We have heard many excellent speeches. I welcome the debate. Kezia Dugdale made a good point about the term “legal high”. We do not want to be seen to be advertising; I could not help thinking that we should perhaps talk about “so-called legal highs”. I commend the work of the Arbroath against legal highs group, which I understand from Alex Johnstone has done excellent work. I welcomed the UK Government’s announcement in December that it would conduct a review of new psychoactive substances and consider a range of options, including legislation, to enable dangerous substances to be dealt with more speedily and effectively. The Scottish Government’s national event in April, at which it heard from police, the NHS and others, was also welcome. We all know that there are no easy answers, but if we work together, not just in the United Kingdom but worldwide, we might be able to find a way forward. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime “World Drug Report 2013” estimated that 8.2 per cent of young people in the United Kingdom have taken a new psychoactive substance. That is the highest rate in the European Union, and we should be concerned about it. No one can underestimate the challenge and the considerable difficulties in that regard. There are many reports of concerns and police warnings, and the NHS has treated children as young as 12 who have used so-called legal highs. In the region that I represent, there was a death at the Rock Ness festival last year. Many so-called legal highs also contain controlled illegal drugs. Members talked about the shops—there is one in Nairn. The owners of such shops continue to do business, covering themselves by misusing the word “legal”, which certainly does not mean “safe”, and by marking products “not for consumption”, although they know perfectly well that the products are being purchased for consumption. It is worrying to hear that people who would not take an illegal drug are taking new psychoactive substances, which are dangerous when taken on their own and have even more serious side effects when they are taken with alcohol. Kezia Dugdale also mentioned people accessing drugs from high street shops. According to the Scottish Drugs Forum, that can lead them to take the next step of buying in bulk over the internet at cheaper prices, which can lead to higher consumption by the individual. It can also lead them to start selling on the products. With 639 online shops, that would not be difficult. The Scottish Drugs Forum’s trends survey shows a rise in the use of new psychoactive substances in the past 18 months, and Crew’s analysis of clients at its drop-in service in Edinburgh shows that 38 per cent of its clients seek information on new psychoactive substances. I think we should be concerned about that figure. More information is needed on presentations at accident and emergency units. According to the Scottish Drugs Forum, there is no means of gathering information about such cases at either the health board level or the national level. Last month, the researcher who works for my colleague Jackson Carlaw sent a freedom of information request to all NHS boards in Scotland on the recording of the use of new psychoactive substances. The response confirmed that only NHS Ayrshire and Arran has been recording the number of patients admitted to accident and emergency units because they had ingested legal highs. In 2009-10, the figure was 14 a year, and in 2013-14, it rose to 46. However, four other NHS boards are now gathering that information. In the remaining nine boards, the information is either not held or not held in a retrievable format, or the board did not record whether the ingested substance was legal or illegal. There is no doubt about the challenge that is presented to staff as a result of the uncertain and unpredictable nature of the component parts, or, to use Elaine Murray’s language, the molecules of new psychoactive substances. Last year, the National Records of Scotland said that in 47 deaths new psychoactive substances were found in the body, in comparison with 52 in England and Wales. However, the figure could be an underestimate, given the lack of information gathered about presentations at accident and emergency units. On the other hand, the figure could be accurate if all those who died following the ingestion of a new psychoactive substance were, in fact, tested. Given the age range of the people who are using these substances and the range of symptoms there is no doubt about the difficulty. For example, a 40-year-old or 50-year-old person who presents with cardiac arrest or stroke is unlikely to be tested for a new psychoactive substance, yet we know that people of that age take those drugs. I make this point in a constructive way: the police and the NHS need information and support so that they know best how to treat a person when they are not sure what substance the patient has taken or, indeed, what is in that substance. I hope that the debate helps to highlight the mental health problems that are related to legal and illegal drug use. Those problems have always been complex, and their causes and effects have often been disputed by patients and professionals.

Despite what the minister says, an S4 pupil from Falkirk has written in today’s Scotsman: “The slow but steady simplification of exams ... benefits only politicians, who are able to sing their own virtues as exam results reach record highs every year.” I ask the minister to respond to that criticism. I hope that, in doing so, he can reassure parents, pupils and teachers.

I commend my colleague and friend Jackson Carlaw on his speech. As a fellow Conservative, I fully understand and empathise with many of the thoughts and views that he expressed. I have received many of the emails that John Finnie received, to which I will come back. I welcome the change in the bill—which not many members have mentioned—that acknowledges the role that humanists, for example, will play in solemnising marriage, by putting belief celebrants on the same footing as religious celebrants. I also welcome the extension to the normal notice period for marriage and civil partnerships from 14 to 18 days. Those changes have been lost in the main core of the debate today. I am delighted to be in the Scottish Conservatives, which had in 2004 under our leader David McLetchie, and has today, 10 years later, under Ruth Davidson’s leadership, a free vote. I fully respect the views of all my colleagues and others who choose to oppose the bill. I was the only MSP to abstain in the 2004 vote on civil partnerships. At that time I could see quite clearly the points that were being made on both sides, so I thought that abstaining was the right thing to do. However, at stage 1 and today again, Jackie Baillie stated that the Scottish social attitudes survey in 2002 showed that 41 per cent of people were in favour of same-sex marriage and 19 per cent were against. We can assume that 40 per cent were undecided. In the 2010 survey, the proportion who were in favour of same-sex marriage rose from 41 to 61 per cent. I was probably one of the 40 per cent who were undecided in 2004, but I will be vote for the bill tonight. I ask myself, “What was my tipping point?” Like John Finnie, I read all the emails that came in, as I did in 2004. The language of some individuals—not churches, but individuals—who opposed the bill was the tipping point for me to vote in favour. The divide across income groups, geographic areas and religious communities is interesting, with 50 per cent of Presbyterians and 55 per cent of Catholics in favour. In the most deprived areas, 67 per cent support same-sex marriage, and in the most affluent areas the figure is 63 per cent. Whether people are urban or rural, rich or poor, religious beliefs and attitudes are changing. I thank Mary Fee, because we have all been talking about same-sex and different-sex marriage, and Mary Fee was the only one at stage 1 and today to raise the issue of single parents. I am a single parent. I was married; my husband walked out when my children were aged one and two. I did not ask him to do that; I did not want that to happen. I hope that Mary’s points will be embraced today. When my children went to school in Dundee, my daughter was asked, “Hands up those from a broken home.” I can tell you that that teacher in that school never asked that question again after I visited. [Applause.] I believe that whether we are in our role as MSPs, parents or citizens, we should all, individually or otherwise, address that type of humiliation, embarrassment, isolation and bullying, whenever and wherever it arises. I thank Mary Fee. I do not agree with all that John Mason said about extending marriage to same-sex couples: that is, that it dilutes its value. In fact, I think that it is a fair and just society that extends marriage to people who love each other, no matter where they live or whom they love. People are equal, and this Parliament is voting to give the same rights to everyone. Following my vote in favour at stage 1, I received emails saying that I would be struck down by the wrath of God for supporting the bill. Others have mentioned potential discrimination. Just as I would not discriminate against same-sex relationships, I would not move to discriminating against those who hold traditional Christian beliefs. That is why I listened very closely to John Mason’s and Richard Lyle’s arguments about their amendments, and why I listened equally carefully to the responses by the cabinet secretary. I have supported John Mason’s call for a five-year review, which is reasonable. I read the stage 1 debate and noted that Joan McAlpine said that when she was growing up, she did not know anyone who was gay. Neither did I, while I was growing up in Angus—but “gay” meant something quite different then. I remember going to Links park in Montrose with my father in the early 1960s and asking why the referees were all gay, although that was not quite the word that was used. I do not remember my father’s answer very clearly, but the term was used in a very derogatory manner, particularly when the ref’s decision did not find favour with the fans.

Later on, at Tannadice, my son asked me about the ref’s sexuality, and I found it difficult to explain why these mysterious men in black, with all the power and authority on the football field, should be at the mercy of that term. This weekend, I read a chapter from David Walliams’s book “The Boy in the Dress” to my seven-year-old grand-daughter. I hope that she will be much more prepared for the diversity of the real world than I was.

I acknowledge the point that was made about the remuneration committees, but does the cabinet secretary expect the principal of the University of the Highlands and Islands to be paid on a par with other university principals in Scotland, when the principal of each UHI further education college has significant responsibilities?

6. To ask the Scottish Government how many additional miles of the A9 between Perth and Inverness are on course to be dualled by December 2016. (S4O-02802)

This week, we learned in the update to the Public Audit Committee on major capital projects that the dualling of two sections of the A9—or about 13 miles—is in progress, which will bring the total for the road’s dualled sections to 43 miles. Given that the dualling of the Luncarty to Birnam section is due to start in 2017, can the minister tell us the timetable for the remaining 67 miles? Is the project on course to be completed by 2025?

This week, Alan McKenzie of the Scottish Secondary Teachers Association also said: “For the sake of both the young people of Scotland and the future of a radical curriculum reform, please listen to us and let us work together to fix the problem.” Will the First Minister attend to those pleas? Will he listen to teachers, help to fix the problem and give pupils in Scotland the chance that they deserve to get qualifications, educational training and employment?

On an equally consensual note, will the cabinet secretary explain to us the legal advice that he has used and that he deems will make it acceptable for an independent Scotland to discriminate against English, Welsh and Northern Irish students compared with students from other EU countries? Will that advice be made available to other MSPs?

Will the minister give way?

I can see that the minister is seriously in his comfort zone, given that he used to be a legal specialist in debt and bankruptcy. I will refrain from picking arguments with him, particularly on legal and technical aspects of the bill. This debate has been fairly consensual compared with recent ones. As other members have done, I thank and commend the committee for its excellent work on what appears to me, as an onlooker, to be a complex bill. The report contains many recommendations and there were several divisions. I always look at divisions to see where people ended up, and I was surprised to see from paragraphs 41 and 44 that the Conservative convener, Murdo Fraser, voted with the SNP against Labour and the Greens. That is so unusual that it is worth a mention. We support the bill. We also support the gist of the committee’s recommendations. The committee wanted further information and more clarity, which is a perfectly normal request in a stage 1 report. That is what the committee is there for and that is what we are here for. I welcome the further information and clarity that the minister provided today on several issues. When, after reading the report—all 77 pages of it—I printed out the Government response, I thought that the printer had broken down when only two and a quarter pages appeared. I now understand that the response referred only to one section of the bill. That is unusual, particularly given the bill’s complexity. However, I commend the minister for giving us more information today. Serious concerns have been expressed, which we must respect. The Law Society’s response to the stage 1 report set out significant concerns about 16 sections of the bill, which indicates the scale of the committee’s task at stage 2. I appreciate the Law Society’s concern, given the proposed shift of activity from the courts to the Accountant in Bankruptcy. The removal of the safeguard of judicial involvement in areas in which debtors’ and creditors’ legal rights are directly affected is a bold move. On sections 36 to 40, the Law Society—rightly or wrongly—talked about an “unnecessarily cumbersome and lengthy appeal process”. Other issues that it raised related to conflict of interest, access to sequestration, a lack of clarity in many areas and a “Failure to deal with the debtor’s home”, which it described as “frequently the most problematic issue in personal bankruptcy.” I have no doubt that further information will come forward after stage 1. The underlying goal, though, must be that the Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill is an improvement on what is in place at present. It is only right and proper that people have access to fair and just processes of debt advice, debt relief and debt management. I am pleased to say that we whole-heartedly agree with the minister that those who can pay their debts should pay their debts. As Mike MacKenzie, Joan McAlpine and others mentioned, creditors should get the best return possible. That should be possible by balancing the rights and needs of those in debt with the rights and needs of creditors and business. Paragraphs 40 to 46 of the report relate to the minimal assets process and LILA, as it is being called. That has the potential for an individual to be free of bankruptcy within six months—which I think should be welcome—with a more streamlined procedure. I trust that the concerns raised by the committee and several members today will be addressed at stage 2. With money advice “mandatory for one debt solution but not another”, there is a clear need for a consistent approach. The report said: “there should be a requirement for debtors to obtain mandatory money advice from an approved money adviser prior to entering bankruptcy.” Whether or not debtors wish to take that advice, it is a reasonable option. It is hoped that the provision of mandatory advice would increase the opportunity for the right debt solutions to be offered to suit the unique circumstances of the individual. I have scored out my next three paragraphs, given the minister’s announcement of £200,000 for ring-fenced funding. Like Murdo Fraser, I, too, ask whether it will be recurrent. I am sure that the minister can address that when summing up. A 6 to 8 per cent increase in cases for Citizens Advice Scotland and others would undoubtedly require additional funding, not to mention training. The committee has rightly sought clarity on the increased workload for money advice services, the monitoring and quality of advice and the performance of money advisers. Given my age, I can cast myself back to my past life as a volunteer with Citizens Advice Scotland. We all had some debt cases. To ensure continuity, one person would deal with one debtor and meet them regularly. Sometimes, we would find that the debtor would choose to spend money on other things rather than repaying the debt. Many cases continued for several years. That was more than 20 years ago and significant progress has been made since then, including the debt arrangement scheme, whose success was stated by the minister. There is no denying that the issue is complex and sensitive and requires professional training and handling. I support the bill. I would say that I fully support it, but there is a bit more work to be done. I wish the committee all success in its future deliberations on the bill, which is critical to the lives of many individuals and families in Scotland.

I remind Stewart Stevenson that a majority of Moray councillors, including the planning convener, voted against the Elgin link road last week. Like others, I welcome this opportunity to discuss the difficult budget decisions that Moray Council’s independent-Conservative administration has to take to make the 11 per cent, or £30 million, reduction in its budget by 2017. I know that all Moray councillors would like to save and enhance the services that they currently supply, but that is not an option. The independent-Conservative administration undertook a thorough consultation process with the public over several months, and unfortunately library provision was ranked lower than many other services by people in Moray. Although the administration has been criticised for the closure of the libraries, the Labour group agreed to seven of the library closures in February; by September, it suggested that four should close; and, in November, it said that they should all stay open. At least Labour councillors in Moray offered some input to the budget debate, however. In February, the SNP group said that it had not had enough time or information to make the budget decisions, despite having the same time, access to officers and budget papers as everyone else. The SNP opposed all the library closures but offered no alternatives at all for savings—I take Stewart Stevenson’s reasonable point on that issue. Nine months later, the SNP had still not come forward with any savings to save the libraries. Back in February, Stewart Stevenson condemned Moray Council for planning to close seven out of eight libraries in Moray, clearly oblivious to the fact that Moray has 15 libraries, not eight. The Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs then intervened, criticising the decisions that were taken by the council, which prompted the president of COSLA, Councillor David O’Neill, to write to the cabinet secretary, on 16 October, in response to her press release. He stated: “I was astonished and angry when I saw what you apparently had to say on the matter not only because it is clearly a local matter”— which is something that we are often told in the chamber.

I am sorry, but I cannot—I have only one and a half minutes left. The letter continues: “faced with the finances that your Government and councils have, demand for our services will always outstrip our ability to pay”. Councillor David O’Neill finishes by saying: “I do not accept that you as a Government Minister, irrespective of your remit, should be involving the Government in something over which you can have only limited knowledge or understanding and is for decision through local democratic and accountable structures.” I agree with COSLA. Mr Stevenson may also wish to condemn the SNP councillors in Perth and Kinross who have supported cuts to the council’s cultural services of £281,000, including library closures. SNP-led West Dunbartonshire Council closed three of its libraries—

Yes. At the end of the day, we know that difficult decisions must be made, and Moray Council will save £286,000 annually through the budget savings in the library service. The area-based review has been set up since that experience. It includes councillors in Moray from every grouping on the council. They are working collectively and collaboratively to achieve the savings that are required over the next few years by looking at service sharing and other initiatives. I also welcome the campaigners who are in the public gallery today. They have shown great spirit in their campaign and engage with many people in Moray. They are passionate about libraries, and I commend them for it. They can take a great deal of credit and satisfaction from the fact that, because of their efforts, Moray still has 11 out of 15 libraries. Moray Council has many more difficult decisions to make, but I trust that it has learned from its experiences with library closures and can now move forward, working together as an entire council to make the best decisions for the people of Moray against the background of ever-diminishing resources and increasing demands. We should all respect local decision making.

Will the member give way?

First, I thank Margo MacDonald for her speech. It takes a qualified, highly specialised PE teacher to tell us what it is all about—well done, Margo. I started reading the Government’s draft strategy “Giving children and young people a sporting chance” after coming home from my Pilates class last night, so my first comment is that it is not only children and young people who need access to sports and exercise but people of all ages. I looked back at where our adult sport strategy was and I found the Labour-Liberal Democrat Government’s publication “Let’s Make Scotland More Active: A strategy for physical activity”, which was published in 2003 and which included both children and adults. I understand that since the publication of that strategy, which set targets of physical activity for children and adults to be reached by 2022, we have tended to focus on children, which is reasonable and fair in terms of assuming that they will continue to be physically active throughout their lives. However, I hope that the targets set for adults in 2003, which I understand were reviewed in 2008, have not been abandoned. I ask the minister to give a progress update on that either in her summing-up speech or in writing later. There is much that local and central Government can do to provide local facilities for exercise and other classes for people of all ages. The Health and Sport Committee carried out an inquiry on pathways into sport in 2009. We discovered that where there was a can-do attitude, such as in East Renfrewshire Council, the two hours of quality physical education by specialist PE teachers was delivered. However, in other local authorities there were plenty of excuses to be found, such as a crowded curriculum, lack of facilities and transport, and staff issues. We heard, though, that physically active children were more alert and attentive in the classroom and that their level of fitness enhanced their learning abilities.

No, I have only four minutes, Margo—sorry. We welcome and acknowledge the progress that has been made towards achieving the two hours of PE, but I read in the SNP manifesto: “To help Scottish children develop the habit of physical fitness, we will ensure that every pupil has two hours of quality PE each week, delivered by specialist PE teachers.” I was a lecturer for more than 20 years before coming to the Parliament and if someone had said to me then, “Right. You take your students for PE this week,” I would not have known where to start. I think that my students would have been at quite a disadvantage if I had been expected to take them for PE. As well as the obvious benefits of fitness from participation in sport, we are now much more aware of the positive link between participation in sport and combating obesity, type 2 diabetes, heart disease, high blood pressure, arthritis and depression. I am looking at the clock, so I will just say of the strategy that I was pleased to note that in addition to the target of two hours of PE, the Government acknowledges that swimming and cycling are fundamental skills for life. I am not sure what “37 per cent of eligible children receive on road training” on cycling means, but I presume from the word “eligible” that it does not mean 37 per cent of all children. I ask that a little bit more than one paragraph for swimming and cycling be included in the main strategy when it comes out.

I am well aware of that.

I, too, for the first and probably the last time can put on the record that I agree with everything that George Adam said. I congratulate him on securing the debate, which highlights the important role that youth work plays in supporting our young people to develop. In its role of representing the voluntary and statutory sector, YouthLink Scotland is at the forefront of youth work. As George Adam mentioned, that is why the recent inspection report by Education Scotland makes for such encouraging reading. The “clear direction” that has been exhibited by chief executive officer Jim Sweeney and the rest of the team has meant that despite a decline in overall staff numbers, YouthLink Scotland has managed to forge closer working relationships with local authorities. For that, and for maintaining excellent staff morale, it deserves to be commended. George Adam also mentioned the success of the no knives, better lives campaign, which has done an excellent job of informing young people about the true risks of carrying dangerous weapons. At the last count, 233 staff and volunteers had been instructed in use of the training resources “Sharp Solutions” and “On a Knife Edge”, with another 102 young people across nine areas becoming peer educators. Each of the 30,000 young people who cast a vote in the recent We-CTV competition, which was held to select the best short film that was designed to get the no knives, better lives message across, will have received an important lesson in the dangers of crime. On a related point, YouthLink Scotland has consistently been one of the top beneficiaries—if not the top beneficiary—of the cashback for communities programme. Last year more than £600,000 was distributed to 204 projects. That is very encouraging and welcome news, although I add that the presence of such funding is no substitute for a consistent long-term financial commitment from central Government to YouthLink. More than 300 volunteers, peer educators and managers attended this year’s national youth worker awards, which speaks volumes for the importance of their work. For too long, the terms “youth worker” and “unsung hero” went hand in hand, so I congratulate YouthLink Scotland on challenging that and on generating some much-deserved publicity via its awards. I note that the nominations for next year close on 19 December, so anyone who has someone in mind needs to move fairly quickly. The best way to encourage more youngsters into volunteering is to recognise their achievements publicly. That can, in particular, challenge the damaging and wrong assumption that young people are somehow not investing in our communities. I came across a submission from YouthLink to the Finance Committee that highlighted that young people who live in the most deprived areas are far less likely than their peers to participate in youth work, and in leisure, sport and cultural activities. One reason is the lack of adequate facilities, which is a problem that was also mentioned during this afternoon’s debate on the youth sport strategy. YouthLink does a tremendous job and deserves cross-party support in Parliament. As I have said, I was encouraged by the Education Scotland inspection, which speaks volumes about the professional and dedicated nature of the organisation. In the coming years, I fully expect that more will be done to ensure that Scotland’s religious and cultural diversity is better reflected and that self-evaluation will improve.

I welcome the minister asking officials to look into some background. Are the minister’s officials also looking into why the average spend per male apprentice is 53 per cent more than the average spend per female apprentice?

Today does not feel like a day for politics after the motion of condolence, but the work goes on. I am pleased to speak in what seems to be becoming an annual debate on women’s participation in the workforce. In the motion, the Scottish Government refers to proposals in its white paper on childcare and increasing women’s representation in public and corporate life. However, as Kezia Dugdale said, most of the barriers that prevent women’s full participation in the labour market can be addressed with the powers that the Scottish Parliament currently holds, just as we have all agreed to the increase in nursery provision to 600 hours a year in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, which is going through the Parliament.

Not just now. A recent labour force survey shows that professional occupations including teaching do well; they are 50 per cent female. In that respect, I commend the many excellent female principals of our further education colleges, some of whom gave evidence to the Public Audit Committee recently. They made their points very clear indeed. However, only 36 per cent of women are in managing director and senior official jobs. In skilled trades, 7 per cent are female and 90 per cent are male. In caring, leisure and service occupations, 82 per cent are female and 18 per cent are male. In sales and customer service occupations, two thirds are female and one third are male. On top of that, across Scotland in 2012 the average hourly pay for a male was 14 per cent higher than the average for females. I welcome the fact that the minister is asking officials to look at opportunities for women, but the SNP has been in power for almost seven years. I will take up Kezia Dugdale’s point: the commitment for 50 per cent more childcare was in the Scottish National Party’s 2007 manifesto. There is no reason to blame Westminster—that commitment could have been met years ago. The manifesto said that the additional childcare would be phased in, but we did not expect to wait seven years for the phasing in to begin. When the SNP came to power, the figure for total student enrolments in the college sector was almost 275,000. Last year it was 170,000—a fall of 104,000 in recent years. As Kezia Dugdale said, 70,000 of those students were female. Apprenticeships are highly gendered. As I said in my intervention to the minister, the average spend per male apprentice is 53 per cent higher than the average spend per female. Females make up 53 per cent and males make up 47 per cent of level 2 apprenticeships, but of those who start the higher level 3 apprenticeships, 64 per cent are male and 36 per cent are female: for every two male apprentices in level 3’s more thorough and intense training, there is one woman. Last week at the meeting of the cross-party group on Scotland’s universities and colleges, which the minister attended, we heard from Ken Milroy, the regional lead for Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire, and Sir Ian Wood, on his proposals, which we all support. I am very pleased to support them. Not only has the total headcount of students on school-college partnership activity fallen from 64,000 to 20,000 over four years, but the funding for those partnerships, which are opportunities for young women to get a taster of professions, trades and training, has fallen by a third. The Equality and Human Rights Commission research shows gender bias in uptake of certain frameworks in Scotland. Not only is the average spend per male apprentice 53 per cent higher than the average spend per female, but modern apprenticeships that are taken up by men are double the duration of those that are taken up by women. That suggests that men receive far more training in modern apprenticeships. If females are not getting the opportunity for training that men are getting, it is hardly surprising that we have increasing inequalities throughout life.

I had thought that someone would speak about the interesting issue of gender equality in the Parliament. When we compare figures for the 2007 election with those from the election two years ago, we find that in 2007 25.5 per cent of SNP members were women and that, in 2011, the figure went up 0.5 per cent to 26 per cent. To Labour’s credit, 50 per cent of its members were women in 2007; in 2011, the figure stayed pretty much the same at 49 per cent. As for the Conservatives—[Interruption.] Members can laugh if they wish, but these are the facts. Between 2007 and 2011, the figure for the Conservatives went up from 29 to 40 per cent. I think that in sitting here, lecturing the people of Scotland about the public and private sectors, modern apprenticeships and so on, the SNP should look at its own record and what it has done about gender equality.

I apologise to Mr Doris, but I have used one minute and have only three left. Moreover, the number of women SNP councillors fell from 26 per cent in 2007 to 21 per cent in 2012, which is not too good. The figures for Labour stayed pretty much the same, while for the Conservatives the figures rose from 12 per cent to 20 per cent. Those are the facts. As for the 600 hours of free nursery provision a year, it is fair enough for people across Scotland to think that they will get a total of 1,200 hours of free nursery provision for their child. However, that is not the case, because it all depends on the child’s birthday. Those who were born between September and December will get 200 fewer hours, while those who are born between January and the end of February and who will, as many do, start school at four and a half will get only 800 hours, or 400 fewer. With regard to the thousands more jobs that there will be in nurseries, I point out that a member of my family works in a nursery. She is quite well qualified—she has her higher national certificate and Scottish vocational qualification—but she would actually earn more filling shelves in Tesco. There is a responsibility on each and every one of us to value the contribution that is made mainly by women in nurseries. It is all very well saying that there will be plenty more jobs, but if the same women worked in Tesco they would find the hours much easier. I put out a call today that we should value the role of women in childcare. With meeting the requirements of the Care Inspectorate, looking after our children and doing the work that Liam McArthur mentioned with children aged between two and five, their responsibilities are far greater than they were 10, 20 or 30 years ago. Gosh! My time is nearly up. I got carried away there. My third point is on waiting seven years for the increase. In the short time that I have left, I will say that I share Siobhan McMahon’s acknowledgement of the lack of progress, and that Dennis Robertson made a great speech on opportunities for women. We need to do more in relation to the Wood commission report. I met young women and girls at Inverness College who are studying to become car mechanics and to work in construction, which is giving them a taster before they sign up to an apprenticeship. Jayne Baxter reminded me that I went to university as a single parent because it was good for the school holidays—I could look after my children. I chose subjects that were taught between 9 and 3 o’clock.

When I graduated, I lectured at what is now the University of Abertay Dundee. For many of us, our careers are based on our childcare and family commitments.

I welcome that. Not only is 53 per cent more modern apprenticeships funding spent on men, but the apprenticeships are twice as long and the spending by the Government on partnerships between schools and colleges has fallen from £60,000 to £20,000 in the past few years. I am asking for a commitment on that, and I support the Wood commission.

As we say in our environmental policy, the SPCB is committed to promoting sustainable travel for business and commuting. We are also committed to reducing our carbon footprint by 42 per cent by 2020 and, by the end of March 2013, emissions had been reduced by 25 per cent. Emissions from business travel have reduced by 21 per cent since 2005. Aviation emissions have reduced from a high of 280 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent in 2010 to 131 tonnes during the last financial year.

The member makes some good points. I am sure that he will understand that I do not have the Transform Scotland document, but it is worth reading and the corporate body could discuss the issue. The point is a constructive one, and we could of course always do better. The SPCB strongly encourages staff not to fly to destinations that can be reached by other forms of transport in a reasonable timescale. In 2010, the SPCB conducted a travel-to-work survey, which revealed that 80 per cent of respondents travelled to work in a sustainable manner. As I said, we can always do better. I give Patrick Harvie my commitment that we will look at the document that he mentions and consider the areas in which we can improve our progress.

I am delighted to speak in this debate but will start by suggesting to the minister in the most constructive way that I would have found it very helpful to have received the Government’s response prior to the debate. Perhaps she was not sure that I was speaking this afternoon; indeed, I have not been in recent times. Having been a member of parliamentary health committees for many years, as well as a member of cross-party groups on drugs and alcohol as far back as 1999, I must say that I, like my colleague Annabel Goldie, fully supported “The Road to Recovery”. On that basis, I very much welcome the minister’s remarks about the emphasis on outcomes, the quality principles for ADPs, what a person can expect to achieve, family involvement and naloxone. In fact, there was very little that the minister said that I do not welcome, and I find that very positive. I acknowledge that there is not an exact overlap between “The Road to Recovery” and the report from the independent expert group that we are debating this afternoon. After all, the former looked at recovery, delivery and prevention, while our focus today is on opioid replacement therapy. However, I have to say that, five and a half years after “The Road to Recovery”, the progress that we all expected and which everyone on all sides of the chamber supported has been, to say the least, disappointing. Even more disappointing is that many of the themes and recommendations that we are debating this afternoon were put forward in 2008. As a result, although I welcome what has been said, I would like more regular updates on the progress of the actions that have been taken. More information on the response to treatment would allow treatment services to be benchmarked and make the effectiveness of interventions that are supplied to patients more transparent. For example, does everyone who is on the methadone script get a monthly test to determine the presence of illegal drugs? I am not sure. Government statistics for the quarter to June this year state that 96 per cent of people attended an appointment for drug treatment within three weeks. I welcome that, but it is what happens after those three weeks that is important. I welcome what the minister said today, but that is the target that we have just now. I commend the focus on the outcomes, which we heard about today, rather than on the three-week period before the first appointment. There is much good practice in the country. One example is the North, East and South Ayrshire alcohol and drug partnership, which piloted a methadone cessation programme that was aimed at supporting long-term methadone users over a period of six months. Given the information that we have, that is an example of a programme that has, undoubtedly, seen some notable success. I have submitted various parliamentary questions on the issue. One such question, from 2001, was answered by Iain Gray, who was then the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care. He said that drug users often claim that methadone is harder to come off than heroin. I am not sure that that is always understood. We need to listen to those who are addicted to drugs, those who are in recovery and those who are having difficulties addressing their drug usage. I would also welcome the inclusion of families. The review says that “there are still huge inconsistencies across the country in terms of ... availability of treatment ... or the range or quality of care” and that little evidence was presented by some ADPs regarding a real impetus towards recovery. That was raised by Audit Scotland in its report on drug and alcohol services in 2009. It was also the conclusion of a 2009 report by the Health and Sport Committee, of which Michael Matheson and I were members. Further, “The Road to Recovery”, which was published five and a half years ago, states that “there were serious shortcomings in a number of ADATs”. That was in 2008, so what we have today is not new. I welcome the commitment and the focus, but I do not want to see the same problems coming up again in another five and a half years. One of the themes in the report is health inequalities. “The Road to Recovery” talked about “An appropriate range of drug treatment and rehabilitation services to promote recovery” and “Better integration of medical treatment with ... mental health”. That is what we have heard today. We knew that that was a problem five and a half years ago. Another theme in the report is “a lack of institutional memory (at all levels) regarding an agreed understanding of the key issues and the plans”. It says that, without that understanding, “systems are destined to continue repeating mistakes”. “The Road to Recovery” states: “agreed understanding and collaboration is a central theme”. Theme 5 in the report talks about “an urgent need to develop meaningful information systems”. That was also in “The Road to Recovery”. “The Road to Recovery” also contained 10 actions to support the setting-up of “a new national drug strategy website to bring together all policy and research in one place for academics, practitioners, key experts, service users and the public.” We have heard the same thing today. I welcome what the minister has come forward with today. I welcome the focus on outcomes. However, I ask whether she will work with us, because she has support from across the chamber, and I ask for regular updates on progress.

Does the member acknowledge that the problem is often that there is an underlying mental health problem and that a dual diagnosis and psychological support are required, not just detox and rehab?

I thank the member for the points that he raises—we have all heard about similar issues—but I cannot help thinking that the Care Inspectorate is responsible for standards of care and for inspecting care-at-home standards. Does he think that it is doing enough, because there is nothing in the bill that will change what it does? Is the Care Inspectorate doing what it was set up to do?

I have a question relating to my constant theme of care at home. Does the member recognise that, when we are looking at the quality of care, it would be helpful to ensure that all home carers are given the training and support that they need and that they are required to register with the Scottish Social Services Council much earlier than 2019?

I, too, commend the Health and Sport Committee for its excellent work in scrutinising the bill and bringing forward its stage 1 report. I am very pleased to be back to speak in this debate on health and the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill. I am even more pleased that I will speak in such a positive way. After hearing about all the problems, I can honestly talk about what is happening in Highland, which is an undoubted success, although I appreciate that there are still challenges. In last week’s debate on the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, Highland Council was commended throughout the chamber for its work on getting it right for every child. I agree that that model is working in Highland and commend Highland Council on its plan to recruit five more health visitors. There was a time not so long ago when health visiting seemed to be withering on the vine. Some health visitors expressed the view that they did not want to become social workers. The lead agency model in Highland allows Highland Council to focus on the needs of and priorities for children and young people, and to adopt not only an integrated model of delivery but, more important, an integrated model of care and support that covers all aspects of a child’s needs. There is still a way to go—I would like to see more holistic support for troubled families—but I acknowledge that the care model that Highland Council has adopted is good and that tremendous progress has been made from what happened in the past, which in my opinion was a recipe for passing the buck. The lead agency for adult care—NHS Highland—has also brought about significant improvements. Again, I accept that there are challenges ahead, but I acknowledge the many submissions on the bill that state that cultural change is difficult. In the past, when local constituents came to my surgeries to ask whether I could help to get their elderly parent out of Raigmore hospital to be cared for at home or in a care home, I had to phone social workers. On many occasions, the social work ring-fenced budget had run out, and people had to wait until the end of the financial year, which could have been several months. As far as the council was concerned, the person was being cared for, albeit at a higher price to the public purse, in hospital. That led to high figures for delayed discharges—otherwise known as bedblocking—which of course impacted on hospital admissions. Now I can email the chairman of NHS Highland—I did so twice last week—who can arrange for the appropriate care package to be delivered at home or in a care home, in a seamless manner. It is in NHS Highland’s interests to free up beds and ensure that every patient receives appropriate care. In the past, Highland Council paid up to 80 per cent more per person per week if someone was cared for in a council-run residential care home rather than a home in the independent or voluntary sector. Now that NHS Highland is in charge of the budget, questions need to be asked about why council care homes receive so much more funding, given that all care homes must achieve the same quality standards, which are set out by the Care Inspectorate. I accept that there is a challenge in that regard. Earlier this year, care-at-home services in Highland received a very poor inspection report—I was thinking about that when Neil Findlay was speaking. The report was not a disaster but presented an opportunity for NHS Highland to bring in more support and training for care workers, to enable them to provide the level and quality of care that we expect them to provide. The lead agency model brings carers into the whole healthcare system, where they can get the maximum support. I spent many years as a member of the Parliament’s health committees. In particular, I was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee when it scrutinised the bill that became the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002. I can confirm that, even then, all but one witness said that a single agency should deliver care of the elderly, although there was no consensus about who should do that. We talked about the NHS, social work and GPs, and there was talk of pooled budgets and aligned budgets. At the time, the cultural differences between the NHS and social work were even more significant than they are now. I think that the situation has improved considerably in recent years. I appreciate that there is no single definition of integrated care. However, I have talked about Highland because good practice should not be ignored. I agree with the Multiple Sclerosis Society, which said in its written submission to the Health and Sport Committee that the bill should not focus “too heavily on structural change ... at the expense of the primary focus on improving outcomes for people.” That is my point. The Highland model focuses on the person and not on where they are, what the budget is or constant arguments between NHS Highland and the Highland Council. Highland’s focus is on the person, as is my focus and, I am sure, that of the Health and Sport Committee. What has happened in Highland has not required legislation, but it is disappointing that progress has been so slow in other parts of Scotland. I welcome the bill; we will support it at stage 1.

I have raised in the past the top slicing of the budget for further education colleges, in the Highlands in particular. I understand that the regional board in Glasgow is recruiting policy officers and other staff and that it rents offices from Glasgow Caledonian University. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that the regional strategic bodies do not become expensive bureaucracies and will he therefore allow more resources for front-line education and training?

I, too, congratulate Cara Hilton on her maiden speech. She certainly made the most of our policy of not intervening in maiden speeches; I say well done to her. I am sure that she will continue with the same passion and commitment in future debates. I remind Colin Beattie, who is a colleague on the Public Audit Committee, that we do not have independence in the Highlands. However, I think that every member in the chamber has commented on how well GIRFEC and other measures are working there. We can certainly do an awful lot without independence. I congratulate the Education and Culture Committee on its excellent scrutiny of the bill. I am not a member of that committee, but I recognise the complexities of the bill, which, obviously, I am new to. Given my experience of many bills since 1999, I can acknowledge the measured and constructive speech given by the committee convener, Stewart Maxwell, which I thought was commendable. As Liz Smith said, the Scottish Conservatives agree with many of the bill’s proposals. In particular, we agree that we should do more to develop the collaborative approach to ensuring that children’s services are delivered more effectively. Like other members, we very much agree with the plans to extend childcare, enhance nursery provision and better train nursery staff. In 1999, conditions such as autism and dyslexia—Margaret McDougall referred to dyslexia in a question earlier today—were not picked up in nurseries. I therefore commend the training that our nursery staff now receive, as well as the additional support for kinship carers, to which Bob Doris and others have referred. Neil Bibby made a critical point about health visitors. Some years ago, Dr Phil Wilson said in evidence to the Health and Sport Committee that there was overwhelming evidence to support the retention of health visitors. However, over the past decade, we have seen the demise of health visiting in this country, which is not something that we have supported. Last week, I met Bill Alexander, the director of social work in Highland Council, and I was pleased to learn that Highland is now employing more health visitors. We very much support that and hope that it will be replicated throughout Scotland. We have several concerns about the bill, one of which is that, as Professor Kenneth Norrie stated, the bill will give ministers more powers that are open ended and not sufficiently well defined. In some key written submissions to the committee, concerns were expressed about the proposed extent of data sharing and about the extension of the powers of Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People; the concern that parental and family responsibilities will be diluted was also expressed. I support COSLA’s point that the children’s commissioner should be the last resort after all local avenues of complaint have been exhausted. We will obviously keep a watching eye on that provision. Whether the additional £160,000 of funding for the children’s commissioner’s office is value for money, only time will tell. I say that with my Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body hat on, because members of the corporate body must decide on such additional moneys. We are concerned that having a named person for all children in the terms stated by the bill might take resources away from the most vulnerable children. John Stevenson of Unison said that the bill’s provisions would mean that children’s services would have to deal with far more children than they deal with currently. Like the EIS, Unison also had concerns about the implications for resources and training in an already well-stretched budget.

No, if the member does not mind. I have less than two minutes left for my speech and I still have quite a bit to cover. I was a lecturer for 20 years before I became a member of the Scottish Parliament. However, if I was the named person for any 16 to 18-year-olds entering further education now, I would not know where to start or what I had to look for. It is a bit naive to assume that no training would be required. We also have practical concerns about the named-person role. What will happen if relations break down between the named person and the family? What will the relationship be between the named person and the lead professional? Will there be a single point of contact? Stewart Maxwell raised a good question about what will happen with regard to the named person during the school summer holidays. It is reasonable to raise such important questions at stage 1. I have no doubt that we will get more clarity on those issues at stage 2. Unison stated that the named-person proposals were not clear and it felt that what it regarded as a rather woolly approach would mean that, to cover their backs, named persons would end up sharing information that strictly speaking they did not have to share. Joan McAlpine made some very good, constructive points about that. When I visited Inverness College two weeks ago, I came across two Gypsy Traveller girls and wondered what their families would think about their having a named person. I wonder whether any thought has been given to the Gypsy Traveller community in that regard.

This has been a consensual and constructive debate. Members talked about their grandchildren, and I too like to play with my granddaughter, except when she wants me to tie worms into knots. I think that members will agree that there are limits. I want to draw attention to the excellent play facilities in our children’s hospitals, which have not been mentioned. I spent a bit of time in the Royal Aberdeen children’s hospital earlier this year, and I know how important and how valued the indoor and outdoor play facilities are. Kenneth Macintosh made a good point about how play and physical exercise are given greater priority in private schools. I hope that the Government will reflect on that, so that pupils in the state school sector get the same opportunities for play and PE as pupils in private schools do. We welcome the publication of the Scottish Government’s play action plan. The links between play and cognitive development are real and proven, and it is important that politicians, parents, local authorities and third sector organisations work together to ensure that every child has the opportunity to take part in constructive play. I welcome the establishment of the play strategy implementation group, and I hope that it will facilitate the joined-up thinking that will make a real difference to children and young people across Scotland. We support the minister’s desire to inject an element of play awareness into continuous professional development courses. We believe that, if our common goals are to be realised, we must also look seriously at opening up school playgrounds and, in particular, indoor games facilities to much wider community use. As my colleague Liz Smith has already indicated, children with disabilities struggle at times to engage in full play. I welcome the support for addressing that from Stewart Maxwell and some other members. Equality of opportunity is vital, and we must do our best to ensure that every child, regardless of need, has the same play opportunities. I read through the play strategy document, noting all the agencies involved in implementation, and I was a bit surprised that the Care Inspectorate was not mentioned. We would expect to see some of the new action plan highlighted in the care standards for early education and childcare up to the age of 16 and for children in care homes, so that all agencies would have to rise to the challenges that the strategy sets out and which we all agree must be met. For example, section 7 of the action plan sets out the outcome for “Nursery and School”: “All children and young people enjoy high quality play opportunities, particularly outdoor free play in stimulating spaces with access to nature, on a daily basis in school, nursery and early learning and childcare.” It is therefore surprising that there is no recommendation to review—perhaps it is coming; I would hope so—the care standards for early education and childcare up to the age of 16 or the care standards for children in care homes to ensure that they include the recommendation in section 7. I looked up both sets of care standards in preparation for this debate. I found a brief, passing mention of play in the care standards for children in care homes and, equally, a brief, passing mention in subparagraphs of standards 3 and 5 of the national care standards for early education and childcare up to the age of 16. If the Scottish Government was serious about successfully implementing the strategy—I presume that it is—I would have thought that one of the main drivers to ensure full implementation would be a requirement in the care standards. Without such a requirement, nurseries, schools and care homes for children can very easily ignore any recommendation in the action plan for play indoors or outdoors. As Jayne Baxter, Mary Fee and Richard Lyle highlighted, whether children are advantaged or deprived, urban or rural, they should all have access to modern, inclusive play facilities. However, the most recent Scottish household survey, which was published in August, revealed that although almost nine in 10 households have access to some form of play area, only around half have a park, playground or other open space within the local community. The survey showed that deprived communities fare particularly badly, as others have mentioned, because not only do children from the most disadvantaged backgrounds have poorer access to play areas, but those that they could attend are widely perceived to be dangerous, with fewer than half of parents considering a park, games pitch or street as a safe area to travel to. In fact, more than two thirds of parents in the survey regard playgrounds as potential sites of bullying. I was contacted recently by a parent in Argyll who was shocked to find out that, in schools with fewer than 50 pupils, there is no obligation to provide any playground supervision. Given the amount of play time that children spend in the playground, I ask the Government to reflect on that situation and whether it is doing all that it can to ensure that every playground is safe, inclusive and monitored appropriately. As Liz Smith stated, many local authorities are already committed to delivering play strategies. I think that it was James Dornan who mentioned that, in 2011, Glasgow City Council launched “Playing for Real”, which is a three-year plan with 15 aims that uses much the same language that the Scottish Government deploys in its action plan. Edinburgh also has a play strategy, as do Dundee and Aberdeen. It remains to be seen how such strategies will mesh with the new framework that we are discussing today. It has been an interesting debate and many interesting issues have been raised. I put it on the record that it is nice to discuss the issue at hand rather than hear every speaker talking about independence. It is very refreshing. The Scottish Government’s strategy is admirable and many of the proposals, if properly implemented, have potential to do much good. We support the Government’s motion.

I, too, thank Jim Hume for bringing the issue to the chamber for debate. John Lamont is not available today, but he has passed on to me quite a lot of local information on the project. Like Christine Grahame, in my past life, I was a volunteer at a citizens advice bureau. I volunteered for one afternoon and one evening a week for quite a long time in Cupar and St Andrews, so I too am well aware of the excellent work that the bureaux continue to do. Like Jackie Baillie, who was given information about West Dunbartonshire, I was given some information about the CAB in Orkney. Although it does not have an identical project, it kindly gave me some information on its work, which is worth mentioning. It provides services to meet the needs of people who are financially incapable of managing their day-to-day finances, helping them to plan ahead and to know where to seek financial advice. Such people may have limited basic budgeting skills and find it difficult to make ends meet. The citizens advice bureau tries to tackle that early, before people go to the payday lenders that Jackie Baillie mentioned, by giving advice on how to avoid getting into unsustainable debt. I was pleased to hear that the Roxburgh and Berwickshire CAB project has been used to highlight the benefits of volunteering. Registration with the Saltire awards, which recognise volunteering achievements by young people aged 11 to 24, is a mark of someone’s commitment to their community. Christine Grahame mentioned employment, and I think that employers would be interested in that—I certainly think that it is impressive. Given that 77,000 young people in Scotland are not in education, employment or training, the project is a great help as it provides support and advice as well as raising awareness. The outreach surgery locations and publicity material are helpful and the project would certainly lend itself to being rolled out in areas such as the Highlands and Islands. As Jim Hume did, I commend the project’s close working with the six local secondary schools, as well as its delivery of monthly outreach surgeries in Borders College. That work gives young people the opportunity to raise issues relating to cyberbullying and many other topical issues that are coming on to our agenda. I was concerned to read that the new focus for the Roxburgh and Berwickshire project will be on planning its exit strategy if funding is not secured. Although we are good at identifying and praising good practice and achievements, we are not always so good at adopting good practice and rolling it out across the board. I hope that Roxburgh and Berwickshire CAB will identify the need for its service and, if it needs an exit strategy, I hope that it will be able to ensure that the needs of the many young people who benefit from the project will be met. There is still much to be done to help young people into training, further education and work, and to help them with how to manage their money, benefits and housing, where appropriate. I fully commend the project, as well as the wider work of citizens advice bureaux. To be truthful, I think that there are probably similar projects in citizens advice bureaux throughout Scotland. As I said, in my past life, I was a citizens advice bureau volunteer. I have nothing but praise for the training that Citizens Advice Scotland gives volunteers and the first-class work that it does, which is topical and responds to topical trends. I commend Jim Hume for raising this excellent initiative in the Parliament.

I remind Mark Griffin that it is not just people in Kinross and Dunfermline, or indeed Markinch and Ladybank, who would benefit, because the train from Inverness goes all the way round the Fife loop. Only one train a day goes via Stirling and Falkirk, and journeys on that train are 25 minutes quicker than journeys on the trains that go round Fife. The proposal would benefit travellers from Inverness, too.

Will the minister give way?

As part of those innovative enhancements, while all those people in England sit and look enviously at our record and at the millions that are going into rail investment, why is it that my train journey from Inverness to Edinburgh is three hours and 40 minutes each way—exactly the same as it was when I came to the Parliament in May 1999?

It has been an excellent debate with many interesting speeches from across the chamber based on an excellent interim report from Sir Ian Wood. There is absolutely no doubt of the commitment on all sides of the chamber to the placing of more emphasis on vocational training in the future. However, as our amendment states, we cannot ignore the cuts to further education budgets because it is in further education that much of the success of the policy will be achieved. Not only has there been a fall of £69 million in colleges’ teaching budgets in the two years from 2010 to 2012; there has also been a fall of 140,000 in the number of part-time students between 2007 and 2012.

Yes, absolutely. That is made clear in the report. That is why I said that it is in further education that “much” of the success of the policy will be achieved. Nonetheless, I thank the member for his intervention. NUS Scotland makes the point that the Wood reforms will fall on colleges to implement, and they are more than capable of doing that. However, with two years of change, regionalisation and mergers alongside reduced budgets and constantly being asked to do more with less, there is no doubt that colleges will find implementing those reforms challenging. The report also states: “There could be some additional college costs for a good news reason ... with the vocational pathway beginning in fourth year school” and more national certificate, higher national certificate and higher national diploma qualifications. Of course, those qualifications need not be the end of studying, as they can be used to bypass first year at university through a straight articulation into second year. Recommendation 5 also mentions—this is on page 13 of the report—the “potential for reducing existing costs in the senior phase at school”, to which Kezia Dugdale referred. The better alignment of college courses with labour market demands, the building of work experience into courses and the provision of support for students to seek employment are all welcome elements of the Wood report. If they are implemented in full—as I hope they will be—they will transform the lives of many young people and hugely reduce youth unemployment. Of course, that can be achieved locally, but it is disappointing that the Wood report points out that “To date the growth has been across the labour market at a range of job levels with only limited specific focus on the key sectors identified within the Government Economic Strategy.” While it is right that we expect colleges and schools to identify labour demand, it is also right that we should expect the Government to ensure that its goals and strategy are used to target modern apprenticeships more actively, as job prospects will understandably be greater in areas of future economic growth. Recommendation 12 highlights that “Most employers don’t recruit directly from the world of education”. That reminded me of a student at Perth College, where I used to lecture, who successfully completed a national certificate, a higher national certificate and a higher national diploma in accounting to get a job in the local bank. His friend, who left school at the same time, was employed by the bank for two years as part of Mrs Thatcher’s youth opportunities programme and was then given a full-time contract. Despite the different pathways that the two friends took, when the college student left with his HND to get a job in the bank—members are probably ahead of me—his line manager turned out to be his friend who did the YOP scheme and who had also managed to pass some of his banking exams. Going straight from school into work certainly helped in that case and, as other members have said, it has helped in many other cases. I would like to highlight the partnership between Highland Council and Inverness College, the number of applicants to which is generally higher than the number of places that are available. From the age of 14, pupils can apply to go to college on Fridays to find out more about courses. Study for Scottish vocational qualification level 4 is possible in many disciplines, such as childcare, construction, car mechanics, fabrication and welding, professional cookery, hairdressing, and uniformed and emergency services. I was pleased to hear that those courses—which are generally called skills for work courses—run from August to May. There is also the get ahead programme for Christmas school leavers, who go to college two days a week from September to December to do taster courses to help them decide what they want to do. That demonstrates that, although a lot of best practice is mentioned at the back of the Wood report, there is a great deal of good practice that is not mentioned. I add that the college has excellent links with industry. In many cases, a local garage will phone it up to ask whether it has any decent mechanics coming through, and the college will help to place them. The college environment is essential for some students. Working in their kitchen whites alongside people who have experience in the hospitality industry—

I hope that Sir Ian Wood’s report will not be ignored. It is 12 years since our amendment on pupil access to colleges was overwhelmingly supported, and I hope that we will make similar progress today.

Given the educational benefits stated by the minister and given the future proposals that he has outlined, why has the number of foreign-language assistants fallen from 284 in 2006 to only 59 in 2012? In fact, even though our population is much bigger, Scotland has fewer language assistants than in Wales or Northern Ireland.

Given that some of the funding for further education colleges in the Highlands and Islands comes through UHI, with its overhead costs of £15 million, some colleges are asking: how much will be taken out of the funding for colleges as it is filtered down through UHI?

In remote rural areas, the availability of supply teachers, particularly in specialist subjects, is a reasonable concern, particularly for continuity of learning and university entrance. Could more be done through distance and e-learning, videoconferencing and, where appropriate—I appreciate that this is not always possible—travel to another school?

We welcome the debate on the new learning disabilities strategy. We agree with and will be supporting the Government motion. I quote part of it: “Scotland can be proud of some of the changes in the quality of life for people with learning disabilities but accepts that there is still much to do.” We commend that honest appraisal of where we are in terms of help and support for people with learning disabilities. I thank the Government for supporting our amendment, which was put forward in a constructive manner. I also welcome the minister’s focus on general health as well as learning disabilities. In the first parliamentary session, I, along with many others, warmly welcomed the publication “The same as you?” In fact, it has been quoted several times in the chamber over the years, so it is welcome that we appraise where we are and consider what has been achieved and what still needs to be done. In the past 14 years, I think that I have said a few times that there is no doubt that of all the Scottish Executive glossy documents in the first eight years, “The same as you?” was definitely the best. In preparation for the debate, I got out a copy of “The same as you?” and then started reading “The keys to life” strategy, as well as all the other briefings that members receive in advance of such debates. Before long, I found several strands of work by the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability and several others. Although a significant amount of work came out of the strategy, I found it difficult to get an overview of exactly where we were. Then I thought about Bunty MacDonald, who has given permission for her name to be used. Bunty MacDonald from Carrbridge has been caring for her son Craig, who has profound and complex learning disabilities, for more than 20 years. As Fergus Ewing also knows, Bunty is a prolific campaigner and in her own words, has had to “fight every inch of the way” to get appropriate help, support and respite for Craig. I am very pleased to tell the minister that Bunty also agrees with the Government motion. However, she asked me to highlight the three areas that are stated in my amendment, which I hope will be supported across the chamber. As Neil Bibby said, about 16,000 schoolchildren and young people in Scotland have learning disabilities, and there are about 26,000 adults with learning disabilities who need support. According to Inclusion Scotland, the proportion of learning-disabled people in employment has fallen significantly in recent years. By 2010-11, only one in 15 adults with learning disabilities was reported to be in some form of paid employment, yet two out of three learning-disabled people want to work. A recent report on modern apprentices in Scotland revealed that, of the 26,500 people who started a modern apprenticeship in 2011-12, only 74—0.3 per cent—were disabled or had learning difficulties. That area could be focused on, prioritised and improved. The minister mentioned the transition from child to adult services, which I understand should take place when someone is aged 14. Bunty MacDonald and others tell me that the change leaves parents with considerable uncertainty and much worry about their child’s future. That is bad enough, but the process of finding something when someone leaves school at 19 is fraught with uncertainty. At that stage, a young person should be allocated a young adult social worker, who works with the parents and the person with learning disabilities to look into and discuss with the family what is available and appropriate, so that there is a transition and a plan to move forward after school. I am aware that many social enterprises and charities are doing excellent work to employ and train people with disabilities in secure employment. The Shetland Soap Company is an excellent example of such a company. The strategy that we are discussing says: “We want to help young people with disabilities plan for leaving school ... We will” work with local authorities, Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish transitions forum. I look forward to better joint working to improve the transition phase. Last week, Malcolm Chisholm—I see him in the chamber—chaired a meeting of the cross-party group on mental health about bipolar disorder. We heard from many people about the years that it took them to get a diagnosis. If people are given a diagnosis as early as possible and if they get support and treatment as early as possible, that helps them not only to remain in work but to find work in the future. Recommendation 3 in “The same as you?” was: “Everyone with a learning disability who wants to, should be able to have a ‘personal life plan’.” According to Bunty MacDonald, her son has never had one. The personal life plan is essential in setting out not only a person’s assessed care needs but their general health needs. “The same as you?” also recommended an annual review for people with more complex needs who live at home but, of the 42,000 people in Scotland with a learning disability, only about 13,000 had a personal life plan in 2011. Some might have chosen not to have one, but that is about 30 per cent, and I ask for that figure to be improved. Recommendation 26 in “The same as you?” was: “Life plans for people with learning disabilities who live with their parents should include plans for a time when parents may no longer be able to provide care.” In the report “How is it Going?”, which concerned a survey of 21 to 64-year-olds, Enable Scotland found that by far the biggest worry for the future among people with learning disabilities and their parents was the parents’ death. We do not like to talk about that but it is an important issue for personal life plans. The third area in my amendment is legal guardianship. I understand that it can take up to two years to achieve legal guardianship and I have heard that, for some people, it can take even longer than two years. I have not had time to look into why there is such a delay or why it is such a protracted process, so I am really not sure whether there are legal obstacles. However, for many people, things have to be put on hold until they get legal guardianship, and two years seems quite a long time. I hope that the Government will look into the issue to see what can be done to reduce that long wait. Not surprisingly, we will not support the Labour amendment today. I move amendment S4M-07787.1, to insert at end: “; considers that particular attention should be paid to the transition between child and adult services and adult services and the next step; recognises the need to ensure that all learning disabled people receive a personal life plan, and believes that more needs to be done to reduce the time taken to acquire legal guardianship.”

The college sector pension deficit was £115 million last year—an increase of 93 per cent on the previous year and more than 10 times the deficit in 2007. What assurances can the cabinet secretary give to staff in the college sector who are, rightly, concerned about their pensions?

As my SPCB colleague Linda Fabiani has said, the motion that is being considered represents the unanimous view of all of us on the corporate body. There is a reputational issue for the Parliament, and we consider that in acting in the way that we have, by inviting the Parliament to consider a reduction in a member’s salary for the reasons that my colleague Linda Fabiani outlined, we have acted in what we consider to be the best interests of the Parliament. I fully understand that some people may think that we have acted hastily on the matter, but I assure members that we have considered all the relevant issues and taken all the appropriate legal advice, and that we have not decided lightly to bring the motion before the Parliament. I know from the media coverage over the weekend that there are moves, as Christine Grahame mentioned, towards discussions with the United Kingdom Government around issues to do with disqualification. That is an area where further dialogue might well be very useful, but it is a longer-term issue. The central principle of the motion is that if a member is imprisoned, they should not be entitled to a substantial part of their salary. That does not pre-empt or compromise any future consideration of measures that could disqualify members. I thank members for raising issues on that. I stress that what we propose is not a punitive measure on members. That aspect is solely a matter for the courts. This amendment operates only during the period that a member is detained in prison for whatever reason and is not available to perform his or her parliamentary role. We are not looking at anyone who cannot attend proceedings because of illness or some other reason over which they have no control, such as long-term travel disruption.

That is a very good point. I appreciate that it probably requires further explanation, and I am about to cover it. I understand, as Christine Grahame suggested, that not everyone who is in prison will have committed a serious criminal offence and, indeed, that it might be considered that some people were in prison because of a matter of conscience. It is for the courts to distinguish whether imprisonment is merited in an individual case, based on the criteria that they apply. It is not for the Parliament to distinguish the treatment of individual cases on the basis of the conduct giving rise to the sentence imposed or the motivation for that conduct. The principle would remain that persons who have been imprisoned by the courts would be unavailable to undertake the full range of parliamentary duties, and therefore it is our view that their salary should be reduced accordingly. I also understand the point that Stewart Maxwell rightly raised that there may be unease about the position of anyone in custody on remand, given the presumption of innocence. Whether an individual should be detained on remand is again a matter for the courts. What is a matter for this Parliament is how the salaries scheme should treat the resulting impact on the ability of any member held on remand to perform his or her parliamentary functions. That gives rise to exactly the same issue that applies to persons in prison following conviction. Having considered this carefully, our inescapable conclusion is that the same principle that is core to the issue applies; accordingly, in our view, the salaries scheme should treat those circumstances in the same manner. I sincerely hope that members consider our proposal to be appropriate and proportionate and that they support the motion.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I refer to the “Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament”, section 7.3.1, on conduct in the chamber or in committee, which requires that: “Members shall at all times conduct themselves in a courteous and respectful manner”. Earlier today, the First Minister responded to the leader of the Labour Party: “I know that Johann Lamont and the Conservatives are welded together in the better together campaign, but her quoting a Conservative MSP, as definitive proof, really is evidence that the rest of Scotland would find rather tame and insubstantial.” The comments referred to were made by me, as I stood in for the Labour Party convener at this week’s proceedings of the Public Audit Committee. Standing orders state with regard to the Public Audit Committee: “no member who represents a political party which is represented in the Scottish Government may be convener of the Committee.” Therefore, as deputy convener, I convened this week’s proceedings. The remit of the Public Audit Committee is to consider and report on financial control, accounting and auditing in relation to public expenditure and to hold to account those in government tasked with spending money. In June, the previous convener, Iain Gray, wrote on behalf of all members of the committee to the permanent secretary and the principal accountable officer for the Scottish Government, Sir Peter Housden, to ask several questions to assist the committee to do the job that it is tasked to do. I did not consider the permanent secretary’s responses adequate. He stated that he “would speak with Ministers ... carry out reviews and consultations” and “reflect how best to respond”. In truth, he did not answer the questions that were put to him, and I stand by what I said. I was fulfilling my duties as a parliamentarian and a member of the Public Audit Committee of the Parliament. I do not think that it was courteous or respectful for the First Minister to dismiss my comments in such a manner. Whatever side of the political or constitutional debate members of the Parliament are on, I ask that the views of every MSP must be responded to in a courteous and respectful manner as we carry out our parliamentary duties on behalf of the people of Scotland. If the First Minister wants “definitive proof” of the inadequate and insulting answers given by the permanent secretary, they are available in the committee papers. Presiding Officer, I find it very insulting, discourteous and disrespectful to refer to any member of the Parliament’s comments as “rather tame and insubstantial.” I seek your response on this matter.

I, too, thank John Wilson for securing the debate. The Oxfam report is indeed wide ranging and it is difficult to do justice to it in a short speech. I congratulate Oxfam on its 50th anniversary in Scotland. As an economist, I would like to see more research and robust data on the recommendation that communities be given greater control over how regeneration happens in local areas. On page 7 of the report, it is recommended that more land and assets be community owned and managed. We need all the information that we can get on how communities could benefit in terms of addressing poverty and reducing inequalities. My party and I are very much in favour of community-owned land and assets. They exist widely across the Highlands and I am very aware of them, but I am not aware of the research. Highlands and Islands Enterprise’s brief includes the pursuit of social benefit as well as economic regeneration, and it would be helpful to have information on that as well. The recommendations on page 29 of the report include: “Tax havens, offshore earnings and loopholes which allow avoidance should be pursued and closed.” I am pleased to say that the United Kingdom Government has called for tax loopholes to be closed and for companies to pay their fair share. In July, David Cameron called on world leaders to get behind a global crackdown on tax avoidance and “break down the walls of corporate secrecy”. The United Kingdom Government has also branded aggressive tax avoidance, which is mentioned in the report, unacceptable, and in June it brokered an agreement with the UK’s overseas territories and Crown dependencies to sign up to a tax evasion clampdown. I am sure that that is welcomed throughout the chamber. The increase in the personal allowance to £10,000, which will also take thousands more Scots out of taxation, is welcome. Personally, I hope that the threshold of earnings before liability for tax will continue to rise in future years to ensure that there is higher disposable income, particularly for the lower paid. The first paragraph of the report states: “the reality for many Scots is a cocktail of high mortality, economic inactivity, mental and physical ill-health, poor educational attainment, and exclusion from the decisions that affect them.” I am particularly drawn to mental health issues. I remind colleagues that, in Scotland, 43 per cent of people who are on benefits have a mental health problem. Although we can debate—and we do—the rights and wrongs of welfare benefits, we should not lose sight of the thousands of people who live in poverty, and many in isolation, who need and deserve better diagnosis, care, support and treatment. Finally, I have been pleased to participate in the national performance framework discussion forum, chaired by John Swinney, which is looking at the issue. It does indeed have cross-party support.

I, along with Claudia Beamish, sit on the national performance framework group, which is chaired by John Swinney. I thank the minister for recognising the cross-party support for that. Will the minister welcome the fact that, in 2010, the Westminster Government launched the measuring national wellbeing programme; increased the personal tax allowance so that people can earn £10,000 before paying tax; and introduced measures to address tax avoidance? Does she agree that we could do more by making mental health a bigger priority in our health service?

Health is devolved.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to help people with mental health issues remain in employment. (S4O-02284)

The current work is very welcome. However, 45 per cent of people on benefits in Scotland have a mental health problem and find the journey back into work very long and hard. Is it not better to pursue a positive policy of helping people to remain in work—I welcome what the cabinet secretary said on that issue—rather than allow their conditions to become chronic, severe and enduring? Will the Government commit to ensuring that that research is carried out, given that some companies have found that every £1 spent on workplace health promotion and wellbeing has generated nearly £10 of savings from reduced sickness absence and presenteeism?

I thank John Wilson for giving us the opportunity to welcome the announcement that ABCUL has been awarded the contract to deliver the £38 million credit union expansion project—I will check whether I have signed his motion—and I welcome the people from the credit union movement to the gallery. That substantial sum of £38 million is being provided to a sector that has much potential to respond to the financial demands and challenges that face people today. Credit unions should be the lenders of choice—not payday loan companies. Much more needs to be done to assist the 7 million people UK-wide who currently fall into the trap of high-cost credit, many of whom are charged exorbitant rates of interest on their loans. Currently, there are about 108 credit unions in Scotland, with the highest membership rates as a percentage of the population undoubtedly being in Glasgow, as Sandra White said. I helped Inverness Credit Union to get set up many years ago, so I understand the difficulties of getting volunteers and ensuring that they receive the training that is required in order that they comply with stringent financial rules and regulations. I also understand how a credit union’s accessibility can be an issue, as can concerns about confidentiality. I believe that there is greater scope for employers—in the private, voluntary and public sectors—to offer payroll deductions to encourage people to participate in credit unions. The Police Credit Union sets a very good example on that, as has been outlined in John Mason’s motion on the issue. Across the UK, the penetration rate for credit unions is less than 3 per cent, whereas in Ireland it is 72 per cent. Ireland has 399 credit unions, which have a total membership of more than 3 million, and there are another 101 credit unions in Northern Ireland. Across England, Scotland and Wales, there are only 396 credit unions, which is fewer than in the Republic of Ireland. I think that the banking crisis has contributed to a willingness on the part of the public to consider alternative financial institutions, and the community-based nature of credit unions enhances their appeal, but more can be done. As a member of the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly, I know that John Robertson, who is the MP for Glasgow North West, recently presented a paper on the issue. He reported that many people in Glasgow who have used high-cost lenders might just as easily have approached the credit union a few doors down the street. The reasons why people do that need to be understood if credit unions are to become the preferred choice. One reason that is given for approaching the payday lender is the ease, speed and accessibility of the process. Therefore, I think that more could be done to examine the way in which credit unions offer services to make them more attractive and more accessible. The credit union expansion project money will help. Between 2006 and 2012, £113 million was allocated to more than 100 credit unions in the UK by the DWP’s growth fund. Although the fund was successful in making relatively low-cost loans more readily available to credit union customers, the evaluation of the growth fund concluded that it was not possible for credit unions to achieve sustainability unless they could reduce their costs further by improving services, attracting more members and maximising profitable income. The £38 million project that we are debating today is an opportunity to achieve that, as are the links with the Post Office that have been suggested. I will finish by quoting from Lord McFall’s speech on the issue in the House of Lords. He stated: “One problem with credit unions ... is that they are seen as a poor man’s—or woman’s—bank. ... But on another level, if credit unions are to grow and become fully established as a potent force, they need to attract the full spectrum of savers”.—[Official Report, House of Lords, 13 December 2013; c 1181.] I agree with that.

I fully support the expansion of hydro schemes. Hydro is a wonderful industrial success. Will the minister ensure that it is also an environmental success, in light of the dreadful destruction of the freshwater pearl mussel colony, along with salmon and trout, in the River Lyon?

We are delighted to contribute to this debate on hydro power in Scotland in recognition of the celebration of the 70th anniversary of the Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland) Act 1943 and in acknowledgement of the contribution of Tom Johnston. Much has changed in the world of energy in 70 years, but hydro remains a productive, effective and environmentally friendly method of producing electricity. It is the oldest form of renewable energy in Scotland, being even older than the 70 years of the 1943 act. In fact, the hydroelectric pioneers were the monks at Fort Augustus abbey on Loch Ness, who developed a small 18KW scheme in 1891 to power the chapel’s electric organ and the houses in the local village. In researching for this debate, I read that, when the monks played the organ, the lights in the village went dim. Nonetheless, it was wonderful technology for the time. Although that development and others like it proved that the technology worked, they were restricted by the fact that power could not be transmitted to a sufficiently wide area. In 1896, the Foyers catchment area was first developed for hydroelectric power, and it still produces hydroelectricity today on the shores of Loch Ness. Kinlochleven was transformed from a remote crofting settlement to a centre of industry with people from all walks of life and of many nationalities in the village when the hydroelectric power system was completed in 1909. In the graveyard at Kinlochleven, we find the graves of many men who lost their lives doing hard and dangerous work. The extensive hydro scheme there is also still operated—by Rio Tinto Alcan—although a large part of the site has been redeveloped. After the second world war, men came from across Europe, including Ireland, to work on the hydro schemes in Scotland. The tunnellers, or tunnel tigers as they were called, could earn up to £35 a week, which at that time was 10 times the going rate for those who worked on the land in the Highlands. My mother’s brothers came from Donegal, along with many other Irishmen, to work on the schemes. Five years ago, SSE completed Britain’s first large-scale conventional hydroelectric station for more than 50 years—the £150 million, 100MW plant at Glendoe, again near Fort Augustus on Loch Ness. We are not short of the water or high land that we need to make hydro the success that it is in Scotland. The 1943 act of Parliament stated a requirement on the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board “to avoid, as far as possible, injury to fisheries and the stock of fish”. That brings me nicely to my second point, which is about the freshwater pearl mussel, which is scientifically known as Margaritifera Margaritifera. As the Scottish Environment LINK species champion for the species, I cannot miss an opportunity to mention these incredible creatures, which can live for up to 134 years. Of the rivers in the world that are known to host populations of freshwater pearl mussels, 72—one third—are here in Scotland, and we have around 50 per cent of the world’s freshwater pearl mussels. The jewellery is incidental, given that only 1 per cent produce a pearl. The reason why the species needs more protection from new hydro schemes is that it is now listed as one of the world’s endangered species, alongside the giant pandas. In its first year, the pearl mussel lives harmlessly on the gills of a young salmon or trout. As payback for its first year of living on the fish, an adult mussel filters and purifies about 50 litres of water every day, allowing the fish to survive in clean river water. The issue is not just about pearl mussels; it is also about the survival of trout and salmon in Scotland’s rivers.

I thank Richard Lyle for his comments. He was very supportive in my recent members’ business debate on the subject. For all that—and all that—two contractors on the River Lyon hydro scheme managed to destroy an internationally important colony of this protected species. The damage to the River Lyon is so disastrous that it will cost more than £1 million to repair. The two contractors—one of which had previously destroyed a colony of freshwater pearl mussels at Dalmally in Argyll, which is Jamie McGrigor’s home area—were found guilty and fined £6,000 and £5,000, but their company has since gone into liquidation with £143,000 of debts. I am in favour of hydro schemes, small and large, but we perhaps have to look again at the 1943 act in order to strengthen the environmental impact assessments and the enforcement of the legislation. I understand that the River Lyon prosecution was the first ever such prosecution in Scotland, and not a penny will be paid in compensation. That scheme did not recognise the needs of the fish, the quality of the water and the mussels in the water. We need much better environmental protection. My third and final point—which I shall make slowly, given that I have been given an extra minute—contains the need for hydro to complement wind farm energy. As more wind farms are constructed, there will be periods when the energy that is generated will exceed demand. Unless it can be stored, that energy will be wasted. Likewise, there will be times when insufficient energy will be produced. We have the necessary technology and geology to enable pumped-storage hydro to pump water from lower to higher reservoirs and keep it ready to be used for generation at times of high demand. Although no way of storing energy is 100 per cent efficient, pumped-storage hydro has the highest efficiency of all the technologies that are currently available, and is the only one that can be deployed on a large scale. Given the move to more wind and more wave and tidal power, the pumped-storage plants could move towards having longer running cycles, to store and release energy that is generated. The Coire Glas and Balmacaan have both been developed at sites that allow storage to be maximised, with the flexibility to pump and generate at the right times to make the best use of the available renewable generation. My point is that, in the dash for wind, there should also be a dash for the failsafe option of hydro power.

Will the minister—sorry, the member—give way?

I am sorry—I promoted Jamie Hepburn long before he is likely to be promoted. Mrs Thatcher is no longer with us and I am asking that, for hydro power in rivers, SNH, SEPA and councils ensure that an environmental impact assessment is carried out and adhered to. I have spoken to SNH and SEPA, and they are now doing much more work on that. We do not need any nasty comments from the member when I was making a constructive point. The matter is being taken on board by the minister and those two agencies.

11. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the adequacy of the enforcement of requirements and implementation of recommendations by the Care Inspectorate for the care of older people. (S4O-02242)

I am delighted to know that that is being kept under review. In a letter to Highland Senior Citizens Network, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing stated: “20% of care homes for older people have been assessed as being high risk and in need of closer and more regular scrutiny.” The Highland Senior Citizens Network has asked me to ask why one in five care homes for the elderly is graded as high risk and whether the cabinet secretary has confidence in the Care Inspectorate’s ability to ensure that the quality care standards will be met in order to provide care for vulnerable elderly people.

The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body exemplified the principles of good practice that the Audit Scotland report identifies when it ran its early severance and retirement scheme in 2010-11. The scheme achieved a reduction of 37 posts and fully paid for itself within two years, with on-going reductions in the staff pay budget. The results were fully disclosed in the SPCB’s 2010-11 annual accounts.

I cannot be precise about the exact settlements in 2010-11, but I can tell John Wilson that the corporate body has used compromise agreements. They are a useful means of protecting the organisation from legal challenges relating to departures, but are used only in exceptional circumstances.

The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has undertaken a number of steps to ensure that all visitors can take part fully and actively in any meeting or external event of the Parliament. For example, induction loops and infrared systems are available in the chamber and in committee rooms, and we have television screens throughout the building to enable the viewing of business. Additional provision has been put in place to reflect the needs of people with sensory impairments. For example, we have information leaflets for witnesses and other visitors in a range of formats, including audio and British Sign Language, and we have a contract for BSL and other communication support to enable us to access provision such as note-takers, palantypists and BSL interpreters as and when it is requested.

I am aware through officials of the particular instance of a recent parliamentary committee visit to Stornoway, when members of the public were able to drop in to meet committee members before the formal meeting but we were unaware of the needs of some members of the public. When bookings are made for the Parliament, we always ask whether any level of support is required. When we reviewed our provision for BSL and other forms of communication support, it was decided to provide an interpreter automatically when there is a debate or meeting in relation to deaf issues. However, anyone can request a BSL interpreter or any other form of communication support for any meeting of the Parliament. We will look to meet any request, provided that sufficient notice is given.

Will the cabinet secretary review the resources that are available in rural areas for tackling wildlife crime to ensure that species such as the freshwater pearl mussel are given far better protection than they have at present?

First, I commend Duncan McNeil and Margo MacDonald for bringing not only some reality but some understanding and empathy to the whole debate. I commend the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for its sixth report in 2013 “Underemployment in Scotland”, but I wonder whether Chic Brodie and Mike MacKenzie ever turned up for the committee meetings. Perhaps they went to another committee because, although the inquiry went on for more than three months and they signed up to the committee’s report—I went through every single page and found not one note of dissent from them—they spent their whole speech speaking about anything except the report and disagreeing with everything that Murdo Fraser, John Swinney and many others had said. However, there we are. I had a little bit of difficulty with some of the report’s recommendations. Paragraph 62 notes: “The Committee is concerned that there is a risk that some of the trends that have emerged during the economic downturn ... may become embedded in a way that makes work significantly more insecure, particularly for the young and unskilled.” The trends that the committee rightly highlights include involuntary part-time work, the zero-hours contracts that many speakers have mentioned and temporary contracts, but the committee also includes self-employment. I am not quite sure why self-employment is regarded as a risky trend. Surely, in a country of budding entrepreneurs, self-employment should be encouraged.

I will certainly not give way to Chic Brodie. He was not even in the same debate, so I am not sure that he should be here. What I am discussing has absolutely no relation to his speech today. He has had his chance. My second point relates to the definition of underemployment. I caution against generalising about everyone as if they were in one category. Over the years, I have known many people—including myself—who might have been regarded as underemployed because they were in a job that was well below their level of competence, experience and qualification, but the job suited them at the time. When we experienced a huge influx of Polish and other eastern European migrants to the Highlands, many of those people who were professionally qualified chose to work in hospitality or the retail sector so that they could practise their language skills because they did not feel confident about working in their own profession. Many people who undertake further study work in jobs that suit them at the time. Where people come back to work after a long absence due to physical or mental illness, they often take jobs with a level of responsibility that suits them at the time. We should not assume that all those who might be designated as underemployed need our intervention to come in and sort them out. Also, many people are content in the job that they do. Many people do not want to be managers or team leaders, and we should respect that view. Thirdly, today’s debate on underemployment reminded me of the Peter principle, which in this context could be classified as overemployment. In my personal view, although no monetary loss to the individual is involved—indeed, the opposite is true—overemployment is equally bad for business and for the public services. The Peter principle is that people are promoted well above their level of competence to jobs with duties that they cannot fulfil. Therefore, in the organisational hierarchy, work is accomplished by those who have not reached their level of incompetence. I am sure that we have all met such people—no names, no pack drill, as they say. Underemployment in terms of working hours is also unique to the individual. As a single mum, I worked part-time for many years in order to spend time with my children. Was I underemployed? Technically, yes I was, but it was my choice. I wanted to drop off my children at school—

Not at the moment. Like other mums, I wanted to be there to pick up my children at the school gate. I did not want anyone coming along saying, “You should be working full-time, not part-time”, because I valued the time with my children.

No. For many years, I lectured on a zero-hours contract, but I never complained because the arrangement suited me. I am delighted that I did the work and, if I had the choice again, I would go back and do the same. We should not judge.

Nae chance for you. [Laughter.] On reading the committee’s report—

I will take Rhoda Grant’s intervention. Members: Oh!

I appreciate that, but I have come to realise, from reading round the subject and from listening to members’ contributions today, that overgeneralisations surround the topic. There must be an element of individual choice, and I appreciate Rhoda Grant’s intervention. On reading the committee’s report, I could not help drawing a comparison with the recent Audit Scotland report on “Managing early departures from the Scottish public sector”, which noted that the net loss of employees to the public sector in Scotland since 2009 is 40,000. We are assuming that the loss of 40,000 people has not impacted on the quality and delivery of public services. That will be the subject of a future Audit Scotland report in the autumn, but if we can lose 40,000 staff and still deliver the same quality of service what does that say about employment in the public sector? Were those staff really all overemployed? There is no doubting the complexity of underemployment, nor the challenges in developing measures to gather the data that are stated in paragraph 1 of the committee’s report. However, I found one figure in the report particularly shocking. On page 11, there is a diagram that illustrates underemployment across Scotland. It shows the city of Dundee—which is my home town—and Shetland as having the highest levels of underemployment. I can understand the figure for Dundee, but why should oil-rich Shetland, which has hotel boats full of workers, suffer from underemployment? Could it be that recruitment agencies are bringing in workers from across the UK and further afield but not working with local agencies to ensure that people in the Shetland Islands are given every opportunity for training?

There may be a better explanation, and I look forward to hearing it. I have found the topic of underemployment fascinating and the speeches interesting. I repeat my thanks to the committee, which was right to say that we have some distance to go on the topic.

Will John Finnie give way?

My wish list includes the journey time between Edinburgh and Inverness. Nicola Sturgeon said that journey times have been reduced by 35 minutes. However, the man who runs the trains, Steve Montgomery, who is the managing director of ScotRail, confirmed in a letter to me that one train’s journey time has been reduced by 11 minutes. Will the minister apologise for misleading Parliament and make the record clear?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking in the light of the findings of the Audit Scotland report “Managing early departures from the Scottish public sector”. (S4O-02165)

I thank the cabinet secretary for emphasising in his response the principles of good practice, with which, I am sure, we all agree. Why did the Scottish Government approve the Scottish Enterprise early departures scheme when that scheme did not meet the guidance in the Scottish public finance manual, and resulted in the average cost of early departure for Scottish Enterprise employees being almost £100,000 more than the average for Scottish Ambulance Service employees?

Will the new draft single outcome agreements include a measure for wellbeing?

I chaired the cross-party group on chronic pain for eight years as a result of a promise that I made to Dorothy-Grace Elder. I would not have dared not to keep it. There is currently no clear referral policy for chronic pain, so how will the Government identify patients who would benefit from more specialised or residential treatment before moving to the new model of delivery?

I thank the Labour Party for keeping ferry services on the political agenda. Although the motion is about more than RET, there is no doubt that the CalMac Ferries staff pay cuts, the impending industrial action and the problems relating to the catastrophic failure of the Hamnavoe are worthy of debate, given how important those lifeline services are to the communities that they serve. My colleague Jamie McGrigor attended the TSSA union briefing last week. We have a lot of sympathy for the onshore staff, particularly those who face a reduction in their salary from £22,000 to £18,000. We do not wish to take any side on this issue. Like others, we urge the minister to ensure that constructive talks take place between unions and management. Every member of staff has an important role to play, whether onshore or on a boat. We would not support strike action, which would affect ferry services to fragile island communities that are dependent on such services. We hope that a settlement can be reached soon. The news of the mechanical failure on the Hamnavoe was devastating for all travellers, but it was not nearly as devastating as it could have been had there not been the alternative of the no-subsidy service across the Pentland Firth, run by Andrew Banks of Pentland Ferries, from St Margaret’s Hope in Orkney to Gills Bay. I regret that the Government failed to thank Pentland Ferries in its motion, but I listened carefully to the minister’s speech and I think that there was almost some gratitude there, which I think Mr Banks is worthy of. He has ensured that people and traffic continue to cross the Pentland Firth despite the temporary loss of the state-subsidised service. On the third issue in the Labour Party motion—RET—the Scottish Government’s public relations approach to the cutting of RET in alleging that local hauliers did not pass it on is probably in the same category as Argyll and Bute Council’s approach to Martha’s meals, but the difference is that the council apologised to Martha, whose success in Malawi continues to grow. No such apology has been forthcoming for the Western Isles local hauliers. To blame them for not passing on the gains from RET to their customers was not only unfair and lacking in understanding of haulage costs but, predictably, it caused significant anger at the lack of empathy and understanding of the full impact on island communities and life. We very much welcome the report by MVA Consultancy entitled “Impact of the Removal of RET Fares from Commercial Vehicles on The Western Isles, Coll and Tiree”. It confirms that the removal of RET for commercial vehicles “in April 2012 has had a significant negative impact ... on the volumes and margins of small hauliers ... squeezed the margin of trader-hauliers ... necessitated an increase in prices for network hauliers”. The figures are there for all to see. Comparing the period April to September for 2011-12 with the same period for 2012-13, we see that the Ullapool to Stornoway route had a fare increase of 50 per cent, a revenue increase of 22 per cent and a reduction in carryings of more than 18,000, which is an 18 per cent fall. For the same period on the Uig, Tarbert and Lochmaddy route, there was a fare increase of 50 per cent, a revenue increase of 32 per cent and a reduction in carryings of 7 per cent. In addition, the carryings on the Oban to Coll and Tiree route were down by 17.5 per cent over the one year. Perhaps the Scottish Government thinks that the percentage increase in revenue is more important than the percentage loss in crossings, even when that is at 17 per cent. If that is the case, the Government needs to look more closely at the socioeconomic analysis in its own report. I caution the Government to look at the jobseeker’s allowance claimant count in the Western Isles, which is 2.9 per cent, compared with the Scottish figure of 3.9 per cent. The historical issue of labour mobility from island to mainland is well documented. Were more jobs and opportunities available in the Western Isles, I have no doubt that many people would return home. I hope that the socioeconomic factors are given equal if not greater weighting than the increases in revenue that I have referred to. The Government can find plenty of opportunities for efficiency savings in the public sector without having to enforce severe hardship by slashing wages for essential onshore staff.

I was going to say that I am pleased to continue the consensual approach, but I had to score out that part of my speech after I heard what Chic Brodie, Mike MacKenzie, Jamie Hepburn and others had to say. I commend the minister, Fergus Ewing, for his on-going commitment to working with the United Kingdom Government to secure the best outcome for Scotland’s electricity supply industry and consumers. Good communications and relations between the UK and Scottish Governments are essential for market reform and in working towards the consultation on the electricity market reform delivery plan, which is due to be published in draft in two months. Even the First Minister states: “we will continue to work closely with the UK Government in the development of these measures both around EMR and in other energy related areas.” I welcome that approach. People do not want to see us in an energy debate sitting around bickering and arguing about independence or a separate Scotland when we are facing the lights going out in two years’ time; they simply want to know that the lights will be on in two years’ time. Ofgem highlighted that the system’s spare generation capacity could fall from 14 to 4 per cent by 2015 and that coal-fired generation is likely to end much earlier than expected under EU environmental legislation, which makes the risk of a shortfall in electricity as close as two years away. That background confirms the need for electricity market reform and the need for many of the measures before us. The 106-page report on Scottish islands renewables marks the end of the first phase of the intergovernmental work to understand the barriers and opportunities to generation on the Scottish islands. I welcome the advance notice of the report from the minister and his email stating that a robust analysis of all options by DECC and the Scottish and UK Governments will be completed this summer. As others have said, the report makes it absolutely clear that Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles can make a cost-effective contribution to 2020 renewables and decarbonisation targets, if grid access and transmission charging issues are addressed. We have had many statements in the Parliament about conclusions and recommendations that still have not been reached. As the minister said, today’s debate is a step along the way and an opportunity to highlight the renewables resource potential of the Scottish islands, as well as the socioeconomic and wider benefits of island renewables, which include jobs, developing supply chains and security of supply. The challenges that the islands renewables report outlines include the funding gap, early-stage funding for marine projects, support for the supply chain, the need for anchor projects and—this is the most contentious—grid access. The study concludes that the cost of deploying renewables on a large scale on the islands is high, given the technological and environmental challenges. Ironically, it is difficult—if not impossible—to build towers and turbines in high-wind conditions. I got that information from my son, who works in the sector. According to the report, onshore wind projects have higher yields, are cost competitive and are significantly cheaper than round 3 offshore wind. That is why a co-ordinated policy response is urgently required, particularly given that the current locational charging model—with the figures used by the minister— was established eight years ago, when renewable energy and climate change targets were not at the centre of public policy. The current charging structure was Labour Party policy, so it is surprising that Labour members are criticising us for making and addressing the proposed change. I trust that any new charging methodology for the islands would be in accordance with the two EU directives on renewable energy and the internal market for electricity, both of which enshrine the principle of non-discrimination between the mainland and islands, as well as with other EU laws. Our amendment relates to Ofgem’s principal duty to protect existing and future consumers by keeping costs as low as possible for consumers while promoting security of supply and facilitating the move to a low-carbon future. No one can doubt the commitment of the UK Government and Ofgem to addressing the misselling of energy to consumers. The £10 million fine to Scottish and Southern Energy is a warning to other suppliers to get their act together on offering consumers the best possible energy tariff with no tricks and no loopholes. The complex and confusing array of tariffs has been a disincentive to consumers to switch and, even when consumers switched, they found that the gains were often short lived and not worth the hassle. I hope that, if Hanzala Malik finds anyone in his constituency whose supplier is not adhering to the guidelines, he will take that matter to Ofgem. I commend the pluralist approach of the Scottish and UK Governments to electricity market reform. I trust that we will get the transmission charging regime for the islands that they need to progress with investment and development in marine, tidal and other renewable energy.

Has the member reported that supplier to Ofgem, given the new guidelines and proposals that it will implement in the forthcoming months?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am pleased to wind up in the debate, which has been mainly constructive. I hope that the Government will respond to Margaret McCulloch’s positive call for three-year funding for training contracts. Ken Macintosh talked about the inactivity rate. We should not lose sight of that, given that the inactivity level rose by 12,000 in the past 12 months in Scotland—the figure for the rest of the UK was 2,000. I hope that the minister will explain that when she sums up. I suggest that Mike MacKenzie should amend his critical speech in light of the contributions from Opposition parties. I can say quite honestly that I did not hear anyone being grudging. I think that we have all been fulsome in our praise and that we have welcomed the reduction in youth unemployment. I will continue in that spirit. I look forward to hearing the Government wind up. In previous debates I have asked ministers several questions and got no answers. In one debate I got answers to questions that I had not asked. In the previous debate, I was told that my figures were all wrong, and then I got a letter from the minister to say that they were right. I hope that we can get on to a better footing today, because the issue is important and we want to work with the Government on it. I say again that we very much welcome the drop of 29,000 in youth unemployment over the past year, and we commend the many employers who have helped to achieve that reduction. The inactivity rate also fell by 1,000 over the same period—and by much more in the UK. Some 45 per cent of 16 to 20-year-olds were enrolled in full-time education—2 per cent more than in the UK—and if we exclude the people in full-time education, we find that the unemployment rate in Scotland is 21.4 per cent, compared with 19.3 per cent in the UK. The figures for Scotland change quarterly and annually, but they are comparable with UK figures. We welcome young people getting the opportunity to enter the routine of work and a career. Before I speak about the certificate of work readiness, I highlight that over the past year there was no change in unemployment among 50 to 64-year-olds, and that unemployment in other age groups increased. Although we whole-heartedly, fully and fulsomely welcome the reduction of 29,000 in youth unemployment over the past year, it is disappointing that unemployment has increased among 24 to 50-year-olds and that has stood still among 50 to 64-year-olds. We would welcome debates on employment for people of all ages, particularly in respect of women who are trying to get back into work after a break to have children. The CIPD research report last month highlighted the jobs mismatch between employers and young people. It states that employer feedback is crucial for young people—a point that Roderick Campbell made—yet employers struggle to provide it, particularly during the recruitment process. There has also been criticism from employers about the need for young people to have soft skills and the ability to work in a team. The certificate of work readiness, which has been developed in partnership with business, will help to bridge that gap. There will be college-based learning time and 190 hours of real-life work experience, and the certificate will be awarded only following employer assessment. That is essential and I have no doubt that it will be positively useful for young people who are seeking work. The certificate, which is approved by the Scottish Qualifications Authority and is backed by industry, employer bodies and companies such as Diageo and Scottish Power, will be a positive and progressive step towards the job market. I hope that many other employers will work together with further education colleges to help to increase the number of these certificates. In previous debates I have raised the issue of jobs in the hospitality industry. I take this opportunity to commend Apex Hotels Ltd, which regularly takes part in initiatives to promote a more positive image for the catering and hospitality industry. Apex recently held a jobs fair for third, fourth and fifth year students to highlight the wide range of different jobs and career paths in that business. That initiative was also highlighted in the CIPD research report. We keep talking about apprenticeships as if they come from nowhere and we just want to get young people into jobs. Liz Smith made a critical point when she talked about looking at the joined-up journey. Whatever job young people go into, whatever training or education they need and whatever certificate of work readiness they get, so much depends on basic skills in literacy and numeracy in primary schools. Let us not all talk about how many highers people have; let us make sure that they have what they need in primary school before they move on to secondary school. Modern apprenticeships and reductions in youth unemployment should also go hand in hand with training and understanding of entrepreneurship. The Carnegie UK Trust briefing paper for the debate highlights the need for the Scottish Government to work with schools, colleges and universities to eradicate interruptions and inconsistencies in their approach to enterprise in order to ensure that students’ enterprise awareness is reinforced at each level, rather than weakened—a point that Liam McArthur made. I commend the Institution of Civil Engineers for giving free student registrations with the institution for all apprentices at college. That is another good example of a good partnership between the industry and our further education colleges.

Further to Tavish Scott’s question, I understand that the new dementia strategy that is due next month will recommend four test sites to support people in the mid to later stages of dementia. Could one of those sites be in a remote and rural area such as the Highlands or, indeed, one of the island groups such as the Shetlands?

Some weeks ago, a member of my staff said that Scottish Environment LINK had called to ask whether I would be a species champion. I agreed, and received another call to say that I was the champion for the freshwater pearl mussel. I thought that it was perhaps due to my party’s affection for twinsets and pearls, but I confess that I could not even borrow a Scottish freshwater pearl necklace or brooch for the debate—even the Mrs Carlaws could not oblige. I did not know much about the freshwater pearl mussel—which is also known as Margaritifera margaritifera—when I became species champion, but I was pleased to know that I could have got the narrow-headed ant, which was given to my colleague Jamie McGrigor. Like many people, I thought that the freshwater pearl mussel existed to produce fine pearl jewellery. How wrong could I have been? In fact, it is the pearl’s attractiveness as a fine item of jewellery that is one of the major factors leading to the mussel’s decline, even though only about 1 per cent of freshwater mussels contain a pearl. The oldest known living specimen was 134 years old, and in the past 100 years more than one third of rivers in Scotland that used to contain freshwater pearl mussels no longer do. A further third contain only non-productive mussels, which leaves only one third left with a productive population. There is evidence that, during the past century, pearl mussels became extinct in an average of two rivers every year. Despite being fully protected since 1998, large numbers of freshwater pearl mussels are still killed illegally each year in Scotland. The on-going threat to the species has made the mussel a United Kingdom wildlife crime priority, with risks including habitat degradation, water pollution, the declining population of the fish hosts and climate change. That threat is critical in Scotland. Of the 200 rivers in the world that are known to host breeding populations of freshwater pearl mussels, 72—one third of the world’s population—are here in Scotland. Scotland is the global stronghold for the freshwater pearl mussel, which is now listed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as “critically endangered” alongside giant pandas. The presence of the freshwater pearl mussel in any river depends on the availability of host salmon, and the present decline in stocks of host migratory salmonid fish threatens Scotland’s pearl mussel populations. In its first year, the pearl mussel lives harmlessly on the gills of a young salmon or trout. As payback for its first year of living on the fish, an adult mussel filters and purifies about 50 litres of water every day, allowing the fish to survive in clean river water. River engineering and illegal pearl fishing have been responsible for the decline and extinction of many freshwater pearl mussel populations and are among the reasons why the species is threatened. Clean gravel and sand are essential, particularly for juvenile pearl mussels. If the stream or river bottom becomes clogged with silt they cannot obtain oxygen and die. Having outlined the critical part that this mollusc plays in the ecology of our rivers and river salmon and trout populations, I turn to what happened on the River Lyon in Perthshire, where two contractors destroyed an internationally important colony of this protected species. The court heard that pollution that would last hundreds of years had been caused through work on a hydro scheme that was so disastrous that the basic repair bill ran to almost £1 million. The two contractors were found guilty and were fined £6,000 and £5,000 but their company has since gone into liquidation with £143,000 of debts. One of the men admitted previously destroying a colony of freshwater pearl mussels during another hydro project at Dalmally in Argyll. The contractors were given eight years in which to pay their fines, so it was not much of a deterrent although I understand that it was the first such prosecution in Scotland. As the species champion, I have submitted quite a few parliamentary questions relating to the species, the work that freshwater pearl mussels do in our rivers in allowing trout and salmon to survive, and the damage that was done to the River Lyon. I would describe the Scottish Government’s answers as ranging from disappointing to dismissive. That is why I have brought the debate to the chamber. More needs to be done, and the Scottish Government has the power to ensure that our freshwater pearl mussels survive. There needs to be more enforcement by police wildlife crime officers and, as a priority, an assurance given that the species will not diminish following the establishment of the new single police force. There also needs to be more rigorous enforcement of cross-compliance relating to the Environmental Impact Assessment (Agriculture) (Scotland) Regulations 2006, as well as an assurance from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to strongly protect the water environment even when that conflicts with economic growth and new hydro schemes. Exploitation of freshwater pearl mussels has taken place since pre-Roman times. The earliest reference in Britain is from Julius Caesar’s biographer, Suetonius, who stated that Caesar’s admiration of pearls was one of the three reasons for the first Roman invasion in 55 BC. Surely if the freshwater pearl mussel was a good enough reason for the Romans to invade Britain, it is a good enough reason for the Scottish Government to make a commitment to do much more to preserve this incredible species.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I will be very brief. Has additional action been taken following the incident in the River Lyon?

I remind members that I have an interest in the debate, as my son is a project manager who builds wind farms in Aberdeenshire—indeed, in Dennis Robertson’s and Maureen Watt’s constituencies. I am pleased to close this wide-ranging debate entitled “Scotland needs a balanced energy policy”. It has mainly been a constructive debate. It has been almost consensual at times. It has been adversarial at other times and interspersed with references to soor plooms—members can decide for themselves who that may refer to. I thank Elaine Murray in particular for a thoughtful and balanced speech. I also say to Rhoda Grant, Alison Johnstone and Ken Macintosh that we are comfortable with community ownership and welcome the points that they made. In particular, I thank Mark Griffin—as Rhoda Grant did—for a well-researched and considered speech. He raised the necessity for electricity storage, which has been highlighted by the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, as well as the need to reduce our dependency on gas imported from Russia. The first part of our motion “welcomes the strength of Scotland’s energy sector” and “the vibrancy of the oil and gas industry, which is underpinned by a favourable UK tax regime”. Despite the fact that the Government and the Labour Party amendments both delete “which is underpinned by a favourable UK tax regime”, it was noticeable—I listened carefully—that neither party informed the Parliament what tax regime it would apply to the North Sea oil and gas sector, what changes it would make or what part of the tax regime it would reject and why. They could have graciously acknowledged the current tax regime, particularly given the extent of their criticisms in the past.

One of my colleagues refers to what Gordon Brown did, but we are looking forward, rather than back. I would have thought that Ken Macintosh would welcome the fiscal forum that was set up between the Treasury and the oil industry. As a regular attender at the cross-party group on oil and gas, I know that the industry has welcomed the new fiscal forum on many occasions. It is worth putting on record again the fact that oil is a volatile commodity, which would provide up to 20 per cent of revenue in a separate Scotland but less than 2 per cent of United Kingdom revenue. For that reason, oil is central to debates in this Parliament. In 2011, almost 52 million tonnes of crude oil was extracted from the North Sea, compared with 1999, when 137 million tonnes was produced. In 2011, oil extraction was at its lowest level since 1978. Since the SNP came to power, the production of crude oil has fallen by one third. As Murdo Fraser said in his opening speech, there is no doubt that the vibrancy and confidence of investment in the sector are as a result of the closer working and understanding between the industry and the Treasury. The brownfield and small-field allowances, along with other reliefs, are now targeted to respond to the needs of the industry and to ensure optimum extraction. The price of oil was $18 a barrel in 2002 and $141 a barrel in 2008. Last year alone, it fluctuated between $91 and $126 a barrel. For all those reasons, it is difficult to predict with any certainty the revenues from this volatile commodity, which depend on production, price, sterling-dollar exchange rates, capital and operating expenditure and tax rules and rates. The second part of the motion relates to the rising cost of energy. I commend Ofgem’s approach in fining SSE £10 million for prolonged and extensive misselling at every stage of the process and for misleading customers into believing that they could save money. I hope that we all agree that that is unacceptable practice, which justified that significant fine. Unfortunately, however, that has meant a loss of reputation for one of Scotland’s leading companies. Ofgem is now introducing a simpler, clearer and fairer energy market by reducing the confusing array of tariffs so that consumers are put on their supplier’s lowest variable rate. Even more measures are being introduced as a result of the UK Energy Bill. I am sure that everyone would agree with that. Demand reduction is critical, as was highlighted in the Royal Society of Edinburgh briefing paper. I was pleased to note that Scottish Enterprise is now helping firms to reduce overhead costs by reducing energy—a sensible approach to help businesses compete and reduce overheads. The volume of onshore wind farms is undoubtedly causing concern, of which Fergus Ewing is fully aware. We have long said that wind turbines are not compatible with scenic areas, and we welcome the fact that the Government and its highly competent Minister for Local Government and Planning have reached that conclusion, with the protection that has been outlined this week. We have waited a long time for Derek Mackay but, now that he is here, he is doing the job that the Parliament is looking for.

Finally, I will use a local example from Moray. A section 36 application for Brown Muir wind farm received more than 2,000 objections, and the council unanimously agreed to object to it. Local people have called for the company to withdraw the application, given the level of opposition and the unanimous vote in the council, as well as the fact that it is against local policy.

The matter continues to be pursued, despite the cost to the council and so on. We have set out a paper on a balanced energy policy that is based on the principles of affordability, security of supply, increasing decarbonisation and drawing energy from a mix of sources, set against a background that provides a favourable and stable tax regime, which I trust will be supported by all members.

The fact that businesses and travellers are having difficulty booking the Pentland Ferries service from Gills Bay to St Margaret’s Hope in Orkney confirms that this is a lifeline service and, indeed, that an effective contingency is even more valued in these times of need. Given that the service receives no public subsidy at all, will the minister look again at the state’s zero subsidy for lifeline services?

I thank John Mason for bringing the debate to the chamber and the issue of social tourism to the attention of a much wider audience. I am not aware of any debate on social tourism in the Parliament since 1999, so this could be a first. In fact, the honest truth is that, until I did some research for the debate, I was not very aware of what social tourism was. I do not think that I was the only one—I noticed that Paul Maynard MP, the Conservative chair of Westminster’s all-party parliamentary group on social tourism, said: “Twelve months ago I had never heard of ‘social tourism’.” There is a constant awareness of the economic value of tourism, but much less awareness of its social value, particularly in relation to people on low incomes, those who are dealing with mental or physical impairment or those who are experiencing other disadvantage in relation to holiday and leisure activities. Research from the University of Nottingham concludes that: “Whilst indicators and measures of mental and physical health, happiness and quality of life have evolved over recent years, the extent to which such measures have been applied to tourists ... is limited and, until now, to the beneficiaries of social tourism not at all.” However, along with other academic research, an evidence base is being established, as other members have said. I particularly noticed the University of Westminster research that concluded that the family holiday can “improve the outlook on life: it shows that even in difficult circumstances, good things can happen. This may lead to renewed courage and a more pro-active attitude to life ... some started a course after the holiday, gave up smoking or anti-depressants, started visiting their social support organisation more often or changed jobs.” The University of Nottingham research focused on information that came from application forms for the holidays and a follow-up questionnaire, and it was clear that all the family are equally affected by circumstances, children as well as adults. The perceived benefits were: “The chance to spend quality time together as a family ... The opportunity to spend time away from stressful routines” and “The opportunity for fun and happy memories”. The findings concluded that although a holiday is not a remedy for medical conditions, it might contribute to a self-assessment of good health. The results also showed that families who are in debt perceived fewer of the benefits such as “fun and happy memories”, which pointed to their difficulty in seeing beyond their current circumstances and looking for ways out of debt. I highlight two of the recommendations of the House of Commons all-party parliamentary group’s report because I see no reason why they cannot be adopted in our Parliament. They are: “building on existing research for a deeper understanding of the long-term benefits that social tourism can bring to individuals, families and society” and “to explore how various departments can support the concept in an integrated way.” I hope that at least those two recommendations can be adopted. Given the clear improvements in mental health and wellbeing alongside increasing confidence and social networks, I certainly support centres such as the Badaguish outdoor centre, which is hugely valued by many individuals and families across the Highlands. Again, I thank John Mason for putting social tourism on our agenda and helping us to focus on the social, health and wellbeing benefits rather than the usual statistics about visitor numbers, the amount of tourist spend and bed nights. I hope that, as well as cold statistics, wellbeing will continue to be integrated into economic measures. After all, economics is a social science, not a pure science.

I am a member of the Public Audit Committee, which has been looking into the Auditor General for Scotland’s report on Registers of Scotland’s IT system. Paragraph 60 of the Finance Committee’s stage 1 report states: “Of particular concern to witnesses is the readiness and effectiveness of RoS’s IT system.” I ask for an assurance from the finance secretary that any difficulties have been overcome and that Registers of Scotland is ready.

I thank Jamie Hepburn for bringing the debate to the chamber and for the measured tone of his speech. The first debate that we had on post offices was brought by a colleague of mine, David Mundell, whose aunt ran the local post office in Moffat. That was many moons ago. Although tonight’s debate is specifically on Crown post offices, it is worth congratulating its partner, the Royal Mail, on its excellent campaign called save our Royal Mail, which is now helping to reverse loss-making elements of its business and bringing it back to break even or into profit. As an MSP who represents the Highlands and Islands, I commend the one price universal service that is enshrined in law and would need a majority vote in the House of Commons and House of Lords to overturn it. When I read the motion, I thought there was a contradiction in it because, in the same sentence, it talks about closing five Crown post offices and moving them to retail outlets. However, Jamie Hepburn’s speech was very clear about retaining the services. Crown post office branches operated at a loss of £46 million in 2011-12. Any move to retain the full service and reduce overheads will release taxpayers’ money to fund other essential services. As other members have said, the programme is not a closure programme. In fact, the coalition Government is investing £1.34 billion up to 2015 to sustain the post office network. As an MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I would like to focus on the Stornoway post office. When I read about what is happening in the Stornoway Gazette, I contacted Post Office Ltd, which confirmed that, even if it is put out to franchise, the Stornoway office will remain a Crown post office. There is a commitment that there will be no compulsory redundancies and the opportunity to move to a retail outlet has not yet been advertised. If no retail partner is found, the post office will remain where it is and operate as it is. It costs £1.57 for every pound of income that it generates. When I heard the announcement that the post office at Stornoway had been identified as one that could be partnered with a retailer, I—as Annabelle Ewing did—contacted the Post Office to ask how that would affect the services that are on offer. The response confirmed that the same range of Government services will be available. The only possible change will be around financial services; a new retail outlet such as the Co-op might choose to provide its own financial products instead of the Post Office’s ones. Apart from that, the service will be a like-for-like service, if not an identical one. We all need to question our support for the post office network. When I looked at the motion, I wondered how often I use a post office and how I could use it more. I do my road tax online, pay my television licence by annual direct debit, and buy stamps at retail outlets. I use the post office for financial products, currency exchange, and to send parcels. The days of standing in a queue for the family allowance have changed and Post Office Ltd is now modernising to adapt to those changes.

Linda Fabiani questioned where I got the £46 million figure. I have the Hansard report, and I took the figure from Jo Swinson’s comment in a debate led by Gordon Banks, the Labour Party member for Ochil and South Perthshire. I just wanted to tell members where I got that figure.

On the point about something needing to be there, does the member think that there is enough there to help the 45 per cent of people on benefits who have a mental health problem? Are we doing enough for them?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I, too, thank the Welfare Reform Committee for its second report on welfare reform, which I read with interest. I look forward to the recommendations that Michael McMahon said are coming. They will be helpful—especially to those of us who are not members of the committee and who have not heard all the evidence. The main headline in the report is that the welfare reforms will eventually take £1.6 billion a year out of the Scottish economy. With Alex Johnstone, I found no analysis of how much would be brought back into the economy by people being supported into work. The outcry from Labour and the SNP about capping benefits at £26,000 is certainly not joined by people across Scotland, given the YouGov poll that shows 72 per cent support for capping benefits, which is 3 per cent higher than the figure for England. I remind members that the benefits cap of £26,000 in income is equivalent to a gross salary of £35,000.

No. I am sorry, Kevin. Currently, the average salary in Scotland is less than £23,000—in the Highlands, it is just over £20,000. If Labour and the SNP do not support the cap on benefits, they need to tell that to people across Scotland. I watched “Question Time” last week. Caroline Flint, a Labour member of the Westminster Parliament, clearly said that she supports the cap, and that she wants it to be increased for some areas, in particular, London. Labour has to be honest. Is there a Scottish policy or a policy for this Parliament? Is there a separate policy at the Westminster Parliament? We have heard bitter complaints from Labour and the SNP about the UK coalition Government’s welfare reforms. Alex Johnstone and I welcomed Patrick Harvie’s contribution, because at least he was honest about what he would put in place instead.

I will finish my point. What would Labour and the SNP say if they were ever in a position to implement reforms? We do not know, but we can assume from everything that has been said that we would have higher taxes and higher benefits in Scotland. People would spend a lifetime parked on benefits—I will come back to mental health—with no review of their abilities or needs and no support to get them into work. We would have housing benefit of up to £2,000 a week, and child benefit for millionaires.

You have never said where. You have never said anything.

It is all very well to criticise, but you cannot be against everything and for nothing.

I remind members that, since 2010, 224,000 people in Scotland have been taken out of paying any tax at all, and that number will rise again next year as the personal allowance increases to £10,000.

Was that significant increase in disposable income taken into account in the report from Sheffield Hallam University and the committee, which arrived at the figure of £1.6 billion?

As an economist, I know that it is important to include that additional disposable income, given that the marginal propensity to consume is higher for lower incomes, which would lead to a significant increase in the multiplier effect.

I have less than two minutes left. I am sorry. Another point that is made on page 5 of the report—I tried to intervene regarding this—refers to the Labour Party. The report states: “Some of the incapacity benefit reforms, however, are Labour measures that pre-date the 2010 general election but are only now taking full effect.” Which reforms are you for? Are they the ones that you have already implemented? I am referring to the Labour Party. Which ones are you against?

I think that you have to be absolutely honest on that point. The report states that: “the figures ... do not assume that loss of income from benefits will wholly or” even partly be replaced by additional income”.

What we know about welfare reform is that already many changes have been made, and I welcome them. I am sorry that others have not done so. Professor Harrington has already made changes in respect of fluctuating conditions such as ME, MS, Parkinson’s disease and mental health problems. Other members—I think Kevin Stewart was one of them—have been in touch with the UK minister, and I have likewise written to him regarding motor neurone disease, because I feel that there are instances in which that should be included because people’s condition can deteriorate rapidly. My final point is on mental health services: 45 per cent of people on benefit—

We can look at the cuts, but what we need to look at is early diagnosis, early intervention, less stigma and a commitment to helping people to stay in their jobs.

I thank James Kelly for his opening remarks, which were very much welcomed by Conservatives. I remind the member that Harold Wilson closed more than 100 more mines than Mrs Thatcher did during her reign. If Mrs Thatcher’s economic and trade union policies were so bad, why did not the Labour Party reverse any of them in 13 years in government?

That is exactly what Mrs Thatcher said.

The Conservatives, too, welcome today’s debate, which provides an opportunity to bring forward some ideas. The motion in the name of Maureen Watt states that her committee “would welcome members’ views on the efficacy of current public procurement processes and on the scope and potential for improvements to be made to these processes.” I would say, as members might expect from the deputy convener of the Public Audit Committee, that a good place to start looking at the scope and potential for improvements is the Audit Scotland and Accounts Commission reports. Too often, recommendations for improvement in procurement are highlighted and then ignored, or are partially implemented, only to be raised again in the reports that we receive years later. Before Bob Black retired from the post of Auditor General, he presented the report “Commissioning social care”. He expressed his concerns by saying that “current ways of delivering services are unlikely to be sustainable. Finally, to be frank, my particular concern, which is shared by colleagues, is that this is the latest of six reports that Audit Scotland has prepared in this general area since devolution, and they have all contained challenging findings about the commissioning and delivery of social and health care services and the efficiency and effectiveness of partnership working.”—[Official Report, Public Audit Committee, 14 March 2012; c 445.] Given the demographic challenges that we face, the social care sector is surely an area in which effective procurement in order to provide quality services and value for money will be critical.

I am not sure that that was a positive contribution, which I am hoping to make. More recently, we received the report “Improving community planning in Scotland”, which states: “ten years after community planning was given a statutory basis, CPPs are not able to show that they have had a significant impact in delivering improved outcomes”. The whole ethos of community planning partnerships, which we all supported, was to ensure that representatives from across communities would sit around the table with a better understanding of the community’s needs and concerns. The aim was to ensure that any decisions that were made, including procurement decisions, would be beneficial to the local community, which Gordon MacDonald highlighted very well in his speech. Perhaps the main procurement issue that has arisen in recent times was highlighted in the report “Managing ICT contracts”, in which the Auditor General expressed serious concern about procurement of information and communication technology in the public sector, but focused only on three organisations, including Registers of Scotland, which at the time of the report had spent £112 million on such projects against an original cost estimate of £66 million. Two projects were cancelled with a £6.7 million write-off and, as the report points out, “Individual projects lacked detailed cost, benefits and milestones, and contributed to a lack of ownership for cost and time overruns.” Obviously there is plenty of scope to make the sort of improvements in procurement that are outlined in the report. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will also consider the report’s comment that “The Scottish Government provided limited support” to the organisations. As others do, I hope that the public procurement bill will make it easier for new businesses, SMEs, the third sector and social enterprises to access public contract opportunities and subcontracts. The cabinet secretary mentioned the construction industry, so I must point out Michael Levack’s recent comment that “There is currently too little direct linkage between the award of contracts and the creation of more employment and training opportunities with construction companies with a strong local presence and pedigree.” That said, I acknowledge the points that the cabinet secretary made in that regard. I also found the report that was produced by Campbell Christie a few years ago to be very interesting in relation to procurement and commissioning. It says: “There is a widespread belief that the Scottish Government and local authorities are less diligent about scrutinising and costing inhouse services than those contracted out to external providers.” Whether or not that is the case, I am sure that more transparency in the process, which I appreciate is an issue that will be covered in the bill, will be widely welcomed. The Christie commission report also said: “There is still much to be done to ensure that when competition takes place between the public and private sector it is on an equal footing” I hope that we examine the quality, effectiveness and reliability of services, as well as their value for money, and that we give the public, private and third sectors the same opportunities. I also totally agree with the Christie commission’s highlighting of the fact that social care and support services are still commissioned and funded on the basis of units of cost and volume, with little attention being paid to the value of the services with regard to the outcomes that are identified by individual service users and families, or by community planning partnerships in single outcome agreements. I realise that I am running out of time, Presiding Officer, so I will finish on that point.

First, I remind George Adam that further and higher education is not exclusively for young people. It is a mark of its success that so many mature students have entered further and higher education. Secondly, and perhaps unusually, I truly thank Stewart Maxwell. It is very refreshing to hear an SNP committee convener give such a balanced contribution. He is not here, but I am sure that he will hear that. I refer members to my entry in the register of interests. As Neil Findlay did, I want to record how much I appreciate further education. I went into further education to prepare for university as a mature student and a single parent of two very young pre-school children. It was in further education that I spent 20 years lecturing in economics, prior to coming here in 1999. I am very pleased to speak in this debate, at a time when the future of further and higher education is very prominent on the political agenda. We are now in a position to review all the evidence that has been submitted on the bill and the Education and Culture Committee’s response. I am also pleased to speak in the debate because of my experience of further education when colleges were going through previous changes. In 1992—I do not recognise that time to be as Clare Adamson remembers it—colleges were given far greater autonomy and the ability to enjoy greater flexibility when meeting the differing needs of students. I was at the coalface at that time and I am very clear that those changes meant that our colleges could respond much better to the demands of communities and to the needs of employers, mature students, those who wanted to study part time or through distance learning, and young people. As a lecturer at Inverness College, I tutored people who were incarcerated in prison, prison officers, people who worked on oil rigs, people who worked in different parts of the world in the oil industry and people in the most remote areas. The sector is one of success. The changes were good for our colleges and they are largely the reason for their success today. That is why it is so deeply unfair that those same colleges have ended up taking the full brunt of SNP education cuts. I hope that, even at this late stage of the stage 1 debate, the cabinet secretary will respond to the reasonable concerns that have been raised both in committee and across the chamber. I am sure that Mike Russell would prefer to see consensus as he moves forward with the bill, rather than be isolated and see it pass simply on the SNP majority. I want to talk about college structures and governance. In particular, I would like to look at the University of the Highlands and Islands, which is unique and not the same as FE colleges under a regional structure. In asking for some clarity around the issue, I quote from a letter from UHI’s Perth College that was sent to my colleague Liz Smith, of which the cabinet secretary also has a copy. It states: “The highlands and islands is the only region where a university is identified as a regional strategic body for the provision of FE. This pluralistic function is untried and unique.” What concerns me is this: “The proposed arrangements are a very real threat to our ability to plan to meet local needs for FE and to effectively deliver the quality of HE and research required to enable UHI to succeed.”

My time has been cut; I have only five minutes.

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for that reassurance. I am sure that it will be heard. My final point is on the need to legislate. Since 1999, we have had health targets, health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—HEAT—targets and other targets, and the Public Audit Committee is looking at waiting times targets. I think that we need to be very specific about targets that will be part of an outcome agreement. We need to set out precisely how those targets can be measured and what happens if the targets are not met. It is easy to say that we will have a target; it is far more difficult to measure that. What strikes me about the debate is the consistency in the evidence that has been provided about the lack of clarity in many key sections of the bill, and the many questions about why it is needed. That does not sound like a good base for legislation in any Parliament.

SNP members look as if they need a bit of cheering up, so I will start by outlining some measures from yesterday’s budget that will help families and business across Scotland: the increase in the personal tax allowance to £10,000; the 10p tax rate becoming zero; the introduction of a £2,000 employment allowance; the reduction in corporation tax to 20p in the pound; the freezing of fuel duty; measures to clamp down on tax avoidance; thousands of people taken out of paying tax altogether; and the identification of Peterhead as one of the UK Government’s two preferred bidders for funding for carbon capture and storage, with the potential to create another 1,000 jobs in that area. The structural deficit is down from around £170 billion to £114 billion and it looks as if it will be eliminated by 2017, when we will be living within our means and spending only the amount that we raise in tax. As Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, public spending has historically been higher in Scotland than it has in England and is currently £1,200 more per head of population, despite the fact that household disposable income per head in Scotland is very similar to that for the UK. The Government’s motion focuses on oil and gas revenues and, as other speakers have made clear, there can be no doubt that that commodity is finite, declining and very volatile. As figures from the Scottish Parliament information centre show, on a geographical basis, oil and gas accounted for nearly half of all revenues in the mid-1980s; more than 20 per cent of Scottish revenue in 2008-09; 15 per cent in 2010-11; 12 per cent in 2009-10; and 3 per cent in 1991-92. In fact, since the SNP came to power, the production of crude oil has fallen by one third from 76,000 tonnes in 2007 to almost 52,000 tonnes in 2011, its lowest level since 1978.

If I thought it was worth answering that, I would do so. Oil & Gas UK’s recent report confirms that direct tax receipts from North Sea oil and gas production have fallen from £11.3 billion in 2011-12 to £7.3 billion in 2012-13—in other words, in one year. The certainty resulting from the UK Government’s measures on tax relief on decommissioning was highlighted at last night’s meeting of the cross-party group on oil and gas; it was said that such moves will speed up asset sales and free up capital that companies can confidently use for investment. With nearly £36 billion being spent on decommissioning, that will be important and excellent business for Scottish yards. Investment in the North Sea is at a 30-year high as a result of UK Government tax incentives and allowances such as the new brownfield allowance which, according to Oil & Gas UK, has led to companies investing more than £2 billion. Indeed, many companies are now reassessing their brownfield options in the wake of that allowance. Another point raised at last night’s cross-party group meeting was that operating costs per barrel of oil in the North Sea are raising and now range from £5 to more than £30. Since 2010, production has fallen by 30 per cent in just two years largely because of shutdowns, both planned and unplanned, in existing fields. Bad weather has affected production—[Interruption.] Mr Swinney might laugh, but this is all in the Oil & Gas UK report. I suggest that he takes the matter up with—

No—my time is very short. I might come to the cabinet secretary in a second, but the points that I want to make have not yet been raised. Bad weather has affected production and in 2012 the Elgin field had to be shut. That is a fact. Earlier this year, the shutdown of the Cormorant Alpha field curtailed production in 27 neighbouring fields that export via that asset. At lunch time, I met the convener of Shetland Islands Council, who confirmed that, as a result, the Sullom Voe oil terminal was shut down for several days on more than one occasion.

The facts speak for themselves. Those are the facts and, if John Swinney had listened to the representatives from Oil & Gas UK speaking last week about the incentives on decommissioning and the brownfield allowance, he would know that those tax incentives are the reason why, as is mentioned in his motion, investment in the North Sea is at a 30-year high. For all the reasons that I have outlined, it is difficult to predict revenues from a commodity such as oil. Scotland has a £7.6 million net fiscal deficit. That is the Government’s own figure. Aileen McLeod also confirmed it. I am running out of time, but all I can say is that the United Kingdom brings strength, stability and security to Scotland’s finances and makes us better protected from shocks to our economy, such as the recent banking crisis, and fluctuations in the price of oil. We are better together.

9. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning last met principals of further education colleges and what matters were discussed. (S4O-01837)

A submission to the Education and Culture Committee from the North Highland College states that the college reform proposals are a “recipe for confusion and disagreement and difficult to understand”. What will the cabinet secretary do to ensure that further education colleges in the Highlands have the freedom to retain independent college structures and the autonomy to make local decisions for local colleges, and that further education institutions can focus their energies on training and education, not confusion and disagreement?

My memory of that is that it was tied in with the reorganisation of local government. The Conservative Government at the time was looking at police forces, education authorities and so on. My understanding is that there were six options, of which privatisation was one. It was not the only option.

It is not all to do with the public sector; many Scottish Water infrastructure projects are carried out through a very good and successful partnership with the private sector. Indeed, one such organisation, Morrison Construction, works very well and to very high standards in that partnership.

I thank the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee for its work on scrutinising and amending the bill. It was nice to hear the committee convener say that she had enjoyed the process so much that she was quite sad that it was over. I thank Maureen Watt for that. I realise that not everyone who is in the chamber was politically active 20 years ago but, when Elaine Murray spoke, I remembered the options for moving responsibility for water following the replacement of the regional and district councils. One option was to use the same arrangement as that for the police and to have eight water authorities. I clearly remember the six options, but Strathclyde Regional Council did not choose to put those options to voters. That has jogged my memory on the fact that, after local government reorganisation, three water authorities were established—North of Scotland Water Authority, East of Scotland Water Authority and West of Scotland Water Authority—which became Scottish Water. I am not a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, but I think from what I have heard today that we could learn quite a bit from that merger, particularly as we look ahead to the merger of our police boards. As Maureen Watt and others have said, there is no doubt that we have a modern water industry that is fit for purpose. Maureen Watt made the point that, since 2002, Scottish Water has stripped out 40 per cent of the costs. In 2002, it was one of the highest-cost water producers in the United Kingdom, so stripping out costs was essential in order to move forward. When I spoke in the stage 1 debate, I raised the issue of water abstraction. It is worth putting it on the record again that the absence of any consultation on part 2 of the bill, which is on abstraction, in the two public consultation exercises is unacceptable in creating good legislation. I hope that that does not become an acceptable precedent for future legislation. The Government’s response to the committee said: “my officials have been and continue to be in dialogue with a number of organisations ... to explain the policy intention and” give “reassurance that their views will be taken into account.” That dialogue is welcome, but it can never be a substitute for thorough consultation. On seeking reassurances, I will ask about the concerns that the Scotch Whisky Association raised at stage 1 about the 10-megalitre limit on abstraction and about the significant difference between the amount of water that is abstracted and the amount that is consumed in the whisky distilling process. No distillery in Scotland currently uses 10 megalitres of water a day but, given the increasing demand for whisky—which, by law, can be produced only in Scotland—the day might come when that limit needs to be exceeded. A significant point is that two thirds of the water that is abstracted for whisky distilling is returned to the source in a timeframe of between two and 12 hours. Surely it would be more sensible in this case to measure the water that is consumed rather than measuring the water that is abstracted without taking into account the two thirds that is returned to source. I seek an assurance from the cabinet secretary that she will address those concerns and consult the industry when the regulations are drafted. I appreciate that she alluded to that earlier. At stage 1, the committee questioned whether there was a need for a new abstractions regime given that the existing controlled activities regulations system was considered to be working well. Several witnesses found it difficult to see the benefit of an additional layer of regulation, and the committee’s report stated that Energy UK considered that part 2 of the bill was not in keeping with the better regulation agenda. My final point is about the leakage rate. When I mentioned it to my colleague Alex Johnstone, he said, “Dinnae mention that. It’s a lot better than it was.” I appreciate that it is a lot better, and we should all welcome that, but 700 million litres of leakage every day is a significant amount and, I would think, an unacceptable level. I hope that the leakage rate will continue to fall because, despite our high volumes of rainfall, water remains a scarce resource.

On the issue of the 10-megalitre abstraction limit that I raised earlier, given that by law whisky can be produced only in Scotland, will the Government consider any request from the whisky industry to distil more than 10 megalitres?

As usual, I declare an interest in that my son is a project manager for wind farms and is currently working in Aberdeenshire. I welcome the tone of the debate—so far. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee is to be commended for producing an excellent report that thoroughly addresses the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets. However, I hope that the committee will find time to revisit the report in the current session of Parliament, given that the Government’s understandable response to many of the recommendations is that it is “considering” issues; is “committed” to progress; plans to work with stakeholders; and “notes the Committee’s remarks” on biomass. I hope that the committee’s report and the Government’s response are the start of a journey, rather than the end of one. There are many aspects of the report that are worthy of debate—as Rhoda Grant has just said—but I will stick to just three issues. The first one is the effect of wind farms on tourism. The committee rightly recommends that VisitScotland and the Scottish Government continue to gather evidence on that from visitors to Scotland. However, I hope that they also listen to the views of the Mountaineering Council of Scotland, which states that it is not opposed to renewables; it simply recognises that our wild lands and open spaces are fundamental to Scotland’s character and identity. Many parts of the region that I represent form the last great wilderness in Europe and they should be recognised and valued—

No. Certainly not from Mike MacKenzie, sorry. They should be recognised and valued in this year of natural Scotland. The John Muir Trust also confirmed that 80 per cent of respondents to its survey considered that some areas need protection from wind turbines, yet VisitScotland claims that 40 per cent of the responses that it got say that it does not matter. Given that we have these claims and counterclaims, there is no doubt a need for thorough and accurate research. It is not just visitors to Scotland who should be taken into account in making determinations on or justifying wind farms, but all of us who live in Scotland, particularly those of us who live in remote and rural areas and who value the wild land and scenery around us. I appreciate that many studies were done some years ago—

No, I will not; and no, certainly not. There are now 10 times the number of turbines in Scotland that there were in 2004. My second point is on the intermittency of supply. That is a critical issue, yet one on which the Government “notes the committee’s views”. I know that Fergus Ewing has a good reputation for working in partnership with the United Kingdom Government. I hope that, in summing up, he will give a commitment to working on further research into and adoption of storage technology, which, as Rhoda Grant mentioned, will ensure far greater utilisation of our existing resource—particularly of wind turbines. It would increase production from the existing wind farms and would undoubtedly be a positive approach. As the minister said, we should be concerned about the warnings of Ofgem. I will not repeat what he said on that, but I agree. Conservatives support the new third and fourth-generation nuclear power stations, with their improved efficiency and safety standards. I remind members that we would need around 5,200 onshore wind turbines to generate the same output as one nuclear power station, which would last for 60 to—

Certainly not, Mr Brodie.

No, and if I have to keep repeating myself, I will take 20 minutes to finish my speech.

We would need around 5,200 onshore wind turbines to generate the same output as one nuclear power station, which would last for 60 to 100 years as opposed to the 25-year lifespan of wind turbines. My third point is on planning, which often leads to heated debate. A claim that I hear more often than any other is about the lack of local democracy as regards planning. Local residents can engage with their councillors and the planning committee can determine an application, but if it is refused, the developer gets a second chance, with the Scottish Government quite often overturning the decision that was made by elected councillors. There are also concerns over section 36 applications, and I was disappointed that that area received only one mention in the committee report, at paragraph 55. If councillors are acceptable arbitrators on applications with an output of less than 50MW, why are they simply consultees on applications with outputs of more than 50MW? I hope that in the planning review, the minister will look at that requirement, which I understand is based on the Electricity Act 1989. However, planning is now devolved to the Scottish Government. Also, the requirement was brought in at a time when large power stations were being built, not local wind farms, so I hope that the minister will look at it again. Just finally, Presiding Officer—

The visualisations that are submitted with planning applications lack consistency. In the Daviot application, the wind turbines were about twice as high in the information that was given to the council as they were in the local information.

I would also like the minister to look at buffer zones.

I, too, thank James Dornan for securing the make young people your business debate. I was delighted to hear his praise for Langside College and the work that it does—I am sure that that would apply to all colleges across Scotland. Some of the points from the Skills Development Scotland campaign and the UK Commission for Employment and Skills employer skills survey have been raised in parliamentary debates on youth unemployment. Nonetheless, the subject is undoubtedly worthy of a members’ business debate, given the impact on youth unemployment across Scotland. As Margaret McCulloch said, no one can get a job without experience and no one can get experience without a job. Employers need to rise to that challenge, accept their responsibilities and play their part. As Richard Lyle said, with only 25 per cent of businesses recruiting straight from school, college or university in the past two to three years, there is no doubt that employers need to be more involved. Skills Development Scotland states that offering young people work placements can serve as an informal trial period—a point that Margaret McCulloch made, too—but that works both ways. It gives the employee an opportunity to decide whether the work or, indeed, the organisation is suited to them. Bringing young people into work placements or modern apprenticeships helps maintain productivity and reduce what can be, particularly to a small firm, significant recruitment costs. Young people bring fresh ideas, innovation and a willingness to learn. I share James Dornan’s praise for the John Lewis Partnership, which is often cited for its tremendous support. Practical support for employers includes free advertising, recruitment incentives, wage subsidies, work placements and internships. However, James Dornan has a point, and I wonder whether all businesses know that that support is available. I am sure that many do, but we can play our part, too. I am pleased that, as a member of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, I can say that the Parliament has recently recruited two people under the modern apprenticeship scheme. Another scheme that I want to commend is the adopt an apprentice initiative, through which employers are offered £2,000 to help with recruitment and wage costs for a modern apprentice who has been made redundant. Many young people, particularly in the construction industry, lose their apprenticeship training through no fault of their own and it can be difficult for other employers to adopt an apprentice halfway through their training with another employer, who may have taken a slightly different approach. I was pleased to note that many Scottish and Southern Energy executive staff began their careers as apprentices, and have enjoyed significant development and training opportunities since joining the company. We need to look at that. A person does not have to be a graduate to get to the top, if there are good apprenticeships and training. Some of the evidence in the UK Commission for Employment and Skills recent report causes concern. I looked up the reasons why vacancies are hard to fill. According to the report: “One third (33 per cent) of hard-to-fill vacancies are caused by a low number of applicants with the skills required for the role. A quarter (25 per cent) are caused by a lack of work experience the company demands”. The skills shortage in the North Sea oil and gas sector is often mentioned, but I appreciate that some initiatives have been taken. I am pleased to support James Dornan in bringing a debate on a topic that affects many families throughout Scotland.

I did not read all the consultation responses, but I looked through the strategy, and I do not think that it mentions personality disorder. Will the minister consider improved diagnosis, treatment and care in relation to personality disorder?

Will the member give way?

I thank Nanette Milne and Christine Grahame for their kind words. I have had an interest in mental health since being elected to the Parliament in 1999, when I was deputy convener to Adam Ingram on the cross-party group on mental health. In the first two sessions of the Parliament, we worked well together on the topic. I welcome the mental health strategy. It is progress and a step in the right direction. I also welcome the review of progress in 2015, following the introduction of an 18-week waiting time target in 2014. Like other members, I put on record the tremendous work done by many in the voluntary sector to support people with mental health issues and to address stigma. In particular, I highlight SAMH, the Depression Alliance and the Samaritans. The Samaritans website is wonderful; it even tells us how to approach people with depression, which I think many people are nervous about. Like other members, I welcome the 34 per cent increase in the CAMHS workforce and the waiting time target of 26 weeks for CAMHS that is to be introduced this year. I hope that the minister will now consider increasing the psychology workforce in preparation for the December 2014 target. Although I note that waiting times are down, it is only three years since people in Easter Ross were waiting four years and seven months to see a psychologist. I also welcome the progress on improving dementia diagnosis. However, I would also like to see improvements in treating dementia. The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network—SIGN—guideline for dementia is now seven years old despite SIGN reviews generally being done every three years. The Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland confirmed to the Health and Sport Committee—Christine Grahame, Richard Simpson and, indeed, the minister have been on the committee—that 75 per cent of people in care homes were being given psychoactive medications for sedation and behaviour control when the SIGN guideline states: “In patients who are stable antipsychotic withdrawal should be considered.” I find that figure—75 per cent—very serious. It has not been mentioned, but I trust that the minister will mention it again. As the Health and Sport Committee did, I ask for a more consistent review of medication for older people. Not only could that save money, but it could improve health. The committee recommended that pharmacists and GPs should visit care homes more regularly to review the medication of elderly people. I recently became aware of a woman in her late 80s who, as her daughter told me, was on eight different types of medication. She was taking them at all different times of the day. She was on hormone replacement therapy for menopausal problems—the woman is 87—and on antidepressants. Her daughter said to her, “I didn’t know you were depressed, mum.” She replied, “Oh I was feeling a wee bit down when your brother was born.” The brother is over 60. It is not unreasonable to comment on that. I think that we might find such situations throughout Scotland. As 43 per cent of people on benefits in Scotland have a mental health issue, it is right that we give more time to mental health. Also, 79 per cent of people with a long-term mental health problem are not in work, and Siobhan McMahon and Aileen McLeod commented on that. As far as Siobhan McMahon’s point about the work capability assessment is concerned, I am not sure which period she was referring to, but I know that Professor Harrington has looked at fluctuating conditions such as ME and mental health and has ensured that they are taken into account as part of the assessment process. I welcome the Welfare Reform Act 2012, because I feel that many people with long-term mental health conditions need the two years of support that is offered to get them back into work. The strategy also talks about “Treating depression in those with long term conditions such as diabetes”. It is my understanding—perhaps the minister could confirm this—that support should be given for treating depression among sufferers of many, if not all, long-term conditions, but the treatment of depression is rarely addressed or, indeed, mentioned in SIGN guidelines. I think that I understood Jim Hume’s point very well. Early diagnosis and treatment of depression are essential. As Richard Simpson said, cognitive behavioural therapy has been a wonderful success, particularly in the Western Isles and the Highlands, but in its review of CBT, NHS 24 said that it was effective only for those people who received an early diagnosis; it had no effect at all on those who had severe, chronic and enduring depression. I think that Jim Hume’s point was that there is a place for antidepressants, but there are also times when people should be referred on to specialists and when talking therapies should be considered. Audit Scotland’s 2009 report, “Overview of mental health services”, said that 75 per cent of people with a drug addiction had an underlying mental health problem and that 50 per cent of people with an alcohol addiction might have a mental health issue. There is no point in treating the addiction unless we treat the underlying mental health problem. I accept what the minister said about borderline personality disorders. I ask him to continue to inform the Parliament on the issue, because I am aware of what some families go through in order to get a diagnosis and to get the very complex treatment that is required.

I apologise if I gave the wrong impression. The point that the lady’s daughter made was that her prescription had not been reviewed in 60 years. She suffered from depression only after having a child who is now 60 years old.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what financial assistance it will provide to Moray Council for the storm damage to Lossiemouth and Kingston. (S4O-01716)

The minister will know that, during the storms last month, significant damage was caused to the sea wall at Lossiemouth and remedial repairs have been done. At Kingston, homes that had been protected by the shingle bank saw that buffer from the sea reduced by hundreds of tonnes of shingle. My understanding is that the Bellwin scheme provides limited financial support for councils only for the immediate aftermath of an emergency, but not for the repairs that are now required at Lossiemouth and the significant investment that is required at Kingston. Given that it does not appear that the Bellwin scheme would assist Moray Council and that the council’s grant-aided expenditure for coastal protection is less than £50,000—

What changes to the scheme or additional financial support will the Government offer to assist Moray Council in reinstating protection for Lossiemouth and Kingston?

After that speech, I am sure that Mike MacKenzie will be next in line for a ministerial post. We look forward to that. I would like to raise two points relating to the Scottish budget, and I advise the chamber that they have nothing to do with constitutional issues or Labour Party policy and that I am afraid that my speech does not relate to the 1919 budget. The first issue is NHS backlog maintenance, the cost of which was highlighted by Audit Scotland as being more than £1 billion. Following scrutiny by the Public Audit Committee, we now have a clearer picture of the extent of the cost and of the potential harm to patients. The cost of backlog maintenance totals £773 million, now that the cost for properties that are earmarked for disposal have rightly been taken out of the total and some maintenance has been carried out in the most recent financial year. Of the total, 17 per cent is high risk, at a cost of £240 million, and 28 per cent is significant risk. The remaining 55 per cent of the £773 million is medium to low risk. So, what does “significant risk” mean for patients? According to the Scottish Government, significant risk requires “expenditure in the short term and should be effectively managed as a priority so as not to cause undue concern to statutory enforcement bodies or risk to healthcare delivery or safety.” However, the 17 per cent of backlog maintenance that is high risk—I am quoting the Scottish Government— “must be addressed as an urgent priority in order to prevent catastrophic failure, major disruption to clinical services or deficiencies in safety liable to cause serious injury and/or prosecution.” The Scottish Government expects immediate action to be taken to address levels of risk associated with patient health and safety. Therefore, where in the budget is there money for NHS Lanarkshire’s £88 million of high-risk backlog maintenance, NHS Lothian’s £36 million of high-risk backlog maintenance, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s £21 million of high-risk backlog maintenance, NHS Forth Valley’s £19 million of high-risk backlog maintenance, NHS Grampian’s £15 million of high-risk backlog maintenance, NHS Highland’s £14 million of high-risk backlog maintenance, and so on? Patients and NHS staff across Scotland will want to know when the £240 million funding for high-risk backlog maintenance will be made available, given that that should be a priority “to prevent catastrophic failure, major disruption ... or deficiencies in safety liable to cause serious injury and/or prosecution.” There are many other aspects of the health budget that are worthy of mention in this debate, but surely the right to be treated in a clinically safe environment is a top priority. I ask the finance secretary to address that issue in his winding-up speech. My second point is not a new one. It relates to the 24 per cent cut to further education colleges at a time when youth unemployment remains high—other members have mentioned that. Unemployment is at 18.5 per cent for 18 to 24-year-olds. I lectured in economics in further and higher education for more than 20 years before I became an MSP and know that the sector has been pared back over the years. Instead of tutorial groups of 15, we have tutorial groups of 45. In further education, there is a timetable of 24 hours of teaching every week for degrees, higher national certificates, higher national diplomas and national certificates. Further education colleges have done more to be flexible and responsive to local needs to widen access to education, and they should be praised for their work, not punished for it. The standards of degree teaching in further education are excellent and allow students to articulate into university courses after HNC or HND courses. With a 24 per cent cut, it will be much more difficult in future to maintain those standards, which allow students to stay at home for the first two years of their degree course, particularly when the majority of the cut will fall on the teaching budget. According to the National Union of Students briefing paper, college teaching grants will have fallen by £60 million in three years, from £469 million in 2010-11 to £409 million in 2012-13.

The sector is highly efficient. After incorporation in 1992, there was a drive to bring colleges to levels of success in training and education as well as to offer a wide range of opportunities to people of all ages throughout Scotland. Further education addresses inequalities and, just as important, embraces the self-esteem and confidence that individuals need to progress to the world of work. I would pick up the point that Mr Kelly made, but Gavin Brown confirmed it. Eighty thousand fewer places are 80,000 fewer opportunities.

In the eight seconds that I have, I ask the Scottish Government to think again about youth unemployment, inequalities, skills development and the maintenance backlog in the NHS, which is potentially harmful to patients.

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for giving way. I am sorry that I ran out of time to give some of my options, but the Auditor General did make a suggestion in relation to the merger of colleges. Rather than see the money to colleges cut, we would have hoped to see some savings from economies of scale from those mergers—but the Auditor General could not find any.

I was the only member who raised the issue, which came up in the Public Audit Committee. The director general for health does not regard the maintenance backlog as a difficult choice. He says: “High risk elements must be addressed as an urgent priority in order to prevent catastrophic failure, major disruption to clinical services or deficiencies in safety liable to cause serious injury and/or prosecution.” That is not a difficult choice but a top, urgent priority.

The Conservatives also welcome the reduction of 25,000 in unemployment. However, the same table on the same page of the statistics states—I have checked this with the Scottish Parliament information centre—that there are 4,000 fewer 16 to 24-year-olds in employment. The minister just said that there were more in employment, but the figure clearly states that there are fewer.

Given that Mr Gibson has compared the 2005 and 2009 figures for those not in education, employment or training, it is only fair to compare the figures for 2007 and 2011, which is the most recent date for them. I can confirm that 9,000 more people are not in education, employment or training.

We very much welcome the estimated reduction of 25,000 in the unemployment figures for 16 to 24-year-olds over the past year. We hope that it is the start of a downward trend, and an opportunity for all those people to gain work experience, training and skills and to secure employment in the future. However, over the same period that unemployment for 16 to 24-year-olds has fallen by 25,000, the number in employment has fallen by 4,000. There are 25,000 fewer young people unemployed, but 4,000 fewer in employment. I am sure that there may be a very good explanation for that, and I ask the minister if she could give us her thoughts on that in her summing up.

The unemployment situation in Scotland—and especially education, skills and training—would be massively improved if there was not a 24 per cent cut to the college budget, particularly given that the bulk of that cut is to the teaching budget. I say that as someone who spent more than 20 years teaching in further and higher education before coming to the Parliament. It is time that the Government woke up, took responsibility for all the powers that it does have and did its best for Scotland, rather than constantly blaming Westminster. I come back to the table of figures that I mentioned to the minister, which also highlights an estimated increase in the inactivity rate from 27 per cent to 31 per cent—just over 4 per cent. There are 24,000 more young people who are deemed to be inactive than there were a year ago; the figure is up from 161,000 to 184,000. Again, there may be a good explanation for those figures and I would find it very useful to find out exactly what that is. The figures seem to me, as an economist, to point to quite a serious concern. The motion “further welcomes the launch of the Make Young People Your Business campaign”. That campaign is very welcome. If we are serious about helping young people into employment, it is right to form good working relationships with the private sector and the third sector as well as the public sector. The guide “Making Young People Your Business” has been endorsed by the John Lewis Partnership and others who offer graduate programmes, internships, apprenticeships and work experience. They see young people as a benefit to their business, as the minister said, as they adapt to the latest trends, give insight into new markets and bring their information technology skills with them. Nonetheless, it is disappointing that only 25 per cent of businesses in Scotland have recruited straight from school, college or university in the past two to three years. A more flexible approach is needed, given that so many young people cannot get jobs because they have no experience, but they cannot get experience without getting a job. As was debated earlier in the week, the clear message here is to build employability skills. I was surprised that the minister did not mention the Prince’s Trust, although I appreciate that she cannot mention everything. However, in my research for this debate, I discovered that the trust does an awful lot more for young people than I had appreciated. For example, it has a team programme that teaches young people the benefits of team working and it provides a residential course, work experience and grants of up to £500 to fund tools or equipment needed for a job or a course. The grant can be used, for example, for hairdressing kits, carpentry tools or chef’s whites. Those are all difficult to fund if someone is unemployed. There is also the enterprise programme, with workshops, mentoring and start-up funding. I just hope that the systems are in place for those opportunities to be made available to all those who could benefit from them. It is far better for someone to start off their working life with a grant rather than a loan, as was mentioned. [Laughter.] I hope that the free vacancy advertising—[Interruption.] SNP members may think that it is funny to try to help young people into work, but I do not.

No. I am nearly finished. I certainly hope that the free vacancy—[Interruption.] I ask SNP members to stop laughing, because I would quite like to be able to continue. I hope that the free vacancy advertising service, recruitment incentives, wage subsidies, work placements, internships and the fully supported modern apprenticeship programme will ensure a reduction in the numbers of those not in education, employment or training. The latest information from SPICe is that that figure is still 31,000, but it is based on 2011. As I said earlier, the figure has gone up 9,000 since the SNP came to power. I hope that, as with the unemployment figures, that figure is falling. We are probably due an updated figure in that regard. On the cuts to the college budget, there is no doubt that reducing the number of training places for 16 to 19-year-olds has a devastating effect on giving young people the opportunity to get into employment. The Conservatives will, therefore, support the Labour amendment. We think that it is more thorough and considered and that it looks at a wide range of initiatives that are needed to address youth unemployment.

I appreciate George Adam’s understanding and sensitivity to the Opposition parties in giving way. On grants, I was reading from information from the Prince’s Trust. A person who has been unemployed for some time must find it helpful to get a £500 grant to buy the tools that are needed for them to start an apprenticeship, rather than initially being landed with a loan. George Adam can consider tuition fees, but I was talking about the commencement of work experience or apprenticeships.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister, Fergus Ewing, for his measured approach and commend him for his positive and constructive partnership with the Westminster Government. I am sure that the industry, too, will welcome that approach. I was pleased to hear what Rhoda Grant said, and I support her amendment. However, I noted from the Oil & Gas UK briefing that the safety record in the North Sea is better than that of the retail industry. Therefore, I question some of the points that have been raised. We are pleased to participate in this debate on oil and gas, and I confirm at the outset that we will support the Government’s motion and the Liberal and Labour amendments. I will leave my very capable colleague Alex Johnstone to deal with the Green amendment. That pleasure is all his. Given that 200,000 people are employed in the oil and gas industry and that it contributes £32 billion to the United Kingdom balance of payments, it is only right that the Parliament acknowledges and values the excellent work of the sector. As a member for the Highlands and Islands, I acknowledge the sterling work that is being done at the Nigg Skills Academy. I am old enough to remember when the oil industry started in the north-east. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the predictions were that we would be extracting oil from the North Sea for about 25 to 30 years. We are now 40 years on and we will still be taking oil and gas from the North Sea for some time to come. As Tavish Scott said, we have platforms that were built for the initial period and whose lifetime has been significantly extended. As other members have said, there have been many changes over the period. Technology has changed out of all recognition—for example, we now have horizontal drilling. In 1972, the price of oil was $3.50 a barrel, or around $18 in current prices, compared to today’s price of $111 for Brent crude. I want to highlight some recent estimates relating to oil and gas in the North Sea. Revenues are undoubtedly difficult to predict because of erratic prices and levels of production. There have been significant recent outages, including the Elgin leak, which has resulted in production falling by more than 12 per cent. According to the centre for public policy for regions, the cumulative fall in production since 1999, which was the peak year, is now well over 60 per cent. The Office for Budget Responsibility’s North Sea tax revenue forecasts for the period post 2011-12 have almost halved in the past 18 months, although higher capital investment should help to extend production in future years. Gas production is set to be 13.7 billion therms in 2017-18, which is a fall of 46 per cent from the 25.5 billion therms that was achieved in 2008-09. Oil and gas projections from the Treasury budget and the autumn statement clearly signal a gradual decline in total tax revenues from 2013 onwards. As a result, the current forecast for North Sea tax revenue from 2012 to 2016 is half the level that was forecast 18 months ago. Along with the CPPR research and predictions, the work of Professor Alex Kemp at the University of Aberdeen highlights the erratic and unpredictable nature of North Sea oil and gas production. In a recent paper, he highlights the comparison between the peak of revenues of £28 billion in 1984-85 with the low of £1 billion in 1992. In the past 20 years, the average has been about £6 billion per annum. Professor Kemp estimates that there are between 11 billion and 35 billion potential barrels of oil remaining and that future tax revenues in the next decade will be about £5 billion to £10 billion per year. Of course, the £34 billion investment for decommissioning must be brought into the equation, in terms of capital infrastructure and jobs. It is important to emphasise the figures that leading economists and research organisations have given, particularly in the lead-up to the referendum, when people across Scotland are looking for accurate figures on which to base their decisions. In February last year, the First Minister stated that there were 24 billion barrels of oil left in the North Sea—most people would agree—which he said were worth more than £1 trillion. This month, he stayed with the figure of 24 billion barrels of oil, but the value has now risen to £1.5 trillion, which is a 50 per cent increase in less than a year. I find that rather odd, given that the price of Brent crude in February last year was $121 and this month it is $111. The amount of oil in the North Sea still to be extracted remains the same and the price of oil falls by $10 a barrel over the 11-month period, yet the First Minister claims that last year’s £1 trillion-worth of oil is now worth £1.5 trillion.

That is the sort of misinformation that the people of Scotland do not want in the lead-up to the referendum.

If Mr Stevenson would be quiet, I would find it easier to concentrate on my speech, Presiding Officer.

In the lead-up to the referendum, it is worth noting that oil and gas revenues account for 0.7 per cent of UK gross domestic product, compared to 17.7 per cent of Scottish GDP.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I am not sure whether the member was fully awake at the time, but I took that figure from a Scottish Government press release by Alex Salmond, in which he pointed out the erratic volatility of the oil industry. I never made any implication or assumption that prices would fall to $3.50. If the member wishes to represent me, he should please do so accurately.

Will some of the £10 million that was announced yesterday for justice be allocated to upgrade courts in the Highlands and to develop a specialist domestic abuse court for males and females? That will ensure that there is equity of access to justice, and help people in the area, who face the longest travelling distances.

The Government’s list of shovel-ready projects includes more than £300 million-worth of health projects, so why has health received only £10 million today, which is 1 per cent of the £1 billion that has been identified as being required for backlog maintenance?

Given that part 2 was not consulted on and is a late addition to the bill, will the cabinet secretary also take into account the fact that 66 per cent of the water abstracted by the Scotch whisky industry goes back into the environment within a matter of hours? Will the abstraction regime measure consumption, as opposed to total abstraction?

I thank the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee for its stage 1 report, under the able leadership of Maureen Watt. Listening to Colin Beattie reminded me that my son often tells me that engineers save more lives than doctors because they provide clean water. I thought that was an appropriate point to make after Colin Beattie’s speech. In this fourth session of the Parliament, I would have thought that the lessons from the past in bringing forward legislation would have been learned. The SNP and the Conservatives were vocal in opposition when measures were brought forward by the previous Liberal-Labour Scottish Executive with no consultation—rightly so. I was therefore shocked to see that the sections of the bill on abstraction—part 2—was added with no consultation whatsoever. Neither does it seem to be clear to the many witnesses how the proposed abstraction application process will be separate from the current controlled activities regulations licensing regime—otherwise known as CAR—that is operated by SEPA. It is not surprising that the committee report states in paragraph 74: “The Committee has been made aware in evidence of a number of concerns in relation to the proposal to introduce the new abstraction regime” particularly when CAR “was considered to be working well” and “Ministers already had the power to call in abstractions” under the current system. I hope that that potential duplication will be addressed so that we have some clarity, which is, from my reading of the bill, much needed. Even SSE stated, in respect of the new abstraction regime, that “it did not have enough information to form a view on it”— that is mentioned in paragraph 75. The Centre for Water Law—which I did not know existed—considered that “the CAR system worked well and found it difficult to see the added benefit of another layer of regulation”. Therefore, it is not surprising that the committee’s report points out that “Energy UK considered that Part 2 of the Bill was not in keeping with the better regulation agenda.” As Alex Johnstone said, continuing to talk to stakeholders is a world apart from a thorough and considered consultation process, especially when the Government occasionally has a different interpretation from some of the rest of us about what constitutes consistent dialogue. I also share the committee’s doubts in paragraphs 84 and 85. The committee acknowledged “the ... concerns that ... questioned whether there is a need for the new abstraction regime” and noted that “it might be better to enhance the Controlled Activities Regulations”. That suggestion makes much more sense to me. The committee’s disappointment “that the Government did not manage to include the abstraction proposals in either of its two previous consultations” is perfectly understandable. To be fair, such an omission is not conducive to good and effective legislation. As I raised earlier with the cabinet secretary, and as others have mentioned, the Scotch Whisky Association makes the point—this would have been raised in a consultation process—that the threshold should specify the volume of water consumed rather than the amount abstracted, particularly as only one third of the water that the industry takes from the environment is used for distillation and two thirds of it is returned. I note that paragraph 92 highlights SEPA’s concerns about the gap between the abstraction and the water being returned to the environment. When I asked plenty of people about that at the Scotch Whisky Association event in the main hall last night, I was told that the timeframe for that gap is between two and 12 hours. I cannot see burns running dry, despite the scaremongering from SEPA, so I am not sure whether SEPA is totally aware of the timeframe. As convener of the cross-party group on Scotch whisky, I also point out that the industry has done more than most to address energy use, pollution, recycling and environmental issues. Paragraphs 94 and 95 seek clarity on “the rationale for the abstraction threshold of 10 megalitres per day” and point to a “lack of understanding on the part of stakeholders about the policy intention”. At this stage, the policy intention should be known. Once more, I say that that is why this Parliament, with no revising chamber, places so much emphasis on pre-legislative scrutiny to allow the committees the opportunity to do the work that they are tasked to do. Although no distillery currently uses more than 10 megalitres per day, that time could come—Gordon MacDonald also alluded to this—given the increasing demand for whisky exports in China, Brazil, India and many other countries worldwide. Any limit on water use could be potentially damaging to the industry, which is perhaps the only industry in Scotland whose production is restricted to our country by law. Given the contribution that the whisky industry makes to our economy and the fact that two thirds of the water that it abstracts is returned to the environment within hours, I hope that even at this stage the Government will consider—I felt that the cabinet secretary was listening when I raised the issue earlier—an exemption on abstraction for the whisky industry. I have not mentioned the leakage rate. Alex Johnstone has told me not to worry about that, because Scottish Water is making good progress and has reduced the leakage rate from about 1,200 million litres every day to 700 million litres a day. I do not know about other members, but I think that that is still a huge amount. I fully commend the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee. Its work has been thorough and its report is excellent. We will support the general principles of the bill.

Will the member give way?

Rob Gibson mentioned the CUSC panel, which is not due to present its findings to Ofgem until spring 2013. How can he be conclusive about costs when they have not been considered and the findings have not been produced?

I thank Rob Gibson for bringing to the chamber a debate on transmission charging for Orkney waters. As usual, I declare an interest as my son works in the renewables industry. I also thank Mike MacKenzie for raising the same issue in relation to project transmit that I raised in the debate in April, which is the fact that the charging must be in accordance with the two EU directives on renewable energy and the internal market, both of which enshrine the principle of non-discrimination between mainland and islands. When we have accurate charges, those directives can and must be tested. I regret that I cannot fully support Rob Gibson’s motion, especially as we are occasional travelling companions on the long journey north and south, and I hope that he will not hold it against me. I agree with one sentence of the motion, as I believe very much that “clean green energy brings massive potential for renewables and that the sector is already delivering jobs and investment in the Pentland Firth area”. Scottish Renewables is an industry body that claims to “work with members to lead the debate”. My view is that it should perhaps, for once, listen to its members and be better informed before making announcements. I am quite sure that the renewables industry wants accuracy from the organisation that represents it in the public and political domain. I say that on the basis that the claims in Rob Gibson’s motion are taken straight from the Scottish Renewables statement. The motion “notes with alarm ... the costs of grid connection and transmission ... are set to soar” following “new charges from Ofgem”. Scottish Renewables should know that Ofgem does not set or approve the level of individual charges. It obviously does not know that, so it should perhaps listen and learn. The announcement from Ofgem in May 2012 “does not equate to a formal decision that will result in changes to the current cost reflective method of calculating transmission charges.”

No. Can I just get started? As I said in the project transmit debate in April, the CUSC panel has been given strong direction on the issues to resolve—we are in the middle of this, not at the end of it—including a direction to address how links to the Scottish islands, which are currently at the proposal stage, will be treated in line with cost-effective and non-discriminatory principles. The tariff levels produced by Ofgem consultants in December 2011 were not a confirmation or even an indication of the actual tariff or charge level. Those can be provided only by National Grid Electricity Transmission plc. Ofgem has not received the industry’s proposals to develop—

Please let me finish. I am the only one—apart from Rhoda Grant—who is bringing some facts into the debate. Ofgem has not received the industry’s proposals to develop a new methodology; neither has it stated that an approved methodology will deliver a precise level of charge, according to the briefing paper that all MSPs received this week. The claims made by Scottish Renewables and repeated in the motion have no basis in fact. It would appear that the figures used by Scottish Renewables and cited again in the motion come from updated capital costs submitted by SHETL. However, those figures are not fully accurate, as Ofgem has not yet received the design and the cost of the proposed island link from SHETL. The word “estimate” is used in relation to the figures cited—it is a Scottish Renewables estimate and not a true figure. The true figures have not been produced by National Grid.

As I said, the CUSC panel is due to present its findings to Ofgem in the spring of 2013. It will then be for Ofgem to approve or reject the proposal. I regret very much that figures are being used that are estimates by Scottish Renewables—they are not accurate. I regret that because I have very serious concerns that those figures could scare investors from our islands with ill-informed comments and inaccurate statements.

The industry is far too important to the economy to be misrepresented.

I thank the minister very much for his positive remarks. Can he confirm that the group that involves Scottish and UK ministers, HIE and so on will not be able to form any opinion until the CUSC panel has produced its findings in spring next year?

In Lossiemouth, 15m of the sea wall was destroyed at the weekend. Can the minister assure me that its repair will be funded under the Bellwin scheme? In Kingston, which is also in Moray, the sea defence has reduced, with properties and beach roads seeing a vastly reduced shingle bank that many people believe will not protect them from another storm. Will the Scottish Government provide financial assistance to Moray Council as a matter of urgency to replace the lost shingle, and will it enter discussions about longer-term options?

We welcome the statement and further measures of support from Scottish Enterprise and the PACE team. We also welcome the minister’s approach to seeking employer commitment, which is critical. We regret that little has been done since 2007 to support Remploy, although Peter Hain, the former Labour minister, had warned that factories would close unless further action was taken. What progress has been made on the business opportunities for Remploy workwear contracts? What progress has been made on the use of reserved contracts for supported factories and businesses? Will a financial package that is similar to the one that the minister announced be offered in relation to staff in the many social enterprises and supported businesses throughout Scotland that employ disabled people and face an uncertain future?

I think the minister for an advance copy of his statement. We look forward to the long-awaited ferries review. My understanding of this issue is that consultation started in October, that some of the 36 volunteers who opted for redundancy, given the generous enhanced terms, have already left, and that all staff are receiving a pay rise of 4.25 per cent this year, which is almost double the rate of inflation. I regret that the bad weather that is forecast for Friday may result in the cancellation of ferries, but I am delighted that mother nature may on this occasion have outmanoeuvred Bob Crow. Serco NorthLink has stated that there will be no compulsory redundancies. Why, then, is the RMT persisting in punishing families and businesses in Orkney and Shetland at this festive time of year? How will the minister ensure value for money and a consistent and reliable service for passengers, businesses and taxpayers in the contract?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of NFU Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-01600)

I am aware that the cabinet secretary met the Hendry family at Wester Manbeen farm near Elgin this week to look at their organic dairy herd. What further help will the Scottish Government provide to dairy farmers in Moray and the Highlands and Islands to ensure that there is a future for milk production in the north of Scotland, given that the number of producers in those areas is at an all-time low?

6. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take following the recent Supreme Court ruling relating to the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. (S4F-01034)

Notwithstanding further interpretations, I note that the Supreme Court judgment relates to two amendments in my name, which were passed unanimously by Parliament in March 2003. Given that the Supreme Court has now found that ministers acted unlawfully by failing to implement regulations to ensure that mental health patients receive security appropriate to their needs, will the First Minister give Parliament an indication of how many potential compensation claims for victims are expected as a result of the Government’s failure to comply with its own laws?

I am not a member of the Education and Culture Committee and I am quite new to the issue, but I have read the briefing from Unison, which says that 93 per cent of SDS staff disagree with the statement that the new service delivery model will result in an enhanced service. If the new approach is so good, why do the staff not support it?

It is never easy to follow Stewart Stevenson, but here we go. The debate has been interesting; the Conservatives are in the rare position of agreeing with a Government motion, which says that “the modernisation of Scotland’s career services is vital to economic recovery”. How could we not agree with that? We also agree with Labour that the web-based system should be complementary to face-to-face careers advice and not a replacement for it. My colleague Liz Smith highlighted the significant progress that could be made with more personalised careers guidance. She also mentions in her amendment—which I hope will gain support across the chamber—the critical need for early discussion of careers options in schools so that pupils can choose subjects that are appropriate to a career. I am not a member of the Education and Culture Committee. However, following my intervention on the minister, I can only say that, if Unison has misunderstood the web-based approach, many people who gave evidence to the Education and Culture Committee share that misunderstanding. I would have had more respect for the minister had she acknowledged that there are concerns and said that the Government would address them. Instead, we heard evidence from the Labour Party and total denial from the Scottish National Party. That is not helpful. Liam McArthur made a thoughtful and measured speech along those lines. Before being elected to Parliament, I had a career as an economics lecturer. Like Stewart Stevenson, I had no careers advice, but I was a single parent with two young children and chose lecturing so that I could spend the school holidays with them. It turned out to be an enjoyable and rewarding career. I remember looking at a careers website as a student at the University of Dundee along with some friends from my class. It was obviously not as sophisticated as the systems that we have today. One question asked, “Do you like people?” We all said, “Well, yes, they’re okay, you know,” and the careers advice that we were given was that we should all be social workers. I certainly respect and admire the work that social workers do, but when we got back to the lecture theatre and asked the rest of the year whether they had taken the same careers advice, by coincidence, they had said that they liked people as well, so they had all been advised to become social workers, too. I make that point to highlight the need for a more personalised system to suit individual needs and talents. The 31,000 young people who are currently not in education, employment or training may also benefit hugely from face-to-face careers advice, rather than facing a computer screen. I also support better careers advice because I saw many mature students come into further and higher education after years in low-paid jobs with no career progression as a result of their having had little or no careers advice and support at school. If our careers services are to move people towards employment, it is important that they be able to steer people towards the parts of the economy where there is a demand for jobs. I welcome the skills academy at Nigg in the Highlands, and the Aberdeen model, both of which are long overdue but will, nonetheless, work to achieve a much better match of skills, industry and NEETs. Recent research into skills shortages in the energy sector highlighted the need for approximately 120,000 new recruits by 2022 if Aberdeen is to continue as a global energy hub. The Unison briefing is helpful, and I note the point that it makes about information and advice. There is no shortage of information online, as Neil Bibby and other members have said, but that is quite different from a face-to-face discussion on careers advice. The views of SDS staff cannot be ignored. If 93 per cent of the staff who offer the careers advice—the same would apply if it was 10 per cent, 20 per cent, 30 per cent or 50 per cent—disagree that the model will result in an enhanced service, the Government should say that it is listening to what those staff are saying rather than dismissing their views. I congratulate Energy North on the work that it has done in bringing together businesses from throughout the Highlands and in working with the University of the Highlands and Islands, Highland Council, Jobcentre Plus, colleges and OPITO. The organisation has identified a requirement to match education and training to the needs of the energy industry, which is desperately needed, given the opportunities in oil, gas and renewables and the lack of good advice and career guidance. Energy North is also working with schools and colleges. Iain Gray made a good point—which I have made before now—about female pupils and graduates, who need to be given the appropriate options and career advice. It is sad that, today, there are 15 fewer women working offshore in the North Sea than there were in 2007, and that only 5 per cent of offshore engineers are women. That industry offers great opportunities, so it is only right that women be given the advice, access and confidence to take advantage of them. I want to use the debate to highlight careers that require more prominence and respect; I am referring mainly to the hospitality industry. The perception remains that it is an industry for students and part-time staff, but in recent years Scottish food, drink and hospitality have achieved worldwide success. Exports have risen, Scotland is a destination for tourists and visitors, and the sector employs 200,000 people and generates total spend that is close to £11 billion. While we in the chamber regularly welcome the jobs and economic benefits from the sector, we rarely take time to praise the professionalism and commitment of the staff who make that happen, given the contribution of tourism to our economy. I hope that careers services will not, in the future, be dismissive of the retail or hospitality sectors. There are careers there, just as there are in other sectors.

I support the Labour amendment, and the Government’s strategy—up to a point. We will vote for the Government’s motion and live in hope that ministers will take on board the many reasonable and constructive points that have been made in the debate today.

I do not wish to ask the minister to lobby for the area that he represents but, in light of the planning application that has been announced today to make the Ardersier yard fit for purpose for renewable energy manufacturing, does he support any developments at that yard?

I, too, thank my colleague Margaret Mitchell for giving us the opportunity to put on record the excellent work that is being carried out by volunteers at the Samaritans in Hamilton, which is replicated throughout Scotland. It is also worth mentioning the choose life strategy, which the previous Liberal-Labour Scottish Executive set up. Although there is still more work to do, we cannot have a debate on the topic without considering the public money and commitment that have been provided both previously and under the current Scottish Government. My perception of the Samaritans service was that it was uniquely for people who are at risk of taking their own life, although I know from a friend who is a volunteer that conversations cover a much wider spectrum, from debt, sexuality, bullying and family issues to addictions, as Elaine Smith mentioned. I particularly commend the Samaritans website. In particular, I found a page with the heading “Worried about someone?” There are times when we know that someone may need support, but opening a conversation is difficult. It is also difficult to understand when someone may be struggling to cope. The list of signs of when someone may need support is helpful, as is the advice on the website on “How to start a difficult conversation”. Possibly all of us could benefit from that. I know that many parents, families and friends would welcome advice on how to engage in conversations without being seen to be putting pressure on people. There are many lessons to be learned from what the Samaritans do. In my minimal research for the debate, I learned that the Samaritans are not only for people who are at risk of suicide but give wonderful advice that could be beneficial to a wide range of people, including people who are at risk of taking their life and people who are potentially at risk of doing so. As Margaret Mitchell said, the work in partnership with Network Rail is tremendous. That can be seen from the “Men and suicide: Why it’s a social issue” publication. As Margaret McCulloch said, male suicide rates remain three times higher than female rates. I tended to think that the male suicide rate was highest among 15 to 24-year-olds, but the rate for 35 to 44-year-olds is twice as high. I was surprised by that. The publication that I mentioned says that there is a growing risk to men in middle age as opposed to younger men. I also understood that the Samaritans service was only or mainly a telephone helpline. I hope that members will forgive me for having looked up Samaritans services in the Highlands. I noted that the Western Isles Samaritans are open to receive callers at the door for face-to-face meetings on two days every week. I did not realise that that happened. I welcome the new home for the Western Isles branch. There are new, purpose-built premises in Stornoway, thanks to the generous support of the local community, NHS Western Isles, the choose life initiative, the council, Gannochy Trust, the Russell Trust, PF Charitable Trust and Garfield Weston Foundation, as well as donations from local councillors and fundraising by staff at the Stornoway Gazette, who fully supported the campaign. The Western Isles branch is the smallest in the UK, and it now owns its own property after 18 years in rented premises. I welcome its on-going commitment to suicide survivors with monthly support group meetings. Therefore, there are not only phone calls to the Samaritans; there is longer-term support and the opportunity to share concerns with others who understand. I understand that Oban has been identified by the Samaritans as a place in which their support is needed, given its remote rural location, isolation and current lack of access to services. There is no physical branch of the Samaritans within 90 miles of the Argyll area. I hope that the pilot work that is being done by the Samaritans in Oban and the surrounding area will result in a Samaritans service being set up to offer the confidential and non-judgmental support that is available elsewhere in Scotland. I will certainly do all that I can to support the setting up of that service.

I commend the work done on Springburn Remploy by Patricia Ferguson. I have listened carefully to her statements and, if I may say so, allegations, which I agree certainly deserve a response from the UK minister. I would be happy to take that forward. I live in Inverness, and we do not have a Remploy factory in my area. I have had no representations on the points that she has raised, so she will forgive me if I do not respond to them in this debate.

I have only just started.

I thank John Finnie for that point. I was going to mention later the connected issue of Haven Products, which I am sure he is familiar with. I put on record my welcome for the tone and content of the minister’s speech and, indeed, of his letter of 28 November, in which he states: “I am seeking to build business links between the Remploy Marine Solutions, part of Frontline, and senior figures from the offshore energy sector. There are clear business opportunities in that sector which I believe could be exploited in the future.” I welcomed that approach then and I have no doubt that the minister is best placed to secure its success. I was pleased to hear today of some progress on that front. His letter also states that several public bodies are in discussion with Remploy Frontline for workwear contracts, which he also mentioned today. I just hope that it is not too late to pull the situation together and move forward. It is important to put the debate into context, given that it has been on the political agenda for quite some time. In 2007, the Labour Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, Peter Hain, made the decision to close 29 of Remploy’s 83 factories. Mr Hain stated: “The reality is that without modernisation Remploy deficits would obliterate our other programmes to help disabled people into mainstream work. With no change, in five years’ time Remploy would require £171 million a year on current trends. That would be £60 million over ... budget”.—[Official Report, House of Commons, 29 November 2007; Vol 468, c 448.] Five years later, the same issues still need to be addressed but in a very different economic climate. Mr Hain also said that he had managed to keep 55 sites open only on the basis of their having very stretching procurement targets and a tough forward plan. He stated that it would be up to everyone with an interest in Remploy—Government, management, trade unions, politicians and all other stakeholders—to pull together to ensure that the existing factories met those targets. Kevin Stewart (Aberdeen Central) (SNP) rose— Mark McDonald (North East Scotland) (SNP) rose— I cannot take two interventions at a time. Remploy has had five years to achieve the targets that were set by the Labour Government. That is why I started by welcoming the minister’s commitment to seek to build business links with the energy sector and more widely. I am pleased that the £320 million of spending on specialist disability employment programmes remains protected and that an additional £15 million has been allocated to the access to work programme.

I have given Chic Brodie plenty of opportunities, so no—perhaps later. The review that was conducted by the head of the UK disability forum, Liz Sayce, strongly endorsed the principle that money should be used to support disabled people into employment, and that that money should follow individuals, not institutions. As Patricia Ferguson said, the minister’s predecessor, Jim Mather, said that, at the very least, every public body should aim to have one contract under the Scottish sustainable procurement action plan to make the maximum use of reserved contracts for supported factories and business. We support that aim, and I hope and trust that it will be included in the new procurement bill to give it the status that it deserves. Last month, Willie Bain, the Labour MP for Glasgow North East, secured a debate on Remploy in the House of Commons. In that debate, it was mentioned that there were 6.9 million disabled people across the UK, 2,200 of whom worked in Remploy factories, and that in Mr Bain’s constituency “a total of 14,600 people are disabled, and 43 of them work at the Remploy site. However, in the last year, under the Remploy employment services, 534 people had got into work.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 16 October 2012; c 64WH.]

I have 20 seconds left. Can I take an intervention, Presiding Officer?

I do not know whether I will have time to come on to social enterprises, but I think that they have a role to play. I hope that the member will forgive me—because I live in Inverness, I am not familiar with other organisations in Springburn. I note that some of Remploy Springburn’s contracts will be taken over by Haven Products, which is a social enterprise business that has sites in Glasgow and—as the minister knows—Inverness. I hope that existing experienced Remploy employees in Glasgow will have the opportunity to apply for jobs at Haven Products. Finally, Presiding Officer—

I was sorry not to be able to attend the meeting with Esther McVey on 22 October—I was at the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly in Glasgow on that day—although I have read the minutes of the meeting. I commend colleagues for raising the many issues that relate to Remploy employees. I move amendment S4M-05019.2, to leave out from “calls for” to end and insert: “notes the UK Government’s decision to close a number of Remploy factories that make significant losses year after year, in line with the recommendations in Getting in, staying in and getting on: Disability employment support fit for the future, a review carried out by Liz Sayce, the chief executive of Disability Rights UK, which advised that disability employment services should be focused on disabled people themselves rather than institutions so that they can access mainstream jobs in the same way as everyone else; accepts that, while the independent expert report highlighted that several Remploy factories were not economically viable in their existing form, the Department for Work and Pensions has negotiated extensively to secure a future for those enterprise businesses capable of existing outside of government control; welcomes the £8 million package of tailored support that will be available from the UK Government to help Remploy employees with the transition for up to 18 months; welcomes the use of Partnership Action for Continuing Employment to complement existing measures to support those made redundant to get back into the workforce, and commends the work of the Remploy employment service, which has supported over 35,000 disabled and disadvantaged people into work across Great Britain in the last two years and works in partnership with over 2,500 employers.”

I am sorry, but I thought that I made a reasonable contribution on that. It was a Labour secretary of state—Peter Hain—who closed 29 factories in 2007 and gave the remaining factories five years to become sustainable.

From Annabelle Ewing’s point of view, this appears to be all the fault and responsibility of the UK Government. I accept its role, but the SNP Government has been in power for five years. Five years ago there were warnings that changes had to be made, otherwise other Remploy factories would be under threat. What has been done?

I correct the member on two points. Neither Murdo Fraser nor I have said that the Remploy factories were unsustainable; it was Peter Hain who said that, as can be seen in Hansard on 29 November 2007. I have quoted him and Murdo Fraser has quoted him. Peter Hain put down a marker to say that unless people worked together, the factories that the Labour Government had not closed were at risk.

But that is why we retained that money.

I, too, thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of the statement. I endorse the view that pensions should be affordable, fair and sustainable. I respectfully point out that no one earning less than £15,000 a year will be faced with an increase because that protection has already been put in place by the UK Government. The Scottish Government will not impose increases on the local government scheme, but that is surely only right, given that the scheme had a surplus of £266 million last year, according to an Audit Scotland report, and the surplus is likely to be higher this year. The local government scheme is tiered by salary band and employee contributions are, generally speaking, higher than those in other major public sector pension schemes. While Mr Finnie—I mean Mr Swinney; Mr Finnie is in the back row—complains about responsibilities that he does not have, what will he do with the responsibilities that he does have? I have a letter from the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, dated 29 October 2012, which states that, with the Public Service Pensions Bill, “Scottish Ministers have significant flexibility in the design of their pension schemes ... Freedom to choose the rate at which pensions are built up each year, revaluation rates, and arrangements for those choosing to retire earlier or later than the normal pension age.” Ken Macintosh referred to that latter point.

The letter also states that the Scottish Government can choose “how much of their budget is devoted to public service pensions”. Will the cabinet secretary respond on the responsibilities that he does have and say what he will do in Scotland to make pensions affordable?

I welcome the debate and I welcome the conference bid fund. I also thank the minister for his briefing earlier today, which I found helpful. We will support the Government motion and the Labour amendment. Indeed, in the spirit of consensual politics I will say that if Tavish Scott’s amendment had been selected for debate we would have supported that, too. I commend Fergus Ewing for turning £1 into £53—John Swinney, watch your back. Fergus Ewing can perhaps expect a call from the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank or even Mrs Merkel herself. Well done, Fergus. I fully support what he said. Of the international association conferences that are held in the UK, some 28 per cent are hosted in Scotland, so we are punching well above our weight. We should acknowledge that England is not only our closest neighbour, but is our best market for business tourism and spending in Scotland. The minister said that 40 per cent of visits are return visits. That must be worth the investment, for the huge multiplier effect. As is usual in preparing for such a debate, I went to VisitScotland’s website, which says that the business tourism unit works closely with the convention bureaux in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Dundee. The minister said that conferences, conventions, meetings and business tourism are for all parts of Scotland. I remind VisitScotland that there is life beyond the big cities. Aviemore and Inverness are excellent examples of places that can host major conferences; the Scottish open is held at Castle Stuart near Inverness, not only because of the stunning and wonderful golf course there, but because the area can accommodate all the estimated 30,000-plus visitors. I am sure that, as the constituency MSP for Inverness and Nairn, the minister would never dare to tell the Inverness common good fund how to spend its money. However, I am sure that he welcomes—as I do—the fact that funding from that fund has been allocated to attracting conferences to Inverness. A maximum grant of £17,500 is available for any single application. I trust that the fund will work with VisitScotland on the issue. In evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, Gavin Ellis was right to raise the issue of investment in the transport infrastructure of roads, rail and air routes. I heard what was said about improvements in train journey times from Inverness to Edinburgh, and I would welcome any improvement, but I have been a regular traveller since 1999 and I have not yet seen one minute taken off the journey time. However, I believe that that will happen and, when it happens, I will welcome it. I trust that the same approach as was taken to business tourism following the Olympics will be taken in relation to the Commonwealth games. We have moved beyond silo thinking into looking at the advantages that can be gained. I trust that, in summing up, the minister will tell us what will happen when we have that wonderful opportunity.

There are lessons to learn from the Olympics. The lessons are 90 per cent positive, but we must also look at any deterrents. To maintain and increase our competitiveness in business tourism, we need constantly to improve what is on offer. The market is global and competitive, and we need to respond to business needs. The Deloitte annual business traveller survey shows that complementary high-speed internet in rooms is important, given that two out of three respondents said that they worked in their hotel rooms. The survey said that 61 per cent of respondents “expect more from hotels with regards to amenities and services”. I have no doubt that broadband speeds and mobile phone coverage are also major factors in business tourism, although they were not mentioned in the survey At a briefing earlier today, my colleague Murdo Fraser raised the issue of extending business tourists’ stays in Scotland. In our debate in June, I mentioned the excellent Sutherland trail and the problems that visitors had experienced in finding information about it on VisitScotland’s website. The minister’s response was: “I am pleased that VisitScotland has a dedicated walking section on its website as well as ... other initiatives”.—[Official Report, 21 June 2012; c 10464.] In my naivety, I welcomed that comment, but I was disappointed to see that that section of VisitScotland’s website breaks down Scotland into north, central and south areas—I am holding up a copy of the website’s map—and to see that Orkney, Shetland, the Western Isles and three quarters of the Highlands are omitted. The website covers 23 walks, from the Annandale way to the Moray coast, and it links to a glossy document to entice visitors, which is entitled “Discover Scotland’s Great Trails ... there’s a surprise around every corner”. That is, every corner except those in the north of Scotland. Will the minister look at that again?

Business tourism in Islay, with its distilleries, is first class. I appreciate that business tourism is a vital ingredient in the economy of the Highlands and the whole of Scotland.

Given the enormous demand for hotel beds in the north-east, particularly in Aberdeen, does the member welcome Mr Trump’s development and the extension of accommodation facilities in the north-east?

I have to say something about the comparison of the Highlands with the Borders. At least the Borders are on the south of Scotland walking map for VisitScotland; the Highlands and Islands do not even exist.

I thank the member for his question. I know that, as a former member of the Public Petitions Committee, he takes a great interest in e-petitions. He will know that this Parliament was at the forefront of developing an online petitions system. As convener of the Public Petitions Committee and a member of the corporate body, David Stewart has ensured that e-petition delays and updates have been on our agenda regularly. The original system needed to be upgraded and we wanted not just to replace the old system, but enhance it. The system that has now been developed delivers improved functionality, including enabling people to create petitions themselves and to have interactive contact with staff to finalise content; improved security features; and improved presentation of petitions together with improved administration tools for the clerking team. Apart from giving us the opportunity to make improvements to the look and functionality of the system, it also gave us the opportunity to bring the system in-house, as opposed to having it externally hosted at a cost to this Parliament.

I thank the member for his constructive and reasonable question. We recognise that although we now have an improved system, the process of getting there has been far from ideal. Officials will conduct a full review to see what lessons should be learned from the experience. We acknowledge that the whole thing took longer than had been anticipated, with the result that we did not provide an online facility to enable petitioners to gather signatures and comments between the end of August 2011 and 25 June 2012. Neil Bibby is right that lessons should and will be learned. The new online system was made available to the public on 25 June. So far, 249 petitioners have created accounts; 70 petitions are being prepared or processed; eight have been published and are in the process of collecting electronic signatures; and a further 16 have been lodged and are under active consideration. Feedback so far has been very positive.

I listened to what the cabinet secretary said in response to Neil Findlay and the Conservatives. The Auditor General for Scotland’s report from last month said: “The expected benefits and costs of the Scottish Government’s reform plans are unclear”. The Government has not published a quantified assessment of the costs of reforms or the expected benefits. If the Auditor General does not know the costs or expected benefits and an assessment has not been published, how does the cabinet secretary expect us to know them?

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests. I am happy to accept the cabinet secretary’s offer for an update meeting on further education. If we can work together on Islay’s health services, I am sure that we can do the same on further education. I am pleased to speak to the motion in the name of my colleague Liz Smith. Further education colleges deserve our whole-hearted support and praise, given how much they have achieved in raising the bar on education and training opportunities since incorporation in 1992. Although I can see the benefits of some college mergers, the sector is one of Scotland’s great successes and is certainly not a sector of failure. I substituted for Liz Smith at a recent committee meeting in which there was a discussion of further and higher education. Although I had done my homework, I found a plethora of figures and a confused account of the real cuts. When Neil Findlay asked Professor Jeremy Peat, Professor Gallacher and Paul Buchanan to give the committee one figure for the cuts, they were unable to do so, despite all their efforts. If eminent economists and college principals find it difficult to interpret the Government figures, that surely has to be worrying for the rest of us. Jeremy Peat confirmed that “FE is a priority for the economy” and said that the cuts are putting “severe strains on the FE sector at a time when there is a need to work at both ends of the labour market”.—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 25 September 2012; c 1443.] That means those entering the market and preparing for work and the many who need readjustment training during their careers to participate in a difficult and complex economy. The briefing paper for the debate from Scotland’s Colleges states that the teaching grant has fallen by £73 million—nearly 16 per cent—in the past two years. The Auditor General stated that there is a reduction of 24 per cent, in real terms, in the Government’s revenue grant support over the current spending review period against a background of increasing demand for college places and rising maintenance and energy costs. I add that there has also been a sixfold increase in pension costs. We then see that £24 million has been transferred from the funding council’s FE budget to Skills Development Scotland. That transfer of funds from the colleges to SDS is now ring fenced for colleges but, as the Scotland’s Colleges paper tells us, as with so many other financial transactions in this confused landscape, “No details of the fund have yet been provided.” Why has money been taken out of the FE budget and given to SDS only to be ring fenced for FE?

Not just now. Could the funds not just have stayed in the FE budget instead of being taken out, put in another organisation and then filtered back into FE? It is hardly surprising that we are bamboozled by this. The main concerns are the impact that the cuts will have on education and training opportunities and, more important, the widening of the inequalities gap, which many members have mentioned. More than 30 per cent of college students come from the most deprived areas, as Margaret McCulloch said. In colleges serving the most deprived areas, that figure can be more than 70 per cent. With 70,000 fewer students in the two years between 2008-09 and 2010-11, there can be no doubt that opportunities to get out of poverty are being lost. I do not believe that all those people were pursuing hobbies in flower arranging and basket weaving—to say so is insulting to 70,000 students who can no longer access further education. My main point, which I raised at the committee meeting, is on articulation. Having lectured in economics for 20 years in further and higher education before coming to the Parliament, I am aware that many students—particularly mature students—do not want to commit to a four-year degree programme. A higher national certificate can be achieved in one year and a higher national diploma in two years. Those programmes are now more flexible, with many modules being achieved through distance learning. Over the past 20 years, students have been able to choose either to complete their degree in FE or to enter second or third year at university. Whether the cut to FE teaching is 16 or 25 per cent, how can the Government expect colleges to provide the same number of courses, teach and train the same number of students and maintain the same excellent standards as they have been doing? Already, FE colleges are expected to—and do—achieve the same quality standards for a degree as universities, yet, as Professor Gallacher stated, “there is clearly a major funding gap”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 25 September 2012; c 1458.] between the funding of university degrees and the funding of FE colleges. Why are the colleges being cut again? I have very little time left, so I will make this my final point. At a time when further education is most needed, it is tragic if training, education and preparation for the labour market are lost. However, they are being lost, and the fault and responsibility for that lie with the Government.

Will Mike MacKenzie tell me how much competition there is in the Highlands and Islands, which we both represent?

I refer the member to paragraph 39 of the Audit Scotland report, “Scotland’s colleges: Current finances, future challenges”, which was published last month. If capital funding is so wonderful, why does the Auditor General for Scotland point out that there is “a real-terms reduction of 45.5 per cent” in funding for capital projects?

I, too, thank my colleague John Scott for securing the debate. I join him in acknowledging the hospitality and splendour of Glasgow city chambers. I agree with Michael McMahon that, given that Westminster, Stormont and the Oireachtas have had full plenary debates on BIPA, it would be appropriate for the Scottish Parliament to do the same in future. Like Willie Coffey, I was not too familiar with BIPA until it was mentioned by a minister in responding to a members’ business debate on Irish people living in Scotland. I was asked to speak in that debate because my mother came from Donegal and, like many others, settled in Scotland. I am proud of my Donegal roots and equally proud of my father, who was born and bred in Scotland. I have attended three sessions of BIPA, the first of which took place in the Grand hotel in Brighton, when I was placed beside a Sinn Fein delegate for dinner. Then there was the Dublin meeting, and the meeting last month in Glasgow. I commend the work of the co-chairs Laurence Robertson, MP for Tewkesbury, and Joe McHugh, Fine Gael TD from Donegal. John Scott mentioned the development of the body to 2008. BIPA is important, because no other body brings together parliamentarians from all the Administrations in these islands and from such a variety of political backgrounds. The address by the Taoiseach, Enda Kenny, in Dublin has been one of my highlights to date. As a previous member of the BIIPB, he spoke from experience about the developments between our countries. He described the Queen’s visit to Ireland as “ground breaking”, “momentous and unique” and “a turning point in British-Irish relations.” The focus at BIPA meetings is on working together, building trust, forging relationships and developing understanding between parliamentarians from all the islands. More than €1 billion of trade flows across the Irish Sea every week. In 2011 alone, Ireland’s exports to the UK increased by more than €600 million. Exports from Ireland to the UK are greater than Irish exports to Brazil, Russia, India and China put together. In turn, Ireland is the United Kingdom’s fifth-largest export market. As well as the greater economic benefits from working closely, in the energy sector there is much to be gained from interconnectors and shared research and development in marine energy. More is being done to share health services between the north and south of Ireland and to provide access to specialist services in the UK for people who live in Ireland. At the meeting in Glasgow, committee C, of which I am a member, had an update on wave and tidal energy from Neil Kermode of the European Marine Energy Centre. Energy will be the focus of our next meeting, in Donegal, which will come midway through the Irish presidency of the European Union. As John Scott said, in Glasgow, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland gave an address, which was followed by a robust question session. Current and future issues were discussed, as were several issues from the past. The session was conducted in a manner respectful to all. As Willie Coffey said, there was a debate on the West Lothian question. The debate that I found most interesting was the one that was led by Frank Feighan TD, who spoke of the decade of commemoration, which will run from 2012 to 2022 and commemorates a period that shaped the history of British-Irish relations until the present day. Between 2014 and 2018, we are likely to focus on the great war and the anniversary of Bannockburn, but 1912 to 1922 was also a unique period in Irish history, with the introduction of the third home rule bill and the signing of the Ulster covenant in 1912, the outbreak of the first world war, the Representation of the People Act 1918, which gave the franchise to women over 30, the establishment of the Irish Free State and much more. The joint statement by Prime Minister David Cameron and the Taoiseach in March this year says it all for me: “2012 also marks the beginning of a decade of centenary commemorations of events that helped shape our political destinies. This series of commemorations offers us an opportunity to explore and reflect on key episodes of our past. We will do so in a spirit of historical accuracy, mutual respect … and reconciliation.” That is what BIPA is all about. It must be better to build good relations with trusted neighbours and to work together to mutual advantage for the sake of all the people who live in Scotland, England, Wales, Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ireland, the Isle of Man, Guernsey and Jersey.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Issues have been raised regarding working towards a closer relationship between BIPA and the British-Irish Council. Can the cabinet secretary confirm how the British-Irish Council will give its input on future discussions, particularly on energy, which is an area on which we can work together to our mutual advantage?

I, too, thank Kezia Dugdale for her energetic campaign and for securing the debate in living wage week. As the Parliament is an employer with significant spend, I felt that it would be appropriate to put on the record what the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body—of which I am a member—is doing so that, rather than our simply judging others, we can be judged by what we are doing in the Parliament. The SPCB recognises that the living wage is a matter of great interest to members. Barely a corporate body question time passes without questions being asked about it. Generally speaking, they are asked by Kezia Dugdale; all credit to her for that. As a result of the views that members have expressed, the corporate body has actively considered the implications for it of adopting the living wage and has taken professional advice—something that Iain Gray alluded to—on the matter. The corporate body is highly supportive of the principles of a living wage and, as an employer that pays the living wage, leads by example.

That is a very good point, to which I am just coming. I thank the member for prompting me to continue with my speech. All directly employed parliamentary staff, as well as agency staff who are employed by the corporate body on a temporary basis, are paid above the recently published living wage rate. The Parliament can be proud of our responsible purchasing approach to procurement. Our on-going commitment enables us to bring about positive improvements in our contracts. Where relevant, we seek to include ethical and social considerations in our contracts, provided that they are compatible with EU procurement law. That brings me on to Iain Gray’s point. The European Commission recently confirmed to the Scottish Government that public bodies cannot require contractors to pay their employees a living wage as a condition of participating in a procurement exercise, and that discrimination against suppliers that do not pay the living wage would be in breach of EU treaty principles. That takes me to the Scottish procurement policy note dated 22 August 2012, which states: “Public bodies can, if they wish, still encourage contractors to pay their employees a living wage.” It goes on to state: If public bodies wish to encourage contractors to pay their employees a living wage through procurement processes, this is still possible, although they cannot treat contractors who say that they will pay employees engaged in the delivery of a contract a living wage any more favourably than those contractors that say that they will not.” That is quite clear. The majority of contracted personnel who are dedicated to the delivery of SPCB onsite services are paid above the living wage. However, at present 19 contracted catering staff are paid 30p below the new living wage and 7 contracted cleaning staff are also paid below the new living wage. Those rates are an improvement on the average industry rate for similar positions within the Edinburgh market and, of course this is a subject for on-going review. I realise that I am running out of time, so I will just say that although I have focused on the Scottish Parliament as an employer and on my own responsibility as a member of the corporate body, I appreciate that we are in difficult financial and economic times and I add that what is right and proper for the public sector can, in these difficult times, undoubtedly present challenges for many in the private sector.

I will ask about something that I did not mention in my speech. Does the minister encourage every MSP from every party in the Parliament to ensure that they pay their employees the living wage?

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether the uptake for flu vaccinations in 2012 is on target. (S4T-00109)

I thank the minister for his reply. This year, the annual flu campaign was launched at Jags for jags at Partick Thistle by the health secretary one day earlier than last year’s campaign launch, yet the vaccine uptake to week 43 is currently 8 per cent lower for over-65s and 5 per cent lower for under-65s and at-risk groups. However, what I find even more concerning is that the national health service staff uptake rate was 30 per cent last year. I appreciate that the target is 50 per cent for this year. What is being done to encourage more NHS staff to take the vaccine and what work is being done to more fully understand why we have such a low uptake generally?

I appreciate the emphasis on NHS staff, particularly given that they work with vulnerable patients. However, I was surprised that there did not seem to be any information for care home staff. I feel that the population of care homes could be at risk if staff do not get the vaccination. Is anything being done in that regard?

Given the historic concordat between the Scottish Government and local authorities, I respectfully ask what approach is being taken to address the significant levels of debt currently held by local authorities in Scotland.

17. To ask the Scottish Government for what reason unemployment in Scotland rose by 0.3 per cent in the three months to August 2012, compared with a fall of nearly 0.2 per cent across the United Kingdom. (S4O-01412)

Given the shortage of qualified and skilled engineers in the oil, gas and renewable energy industries, why have student numbers at further education colleges fallen by more than 73,000 between 2008 and 2011? Does the finance secretary believe that young people in Scotland are being given the opportunities to access the skills to do those jobs?

Will Rob Gibson take an intervention?

Will Rob Gibson take an intervention?

Can I make a positive contribution to the debate, as I could not get in to make a speech? Information from the European Commission, which was last updated on 8 August 2012, states: “Sweden ... has not yet adopted the euro, but in accordance with the Treaty it will do so once it meets the necessary conditions”, which are bank reform and economic convergence criteria. Sweden is not in the euro because it has not met the conditions, but under the treaty it will be in the euro and must be in the euro. That information is from the European Commission.

I, too, thank Hugh Henry for securing this debate and commend him for his consistent and, indeed, persistent approach to the issue of worker protection. I appreciate that the debate is not about the previous bill, but given that I was not involved in the previous debate I hope that I will be forgiven for having looked back at it for some background. Reading through the Official Report from two years ago, I noted that the deputy convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee said: “The committee was unable to access data on the effectiveness of the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 ... ; therefore, we could not determine whether the legislation had acted as a deterrent.” In moving the issue forward, I hope that the effectiveness of the 2005 act will be scrutinised—perhaps it already has been—to provide much-needed data that can be used to formulate future approaches to protecting shopworkers. The deputy convener also said that there is “a perception among workers that assaults are not taken seriously by the Crown Office and that that perception contributes to the thousands of incidents that go unreported each year”.—[Official Report, 22 December 2010; c 31858.] That brings me to the 83 per cent increase in incidents of violence and verbal assault against retail staff that was recorded by the British Retail Consortium over a recent 12-month period. I have to say that I find it difficult to reconcile that figure with the decrease in the number of incidents against shopworkers, which now stands at less than half the 2004 levels. After a steady downward trend, there seems to have been a sudden spike, so the figures deserve more causal analysis to allow us to understand what has caused that sudden increase. I also agree with Hugh Henry that verbal abuse is equally unacceptable. Many of us can remember what some school teacher said that made us feel quite humiliated at the time. In the previous debate on Hugh Henry’s bill, the then Minister for Community Safety, Fergus Ewing, rightly encouraged people to use the “Violence Reduction Handbook”, 5,500 copies of which had recently been distributed to front-line staff. The handbook offers practical advice about encouraging employees to report all forms of violence, because underreporting seemed to be recognised as a factor.

Let me finish this point. Whether the 83 per cent increase is a more accurate reflection of what is happening and is due to better reporting—or, even more worrying, whether it is an actual increase in violent and abusive behaviour—needs to be better understood.

I do not know whether that is a major cause, but I welcome the point that Fergus Ewing made. I welcome the distribution of the “Violence Reduction Handbook” because I think that people need the confidence to come forward and report. Those who spoke in the previous debate all agreed that employees need and deserve protection; the disagreement seemed to be on how that could best be achieved, as is perhaps the case again today. My colleague John Lamont stated: “abuse of those who work with the public is unacceptable”, and the Scottish Conservatives agreed with the principles behind the bill. He also suggested that, “we need to be better able to enforce the existing legislation”, and he cited the Law Society of Scotland’s view, in saying that “the existing common law provides sufficient protection to workers who provide a service to the public, as it takes account of aggravating circumstances.”—[Official Report, 22 December 2010; c 31874.] Finally, I want to commend the work that USDAW has done on the issue, which I hope has helped people to be more confident. I also commend USDAW on its respect for shopworkers week which, as James Kelly said, takes place next week. Just as James Kelly asked all politicians to work with USDAW, I hope that I can ask USDAW to work with all politicians, because I see that the USDAW briefing note states: “Ask your local Labour politicians to support our campaign ... Make sure you invite your local Labour politicians”. I say to USDAW that the best campaigns are undoubtedly those that are supported by all parties and none.

I would certainly be happy to support the campaign. Finally, I thank Hugh Henry for securing the debate, which I hope has moved forward the issue of worker protection.

I very much welcome the minister’s responses so far. Given that there are 15 fewer women working offshore in the North Sea than there were five years ago, will the minister commit to doing everything possible to ensure that the energy skills academy offers the same career opportunities to women as it does to men?

Will the member give way?

I am pleased to speak in the debate. Had I known that I would be opening and closing the debate for my party, I would certainly have made it a priority to attend the women’s employment summit in Edinburgh last month. Gavin Brown had intended to go on our behalf, but had to call off sick. I commend the Government on the summit. Having done some research on the issue, I now appreciate that much more needs to be done to ensure that women have access to all the opportunities in a modern Scotland and beyond. I hope to be part of the fresh impetus that the minister spoke about. The glass ceiling is always mentioned when we hear about women in promoted posts, and rightly so, but it implies that all women belong in the office and, potentially, in the boardroom. I would like to look further into the role of women in Scotland’s oil and gas industry. Not only does oil and gas provide more revenue to the Treasury than Scotch whisky, it is the biggest employer in Scotland and contributes more than £30 million to the UK balance of payments. It is therefore disappointing, to say the least, that 15 fewer women are now working offshore today than there were in 2007. That is not good enough. Many jobs in the oil industry are onshore. Women are generally associated with the five Cs—cleaning, catering, clerical, cashier and caring work. The oil and gas vacancies that are most difficult to fill are not in administration, secretarial or IT support jobs; the industry needs professional engineers, but less than 5 per cent of the professional engineers who are working offshore are women. It is difficult to understand why that is the case, given that more than half the entrants to further and higher education are female, although 66 per cent of those in modern apprenticeships are male. Of total school leavers, 32 per cent of males go into higher education compared with 39 per cent of females. I appreciate that, as Alison McInnes said, the First Minister has allocated £250,000 to encourage girls to widen their career options, and that he has launched careerwise to encourage girls to become engineers, manufacturers and scientists. That is much needed and I hope that it will make a difference. The skills shortage in the oil and gas sector was debated at the Scottish Council for Development and Industry conference in Aberdeen in February. It asked the Scottish Government to set out its skills strategy, policy and priorities. That relates to the sustainable supply of skilled people in Scotland. I agree with the minister’s calls for better collaboration, knowledge sharing and alignment between Government, academia and industry, but we still need to ensure that more is done to focus on women in that process. Scotland is ranked second only to London for the number of people who are qualified to degree level or above. We are highly skilled, but that does not translate into productivity. When we consider the movement of people who are educated to degree level into engineering and related occupations, the gap probably relates more to female employment than to male employment. However, the industry is up for the challenge. Perhaps it, too, could do more to get the message across that the North Sea oil and gas industry is open to qualified and trained women as well as men. My second point is on childcare, which is a topic that is regularly mentioned in relation to female participation in the workforce, as the minister acknowledged. When I looked at the issue, it reminded me of the inquiry that the previous Health and Sport Committee held three years ago into child and adolescent mental health services. That inquiry highlighted the need for standard health checks and high-quality child support. Dr Phil Wilson mentioned the evidence base for the finding that children with problematic behaviour at two and a half years are likely to end up with problems later in life, and research has suggested that it is possible to predict at the age of three as many as 70 per cent of those who will end up as in-patients in a psychiatric hospital or prison. It is for that reason, as well as many others, that I fully support the extension of free nursery education to 600 hours a year for three and four-year-olds, which will help women into the workforce. However, we need to look again at two-year-olds, given that only 1 cent of them get free nursery education in Scotland, compared with 38 per cent in England. The reason why I am so keen on that is that developmental issues can be picked up by qualified nursery staff and addressed early. That benefits not only the child but the mother, who in too many cases cannot work due to having to stay at home and look after children.

The nursery education workforce is mainly female. I question whether those workers are fully valued for the excellent work that they do in identifying developmental issues, working closely with parents and adhering to standards of care. They deserve more recognition than they get. Historically, the training and education of the predominantly female employees, as well as the national standards, were not too relevant. I hope that, in the process of women’s summits, we can change that perception and give them more recognition.

This has been an interesting debate—it was especially interesting to hear Margo MacDonald talking about a something-for-nothing society and to hear about the division of labour in the Macintosh household. I say to Maureen Watt that Alix Thom has been busy, because I spoke to her on Friday—I think that we probably got the same figures. Maureen Watt raised an important point: we need to understand not only the headline figures, but what lies behind them. I want to raise the issue of the caring profession in Scotland, which is made up of around 198,000 staff, mainly female. The training of the staff and their registration by the Scottish Social Services Council has been painfully slow. Despite the SSSC having been set up for 11 years, the registration of those predominantly female support workers is not required until 2020—another eight years—and, in order to register, staff must be trained to Scottish vocational qualification level. I cannot imagine any other profession in which women would be asked to do such a responsible job with little or no training. If we value the level of care that is given to elderly people and others, we should equally value the workforce that is supplying it and give those people the training, support and recognition that they need and deserve. Earlier today, I highlighted an industry in which there is a desperate need for highly trained engineers, and few women in the workforce. Compare that with the caring profession, in which the workforce is mainly female and in relation to which training and support will not be required for another eight years—19 years after the SSSC was set up. I confess that I was on the Health and Community Care Committee that set up the council, but I do not think that any of us imagined that, two decades later, home care staff would still not be expected to have any training. It is 42 years since the Equal Pay Act 1970, yet, shockingly, there is today an 8 per cent gap between male and female hourly rates and a 32 per cent gap in part-time hourly rates. Further, the female employment rate was 53 per cent in 1971 and, in 2010, the most recent year for which figures are available, it was 65 per cent. There has been progress, but it has been slow. I am aware, from my background in further and higher education, that many women are underemployed—not only in terms of hours, but in terms of their occupations, which are well below their training and capability levels. I particularly noticed that in women who came to college to do HNCs on day release. However, of the 27 countries in the European Union, female employment in the UK is seven per cent above the average, with only six countries having higher female employment rates—the highest is Denmark, then Sweden and then the Netherlands. We are not as bad as others, but there are still huge amounts of room for improvement. I look forward to further debates on the issue and to the updates on outputs and progress that the minister promised. I hope that my contribution will prompt more recognition for the role of nursery staff and of the caring workforce. If the early years task force is to do something really successful and if we want to focus on the early years as a priority, we need to ensure that the standard of care and education supplied by the workforce, which is predominantly female, is acknowledged and recognised. I hope that the minister will discuss the training of the caring workforce, which comprises 198,000 people, in order to ensure that they are given the support that they need. That would benefit not only the carers but those who are being cared for, and it would be a great boost to further education providers.

Once a child is born, how many development checks does it get up to the age of three?

I commend all those who have spoken in Gaelic. They have brought back fond memories of John Farquhar Munro and, indeed, Alasdair Morrison. Hugh Henry mentioned Ireland and Donegal. I am, of course, a daughter of Donegal. My mother and her family spoke Gaelic all their lives, and when I go there, they still all speak Gaelic until the English—as they would call us—walk in the door. They do not pronounce it as Gallic or Gaylic, however; they speak Irish. When the minister mentioned what we could do to encourage more people, including children, to speak Gaelic, I thought about the summer schools. When I go over to Donegal in the summer, the summer schools in Ranafast and Gweedore are absolutely stowed out with children from all over Ireland who are there to learn the Irish. I am not sure whether that provision is available in Scotland, but it would be worth consideration where there is not a critical mass of Gaelic speakers or access to Gaelic. I have just spoken about my mother, so I will say something about my granddaughter. Annabel Goldie spoke about the early years. My granddaughter’s mother is Spanish and, at three years old, my granddaughter asked me politely why I do not speak Spanish. She was a fluent Spanish and English speaker and thought that that was quite normal, so she could not understand why I could speak only English. Annabel Goldie and others made a very good point: the earlier people have access to language, the better. I would also like to put on my Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body hat, given that its Gaelic language plan comes under my remit. The SPCB was among the first public bodies to be invited to submit a Gaelic language plan under the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005, and Bòrd na Gàidhlig approved our plan in May 2008. Public authorities are required to review and update their plans within five years, so our plan is due for renewal by May 2013. The plan forms part of the SPCB’s provision to support the use of a number of languages in the Parliament’s work, as described in our languages policy. As a result of operating a Gaelic service since 2000 and of the development work that has been achieved since 2008 under the SPCB’s first Gaelic language plan, the SPCB already has an outstanding range of services that are available in or that promote the visibility of Gaelic. Those services enable members to use Gaelic in parliamentary business—through support such as that for today’s debate—and allow the public to communicate with members and engage in the work of the Parliament in Gaelic when they wish to do so. I believe that, on a day in April next year, there will be a pilot in which security officers are asked to welcome people in Gaelic, which will be interesting. Perhaps we should all do that. The services offered demonstrate that the SPCB is actively promoting Gaelic across its operations and leading on good practice. The proposal under the SPCB’s new Gaelic language plan is to continue to offer the current services. Last month, the SPCB approved a draft of the second plan, which is currently available for public consultation. Many issues, concerns and points have been raised today. I call on all members to look at the plan, respond to it and let us know what could be done better. The consultation will end on 4 November. The focus will be on the development of good practice and encouraging the uptake of services. In agreeing the proposed core commitments for the new plan, the SPCB was mindful of the excellent range of services that are already in place to support members and the public to use Gaelic in the Scottish Parliament and the opportunity to promote the better uptake of the current provision. To reflect that, an introductory section has been included in the draft plan that highlights all the ways in which Gaelic is or can be used to access SPCB services and parliamentary business. With my Conservative hat on now, I very much welcome the short-term working group that the minister mentioned, which will look into the provision of Gaelic teacher posts. We heard the translation of only some of John Finnie’s Gaelic speech, but I acknowledge that he mentioned that issue. Annabel Goldie’s amendment, which I believe is in my name, seeks to do more than just welcome the increase in funding for Gaelic. It is important that we consider how the funding is spent, whether it is spent in the most effective way and whether it will achieve the aims and objectives that each of us has referred to today. We welcome the spending, but we all know that unless the outcomes and achievements are measured, they could go almost unnoticed. We fully support the motion and I hope that other parties and their members will support our amendment, which we think is constructive, to ensure that the Gaelic plan does indeed deliver.

Listening to Graeme Dey, I could not help but be reminded of Neil Forsyth’s book of Bob Servant’s e-mails. I thank Liam McArthur for securing this debate and remind the chamber that this is my fourth speech of the afternoon. The problem that has been highlighted is not new; in fact, I suddenly realised that we seem to have become accustomed to it. However, given the stress—and, indeed, the fraud—that can result, the issue is certainly deserving of debate. I have also realised that in many phone calls I have made recently I start to leave a message when I am interrupted by the person at the other end picking up the phone and saying, “Oh, it’s you! I thought it was one of those nuisance callers.” As a result of these calls, people have stopped answering their phones. Even more concerning, one of my neighbours in Inverness bought a new phone because she said that there was never anyone at the other end of the line when the phone rang and she picked it up. When she got BT to check the line, it was found to be okay, so she concluded that the phone was faulty. When the same kind of calls continued with the new phone, she then thought that she was being checked out by potential burglars. She was reassured when I told her about nuisance calls; however, she had already been seriously stressed and had spent a considerable amount of money unnecessarily. Like Graeme Dey, I get my fair share of cold calls, on subjects ranging from payment protection plans to offers for free new kitchens, free double-glazing or free solar energy installation. In fact, one evening, I was told about the fortune that I could make by selling the sunshine energy in Inverness to the National Grid. However, what is happening in Orkney is very distressing. Callers pretend to be part of a Government initiative to help those in financial difficulties write off their debts—and, of course, it all leads to the people in question giving up their bank details. I signed up to the TPS to stop nuisance calls, but it did not make a blind bit of difference—and, after carrying out some research for this debate, I now understand why. The TPS does not cover recorded messages, not even Sean Connery when he personally called me last year to tell me to vote for the Scottish National Party.

I certainly did not. Even Sean Connery could not persuade me to do that. The TPS does not cover recorded messages, market research, robocalls—whatever they are—or overseas nuisance calls. If someone is registered with the TPS, the burden is on them to identify and report nuisance callers, but try getting the number and try getting the name of the company—it is impossible. I found some websites that offer to eliminate nuisance calls completely. I thought, “Well, that’s fabulous. I’ll raise that in the debate.” However, that offer comes at a cost or £40 a year or £48 a year, or at a one-off cost of £60 or £100. Basic protection is free but it protects only against unsolicited sales calls and junk mail from United Kingdom companies. Given the number of overseas call centres, that is of little help. I am now so suspicious that I do not know whether those websites are an answer, or whether it is a case of someone trying to cash in with another scam. I commend the work that was done at Westminster by Liam McArthur’s colleague Mike Crockart, which has attracted cross-party support. Mike Crockart’s motion describes the current “legislation around cold-calling via people’s homes and mobile phones” as “confusing and overly complicated” and goes on to say that he “believes that people should be able to guarantee their privacy in a simple and effective way”. That is not too much to ask. A briefing paper from the House of Commons library outlines the action taken over the years—including, in 2010, the increase in the financial penalty that is available to Ofcom from £50,000 to £2 million. Following this debate, I hope that if people can find out who is calling them—that includes Sean Connery—they could perhaps report them to Ofcom. Powers given to Ofcom were also revised in 2003 and 2008. The figure that I found most alarming was that 22 per cent of the UK population have experienced silent calls on their landlines in the past six months—surely that is proof that more is needed to address this increasing problem.

Will the minister confirm that the potential changes to the charging methodology under Ofgem’s transmission charging review are being further developed through the CUSC—connection and use of system code—panel, and that, following that work, findings and proposals will be presented to Ofgem in spring next year so that it can make a decision on whether to approve or reject any new charging regime? No final charging figures have yet been agreed as a result of the process, despite all the current speculation.

Economic growth depends on a healthy and skilled workforce. Will the finance secretary ensure that more of the preventative spend measures are allocated to mental health services, given the current waiting times of 40, 50 or 60 weeks for therapy and psychological support for children and adults?

I, too, thank the minister for providing an advance copy of his statement, and I congratulate him on being able to read Rhoda Grant’s mind. The Scottish Conservatives fully welcome the statement. We welcome the retention of the hydro ROC band at its current level, given the conditions and challenges that hydro developments face. We are pleased to hear of the further consultations and the positive engagement with the UK Government on solar PV banding and certain types of small-scale generation. My first question was to be on when the consultation on the innovative offshore ROC will start, but that has been answered. I welcome the fact that the consultation is to start as soon as next month. My next question is on biomass. Given the finite supply of wood, the measures that are to be taken on ROCs for biomass appear to be sensible. However, is there any potential for flexibility regarding biomass development plans that received planning permission during or after the consultation, and which might have incurred considerable preparation costs?

Does the member agree that the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets has not reached a conclusion following its consultation on grid connection charges for the islands? Its view is most likely to be issued towards the end of this year or perhaps next year.

I thank the minister for his kind words about Charles Hendry, which I am sure Mr Hendry will appreciate. I hope and trust that the partnership will continue with the new minister. We will support the Labour amendment, given the minister’s assurances—he will understand our apprehensions. The Energy Act 2011 resulted in better opportunities to compare prices. We also have the green deal, the Green Investment Bank, which is based in Edinburgh, and more. The draft Westminster energy bill is undoubtedly complex and technical and will require considerable scrutiny from the Energy and Climate Change Committee. It is right that the Scottish Parliament should also play its part in scrutinising the bill. I thank the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism for his constructive approach to the debate and the bill. I regret that the joint briefing with his Westminster colleague, which was scheduled for Monday this week, was cancelled, due to the reshuffle down south. Partnership working between Scotland and Westminster has been good and I trust that that will continue. The First Minister said in his letter in response to the draft UK energy bill: “The EMR provisions are crucial to Scotland’s future energy mix ... The Scottish Government agrees with the principles underpinning the EMR ... these reforms build on the successes we have achieved to date through the effective use of our existing powers and an increasingly productive, pro-active and valuable alignment of political and policy will with industry and investor effort.” I acknowledge those comments. That is undoubtedly how devolution was intended to work. We welcome the approach to price certainty and the statutory requirement to consult the Scottish ministers on the design and delivery of the contracts for difference framework, which the minister mentioned. Although much remains to be done on the bill, it is refreshing and encouraging to hear that the Scottish Government is working so positively with Westminster. The domination of the UK electricity market by the big six, which Rhoda Grant mentioned, only two of which are based here, gives rise to concern, particularly given the vertical integration from generation to supply. An MP said: “Vertical integration allows a utility company to generate the electricity under one arm of the company, which it sells through an intermediary—often offshore—which they also own, and then on-sells to another arm of the corporation, which supplies it to us as the consumer. The result is a total lack of transparency in the true cost of electricity”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 3 November 2011; c 373-4WH.] The process also prevents competition and is, as Rhoda Grant said, a barrier to new entrants. The bill presents an opportunity to address those issues. I ask the minister to tell us whether electricity storage, which is not in the bill, has been discussed. Given the vertical integration of the big six companies, I hope that they are looking at electricity storage, as suggested by the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in a paper that it presented in Parliament this week. Power systems must be operated so that supply is equal to real-time demand and system losses at all times. It therefore makes sense to look more carefully at electricity storage, particularly given the intermittent nature of wind power. Storage would also increase the efficient utilisation of those and other assets on the network. I understand that storage systems can be installed at a community level as well as to the grid. The institution’s report suggests that a detailed analysis of electricity storage should be done urgently. Has the minister discussed the matter with his Westminster counterparts? The Westminster Energy and Climate Change Committee is not alone in being critical of the complexity of the bill. Ian Marchant, the chief executive of SSE, stated in evidence at Westminster that the legislation “is an exercise in job creation for lawyers and economists.” I hope that the bill will bring much-needed clarity and transparency to the current complexity. The bill has many positive features, including the desire to keep household energy bills as low as possible, and Ofgem’s work to make the markets as simple and fair as possible is on-going. It is believed that the result of EMR will be a 4.3 per cent decrease in domestic energy bills between 2016 and 2030. I am also pleased to note that the bill reflects the UK Government’s ambition to shift future energy generation away from large fossil fuel power stations towards a more balanced range of energy production methods—of course, members on this side of the chamber would not rule out nuclear as one of those options. That shift is to be achieved through a range of measures that I am sure will be examined in the fullness of time. We favour the bill. Although it is highly complex and we are still waiting to see it in its final form, the commitment to reducing carbon emissions, securing energy supply and cost effectiveness are all measures that I am sure everyone will approve of. Those measures are absolute necessities, and it is good to hear that both the Scottish and Westminster Governments are committed to working together on this important issue.

Although there is still a way to go, does the member welcome the work that Ofgem has done to ensure tariff simplification, provide clearer comparisons between energy companies to make it easier to switch supplier, and set fixed standing charges?

When the minister is asking his officials to respond to contributions in the debate, can I ask him also to ask them for a response to the paper on electricity storage from the Institution of Mechanical Engineers that was presented to the Parliament this week?

I, too, thank Clare Adamson for securing the debate and I put on record Margaret Mitchell’s apology to Clare Adamson and the chamber for being unable to attend as she has a prior engagement in central Scotland. As energy and enterprise spokesman for the Conservatives, it has fallen to me to participate in the debate. I am a Highlands and Islands MSP, so the memorial for the steelworkers will be pretty far from my region. Nonetheless, Scottish Conservatives try as much as possible to support members’ business debates. I understand the empathy with her parents’ working background that Clare Adamson spoke of eloquently, as Jamie Hepburn said. I fully understand that, given that my father worked in agriculture all his life. However, given my lack of familiarity with the debate’s topic, I found myself reading about it in the Motherwell Times, the Hamilton Advertiser, the Morning Star, the Daily Record and, of course, on the BBC website. Apart from the latter, that is not my normal reading on a weekly basis, but it was very interesting nonetheless. All those sources covered the issue that is the topic of this debate with the respect and dignity that it merits. The Motherwell Times stated: “Those behind the project are in complete agreement with the council and the development company in that the structure should be inspirational and of a scale to be a worthy memorial and at the same time complimentary to the innovative developments which will take place on the site.” I like that, because it fully respects the proposed memorial to Ravenscraig and the workforce and recognises the innovation taking place and moving forward. Richard Lyle gave a positive endorsement of the campaign for this worthy memorial in the same edition of the Motherwell Times. If funding is secured and the project is delivered by next year, it would coincide with the celebrating Lanarkshire 2013 initiative to highlight achievements in Lanarkshire over the past 200 years. The memorial will therefore be not just a worthwhile initiative but a critically timed one. A deputy lord lieutenant of Lanarkshire, Terry Currie, who I believe has joined us in the gallery, chairs the memorial fund. He has fully endorsed and acknowledged the memorial as a remembrance to those who died and something that will honour all the steelworkers in an industry that, as he has stated, “revolutionised the Scottish economy and ... allowed Britain to become the workshop of the world.” At the highest point of the structure, on a flow of steel, a sprinting athlete will be seen powering towards the future, symbolising Lanarkshire’s regeneration and a new start. I understand that the monument is to be in a paved area in front of the new Ravenscraig regional sports facility, which is at the heart of one of the largest regeneration projects in Europe. Again, I thank Clare Adamson and apologise on behalf of Margaret Mitchell. I hope that I have been worthy of speaking in the debate. It is a fitting tribute to the steelworkers who died and, indeed, to the industry, and a recognition of the innovation that is taking place and moving forward.

I associate the Scottish Conservatives with the congratulations to Andy Murray, not only on his wonderful success this morning but on his Olympic gold medal. I welcome Nicola Sturgeon to her new role. I have always enjoyed working with her constructively in the past and I trust that it will be the same in future. I also congratulate Joe FitzPatrick on bringing a full roll of the Cabinet and a large turnout on his first day as chief whip. It will come as no surprise to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth that we do not support his motion, which, as Ken Macintosh said, predictably focuses on the Westminster Government with scant information about the Scottish Government’s own performance with the levers of power that it has—unlike in the energy debate scheduled for Thursday, where the minister has set out to build consensus on such an important issue for Scotland. Given that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth is not lumbered with the debt of the Westminster Government, he could—as Bruce Crawford has just mentioned—take a more constructive and positive approach to our economy. He might have taken the opportunity to respond to Tom Hunter’s call earlier this year, when he said that it needs “maturity and decency to put party politics aside” to deliver for Scotland. We would have respected and supported the Government if it had taken that course. I am sure that people across Scotland would also respect such an approach.

Our amendment is far more credible than Chic Brodie’s intervention was. We had a lot of good news from Westminster, but I had to halve the size of my amendment. When I saw the amendments from Willie Rennie and Ken Macintosh, I very much regretted that. There could have been more for Chic Brodie—I will not reduce the size of my amendment next time, to ensure that he gets the full good news. We can agree with much that is in the Government’s document “Supporting Recovery and Delivering Sustainable Growth”. I acknowledge the £4.5 million to provide occupational health support for employees in small and medium-sized businesses. Too often, people become long-term unemployed because they do not get the appropriate healthcare at the right time or the chance to get back into employment gradually. That funding is a positive move. Under the heading, “Attracting International Investment”, the document says: “The government is determined to build on Scotland’s strong inward investment record which includes successes such as ... Lifescan’s investment in Inverness”. John Swinney chose not to mention that a Tory Government and a Tory secretary of state brought LifeScan to Inverness in 1997. I do not mind having to go back 15 years for some success for the SNP, but it would be good if the SNP gave credit to the Government that secured that excellent business.

I very much welcome Willy Roe and his team. The facility is phenomenal and is a great success in Inverness. However, the Government’s document says that the Government’s “strong inward investment record ... includes” LifeScan. It would be a good idea to be honest in making such statements. The Government document could be honest and transparent and thank the Tory Government for the inward investment that it brought. The motion starts by referring to the “Government’s approach to supporting output and employment ... through a focus on boosting capital investment”. On “supporting output”, the Bank of Scotland’s purchasing managers index showed yesterday that growth in Scotland’s private sector has fallen well below the UK average and is at its weakest rate for 20 months. The recorded UK figure for growth is 52.6, which is up from 49 in the previous month. In comparison, the Scottish index is down to 50.3 from 51 in July. According to the index, the job creation rate in the private sector in Scotland has slowed to only a marginal pace. Kenneth Macintosh mentioned the construction industry, which relates to “boosting capital investment”. The construction industry across Scotland is ready and waiting for the Government to boost capital investment. Jean Urquhart made a good point about confidence. I respect her understanding of that as a businesswoman. The motion refers to “enhancing economic confidence”. Perhaps the finance secretary should talk to the biggest employer in the Highlands—the tourism industry—about that. The latest Federation of Small Businesses survey, which was given to MSPs last week, states that 28 per cent of respondents were optimistic in looking ahead compared with 60 per cent at this time last year. Most of them raised concerns about VisitScotland and ensuring that tourism does not stop in Edinburgh. That is all within the power of the Scottish Government.

Close?

Okay. As a member of the Public Audit Committee, I know that the Audit Scotland report has been very scathing about the Government’s support for information and communications technology projects. I will have to throw away most of my speech, now—sorry about that. I thought that I would have more time because I took interventions. Although there is much that we can support in the Labour amendment, there are aspects of it that, as I am sure members will understand, we cannot support. I move amendment S4M-04045.2, to leave out from “supports” to end and insert: “commends the UK Government’s approach to creating growth and reducing unemployment; notes that its economic recovery plan is backed by the IMF, OECD, Bank of England, CBI, Institute of Directors and British Chambers of Commerce; appreciates that, in the face of the eurozone crisis, the UK Government’s fiscal plan has seen market interest rates reach record lows while those of other European countries have hit record highs and has seen the UK rise from 10th to 8th in the World Economic Forum’s global competitiveness survey; recognises the 906,000 new private sector jobs created since 2010, and believes that the Scottish Government should use the significant number of devolved levers for economic growth that it currently has to help business and promote growth rather than endlessly complain about other powers that it desires.”

Does the member accept that even if the Scottish Government had powers and levers in an independent Scotland, it would still be under the fiscal and monetary control of the Bank of England in relation to borrowing, interest rates and the money supply?

I declare that my son is a project director for a wind farm. Does the member recognise that many wind farms have gone ahead as a result of collaboration and partnership with the MoD and that on this particular issue there has been considerable, marked progress?

Will Chic Brodie give way?

I hesitantly thank the member for giving way, but also for repeating exactly the same briefing that I think all the SNP back benchers have had today. It has become rather predictable. The UK economic plan is backed by the IMF, the OECD, the Bank of England, the CBI, the Institute of Directors and the British Chambers of Commerce—unlike John Swinney’s plan, which is backed by him and the First Minister.

When the coalition Government was formed in 2010, it recognised—as did the previous Government—that for many people on benefits the work incentives were poor and the system was too complex. The aims of welfare reform are to help people to move into and progress in work while protecting and supporting the most vulnerable. As Willie Rennie said, the UK’s welfare bill is currently more than £165 billion a year, so scrutiny and reform should be on-going. We have heard a great deal from the SNP and Labour about opposition to the plans. Not being a member of the Welfare Reform Committee, I have listened carefully to hear of any firm alternatives, but I am struggling to remember any. As Alex Johnstone said in the stage 1 debate last month: “everyone believes that welfare reform is needed, but no one is willing to say how it might be achieved other than to look at the UK Welfare Reform Bill and say, ‘Not that way.’”—[Official Report, 23 May 2012; c 9235-6.] I am also disappointed that not a single member has mentioned the fact that 44 per cent of people on benefits in Scotland have a mental health problem. Instead, they have all railed at David Cameron and the UK Government. I would have liked a bit more talk about people being supported to access mental health services instead of being consigned to a lifetime on benefits. Many people with a mental health problem are on benefits not because they want to be and not because they do not want to work, but because they did not receive an early diagnosis or the treatment or drugs that they wanted.

Mark McDonald had four minutes and no one has mentioned mental health. I am the only one who has mentioned it. I would have thought that if anyone cares about people on benefits, we should start with the 44 per cent who have a mental health issue. The benefit cap that is proposed in the Welfare Reform Bill is an important aspect. The cap will impose an upper limit of £26,000 a year, which equates to a salary of £35,000 a year. That is 75 per cent higher than the average salary in the Highlands and an even greater percentage higher than the average salary in the Western Isles. However, as I mentioned in the stage 1 debate—it is worth repeating today—many benefits such as war widows allowance, attendance allowance and DLA will remain exempt from the cap. Another area to highlight is reassessment, which has been portrayed by all SNP and Labour members today as a way of reducing benefit and support. What if someone’s benefit has stayed the same for years while their condition has seriously deteriorated? It cannot be right that people on DLA are left for years or decades—as they are—without reassessment although their condition may have worsened and they may be in need of a far higher level of support and financial assistance? It is immoral not to help those who are most in need. The cabinet secretary mentioned human stories. In my previous employment as a lecturer in further and higher education, I saw many lives transformed through training and education, some after years in prison, some after drug or alcohol addiction and many after years on benefits—women and men at a crossroads in their lives. Those students were not incapable, but many had lost confidence, had low self-esteem or had been put down by teachers at school. The welfare reform measures will bring better support to many people in work for up to two years. This is absolutely essential and I regret that it has had so little support today.

I welcome the acceleration of £15 million of maintenance projects in the national health service, but may I reasonably ask what action the finance secretary is taking to ensure that all public sector buildings, new and old, are properly maintained and not allowed to fall into disrepair?

I commend the member for the support that she has given to procurement opportunities for supported businesses. As part of our responsible purchasing policy, the SPCB aims to have at least one contract with a supported factory or business. At project planning stage, forthcoming requirements are examined to identify contracts that may potentially be reserved for supported businesses. The supported business directory is used to identify those suppliers. To give one example, the SPCB information technology disposal services contract was awarded to Pluss, which is a social enterprise that supports people with disabilities and other disadvantages into employment each year. About half of Pluss’s own workforce has a disability. Although the contract value was below the EU threshold, the requirement was reserved and the competition was undertaken with three supported factories and businesses.

The issue of procurement has been raised by several members. I will raise the point about working with Fergus Ewing, and I have also had an offer from the head of procurement. Liam McArthur and I would be happy to discuss the issue further with Helen Eadie.

I have listened carefully to the minister’s comments about the recovery programmes, which I fully support, and I support everything that Nanette Milne said, but I have not heard anything about psychological support for the many underlying mental health issues that can often result from drug taking and alcoholism.

Many issues that relate to whistleblowing could be addressed by more understanding and supportive human resources departments in the national health service rather than by the usual approach of suspending conscientious staff. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that HR departments try to support staff rather than bully them for whistleblowing?

He is behind you.

I, too, welcome the increase in tourism business that the minister outlined. I share other members’ views on the Olympic torch relay, which has undoubtedly been a phenomenal success. I did not see the torch in the Highlands, but I saw it at the back door of the Parliament as I drove in early one morning. I will be at the première of Pixar’s “Brave” in Inverness with my five-year-old granddaughter Alba, who is very much looking forward to it. Like the minister, I hope that the film will help us to achieve the 50 per cent target. The Scottish Conservatives will always support initiatives to improve and increase tourism. In the Highlands, tourism accounts for 20 per cent of jobs, which is more than in the rest of Scotland, so tourism is even more significant in the area that I represent. The minister is right that the industry is about people. Last week, when I was staying in a hotel in Thurso, a guest came in who was unsure about what to drink. The experienced waitress said to him, “Well, you look like a Dark Island man to me,” and that is exactly what he got. I am sure that that will increase sales of drink from Orkney. That is an example of somebody giving advice and knowing their job well.

I discovered this Dark Island ale, which looked like a pint of Guinness to me, but I am told on good authority that it is well worth trying. On the point about workforce retention, skills and customer service, there is sometimes an attitude in the Highlands that is almost as if people are in service, when in fact they are public servants. Many people provide excellent customer service, but it is for hotel owners and others in the tourism industry to ensure that staff are well trained—as I know they do—and to value those staff. I have one good story and a second one that is a could-do-better. The good news story is on the whisky industry, which I again commend for its incredible contribution to the Scottish economy and in particular its contribution to tourism. More than half the distilleries in Scotland have visitor centres, the majority of which are four-star attractions. The distilleries attract 1.3 million visitors, 87 per cent of whom come from outside Scotland and 62 per cent from outside the UK. In 2010, £27 million was spent. Distilleries provide 640 jobs in the visitor centres and more than £30 million in value to our economy. On average, for every £100 million of Scotch whisky exports, there is an associated £20 million spend directly on tourism. Starting in November, there will be an exhibition in the Parliament’s main hall for almost three months to mark the 100th anniversary of the Scotch Whisky Association. At last week’s meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on Scotch whisky, which I was delighted to see was attended by many civil servants, we had a presentation from Ian Urquhart of Gordon and MacPhail in Elgin on the spirit of Speyside whisky festival. Given that it has more than 50 per cent of malt distilleries, Moray is very well placed to host this four-day festival with 350 events that include wildlife and whisky walks, a “Dramble along the Spey” and “A Bacon Roll and Four Nips”. There is something for everyone at all times of the day and night. Eighty per cent of visitors stay for at least four nights and the festival is an excellent example of local distilleries, local businesses and people working together. The second issue that I want to raise is walkers in Scotland. I do not think that those particular visitors are valued as highly as they should be; in fact, climbers, cyclists and walkers have considerable spending power and prefer to see and experience Scotland by walking, climbing or cycling rather than through city breaks at our excellent hotels and other accommodation. That market has enormous potential and should not be overlooked. However, when I was in Lairg at the weekend, I was told that they are taking bookings from walkers from various European countries, who were also asking about the accommodation and shops along the 70-mile Sutherland trail from Lochinver to Tongue. As the minister knows, there might be excellent accommodation in both Tongue and Lochinver, as well as Inchnadamph Lodge, which is less than a kilometre from the trail, but unlike the west Highland way and the Speyside way there are no shops, services, hotels or bed and breakfasts along the trail. I am also concerned at the way in which this stunning trail along the old drover roads, which is highlighted on many websites and has been developed by Cameron McNeish, does not even register on the VisitScotland website. In fact, searching that website for the Sutherland trail brings up only two results, both to do with a flat in Talmine. Moreover, anyone who starts the walk from Lairg has to get to Lochinver or Tongue first. When someone phones up the hotel in Lairg and asks for travel to Lochinver to be arranged, the people at the hotel have to tell them, “Well, there used to be a post bus, but it doesn’t run anymore”. There is now a post van, but I would not recommend huddling in the back among the letters. The councillor in north-west Sutherland also confirmed to me that all the community councils in the region are dissatisfied with the way in which VisitScotland constantly ignores the area. The new Hebridean way will run 203 miles from the Butt of Lewis to Vatersay. Funding has been secured for that project, but I ask the minister to ensure that when these fabulous, stunning and amazing walks come on-stream in Scotland VisitScotland gets involved, helps to market them, provides advice about accommodation and so on. I am sorry to say that such support is not available at the moment. Given that parts of the Highlands of Scotland remain the last areas of wilderness in Europe, we should be able to manage and support visitors—the hill walkers, the climbers and the cyclists who will use these huge new walks of 70 and 203 miles apiece—and make them feel welcome and safe as they enjoy our stunning scenery and hospitality. I ask the minister to ask VisitScotland to talk and listen to people in north-west Sutherland and to support the walks as well as the tourists, who do not all want to stay in four-star hotels. I move amendment S4M-03400.3, to leave out from “renews” to end and insert: “recognises the enormous opportunity for tourism in Scotland presented by The Winning Years and the Disney/Pixar film, Brave, in particular; congratulates Glasgow on its success in winning several additional conferences with the support of the Conference Bid Fund announced in March 2012; encourages other destinations in Scotland to use the fund to win further business for Scotland; calls on the Scottish Government to use the powers currently at its disposal to establish an air route development fund and to examine how the business rates system could be used in order to assist the tourist sector, and believes that there needs to be a substantial change to tackle the skills disconnect between employers and employees and help to ensure that tourism is seen as an attractive career.”

I, too, have been reading briefings. I remind the member that Glasgow is the UK’s second-top retail destination.

I welcome this debate on youth employment. I was a lecturer for 20 years before I became an MSP, so I am fully aware of the enormous benefit of training and education to people of all ages. I was hoping for a more constructive debate—but there is still time. In the debate in February I welcomed the appointment of a dedicated Minister for Youth Employment and the fact that the Parliament would get regular updates on the issue. I also welcomed the social enterprise fund, raised issues to do with literacy levels in schools, expressed concern about the £33 million cut in further education funding, and highlighted the employment levels and rate of positive destinations, including further study, for Scottish graduates, which are much better than the UK average. The response from the Minister for Youth Employment was: “I will not take any lectures from the Conservatives on youth or adult unemployment.”—[Official Report, 9 February 2012; c 6365.] There was no analysis of any of the content of my speech and no response to any issue in my speech. I trust and hope that today either the minister or Mike Russell will, when summing up this hugely important debate, respond to the contributions of MSPs across the chamber rather than making dismissive statements. Sir Tom Hunter gave an inspirational speech at the business in the Parliament conference last week. He reminded us that the business birth rate in Scotland is exactly the same as it was in 2003. Given that the Government’s motion refers to “supporting young people into work in small and medium-sized businesses”, I hope that it will enhance dialogue with small businesses to give them the opportunity to get more apprentices and to support them in growing their businesses. Of course, it is not just the quantity of apprenticeships that counts, because the quality of the training and the ability to transfer skills also help to keep young people in the job market. I noticed that the education secretary was at the business in the Parliament conference and nodded positively when Sir Tom Hunter emphasised the need for the education system to be more closely aligned to the world of work. We fully support that, given the points that the minister has made.

I am delighted about that. There was some criticism about how entrepreneurialism was encouraged in the past, and I am pleased to hear the education secretary’s positive response. Sir Tom Hunter also pointed out just how much can be achieved by “a can-do attitude”. I would find it helpful if the Government could lead from the front with a can-do, positive attitude instead of constantly carping and criticising other political parties and the Westminster Government. Tom Hunter talked of people turning up their noses at vocational education and also said that university lecturing careers should be based on jobs for students and not on research papers. That was undoubtedly food for thought. It is shameful that the vocational budget in further education has been cut by more than £33 million by this Government. Tom Hunter also said that “it is the Government’s responsibility to paint the picture”. That was in response to the hopelessness felt by so many people in Scotland. I will come back to that, because this is not only about jobs and about being good for business but about confidence and self-esteem for the individual. I will quote what were probably the two most important points made by Tom Hunter that will remain with me. First, instead of “political point scoring”, politicians need to co-operate, innovate and form successful, positive partnerships. We are all committed to the reduction of youth unemployment. I do not think that there is an MSP in the chamber who does not want a successful, positive partnership. The second important point that Tom Hunter made was about the need for “maturity and decency to put party politics aside” and deliver for Scotland. He asked us please to put party politics aside—we will all be with the Government on that one. The first line in the Government’s motion is: “That the Parliament believes that recruiting young people makes good business sense”. Of course it makes good business sense, but it does more than that. Research by the Prince’s Trust this year confirms that the emotional health of young people is affected by unemployment: they are more likely to feel stressed, down and depressed. Research by Bell and Blanchflower in 2010 states that “unemployment is a stressful life event that directly reduces individual well-being.” It also states that “Unemployment increases susceptibility to malnutrition, illness, mental stress, and loss of self-esteem, and increases the risk of depression. The unemployed also appear to be at higher risk of committing suicide” and of being in a poor physical condition. I would simply add that to the Government’s motion. I fully appreciate that employing young people “makes good business sense”, it does far more than that.

I close by saying that in its last four years, the previous Administration had 3,000 more apprentices per year than this Administration has had in its first four years. I have the figures, if members would like to see them. I move amendment S4M-03295.3, to insert at end: “; believes that there needs to be greater dialogue between the Scottish Government and small businesses; believes that there should be a greater focus on the quality of the training and apprenticeships provided, rather than just on the numbers of places available, so that there is greater emphasis on ensuring that training programmes are tailored to the needs of the individual young people; views with concern that there has been a lack of analysis when deciding how to allocate the £30 million youth unemployment strategy budget particularly in terms of the lack of clear guidance to local authorities on what they are expected to achieve, and is disappointed that the Scottish Government policy was unimaginative in relation to raising private sector capital and expertise to complement the £19 million allocated thus far.”

As the First Minister plans for the 2014 year of homecoming, will he ensure that the 100 small businesses in Scotland that are owed £300,000 as a result of the 2009 gathering receive payment before further plans are made?

Just say yes.

I remind the member that we are not all on a rota to come here. I am certainly not on a rota—I say that with my party’s chief whip sitting in front of me. I am here by choice to listen to this interesting debate.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I commend John Swinney on the tone of his speech, which was unlike that of many of his back-bench members. The Scottish Government can approach economic recovery quite differently from Westminster, because it does not have £1 trillion of debt to address. I also commend Johann Lamont; she was right to say that Scotland is not immune from the euro zone crisis. When Neil Findlay mentioned the Maastricht treaty, I tried to intervene to say that few of the countries that now face problems met the economic eligibility criteria that were set out in that treaty so, if we are looking for faultlines, perhaps that is where we should go. We should never underestimate the EU countries’ commitment to maintaining the euro. It has been shown and will continue. Deficit reduction and growth are not—as many members on the nationalist benches seem to think—alternatives. Deficit reduction is essential to securing economic growth. Sensible politicians will not blow the budget on more spending, more borrowing and more debt, which would result in the loss of our credit rating and much higher interest rates for mortgage payments for families and higher investment costs for business. Willie Rennie mentioned that today’s UK 10-year bond yield is 1.74 per cent. It is worth adding that that is the lowest rate in 318 years. The examples that I will give of deficit reduction going alongside economic growth arise from the policies at Westminster and the Irish Parliament. In 2010, the Irish received from the EU a bail-out of £71 billion, but last year they turned 10 years of budget deficits into a budget surplus. They have stabilised the banking system and the economy is now showing modest growth. They are addressing high unemployment and have 800,000 more people in work than was the case 15 years ago. Ireland has reduced the public sector by 12 per cent, which has reduced the pay and pensions bill by €3.5 billion. When the Irish assume the presidency of the EU in January next year, I have no doubt that they will continue to focus on debt repayment and growth. The Irish recognise that they cannot continue to spend nearly €14 billion more than they take in in tax revenues each year. The Taoiseach and David Cameron have agreed on joint priorities for co-operation in the years ahead, based on a strong partnership between Britain and Ireland within a strong European Union. The focus will be on the potential of the single European market and better competitiveness, which the cabinet secretary mentioned, in order to create jobs and growth. Given that £1 billion of trade in goods and services flows across the Irish Sea every week, and that Ireland’s exports to the United Kingdom increased by €600 million in 2011, greater economic collaboration is a must. We must also increase trade, make businesses more globally competitive and generate sustainable employment. That was all agreed in a British-Irish summit on 16 March.

I am not talking about arcs of prosperity. My point is that we do not have to make a choice between deficit reduction and economic growth—my examples show that the two go hand in hand. The Taoiseach has said that the British and Irish Governments are “very much on the same page”, and that “Britain is our nearest neighbour and remains our closest friend on the world stage.” That is in stark contrast to the rhetoric from the nationalist Government, in which any Westminster policy must be bad and anything from Scotland must be good. The UK has become more competitive because of the reductions in corporation tax. The “patent box” tax mechanism, which introduces a lower rate of corporation tax on profits that are generated from UK-owned intellectual property, will give the United Kingdom an edge in attracting investment. Westminster’s fiscal plan has helped to maintain the AAA international credit rating and low interest rates. The inherited deficit has been cut by a quarter, although we still pay £120 million in interest every day. In two years, the private sector has created more than half a million jobs. Rob Gibson mentioned banks. The Westminster Government is introducing a national loan guarantee scheme to provide cheaper loans for businesses. The Government is cutting corporation tax and red tape and streamlining planning policies from more than 1,000 pages to just 52. It is releasing enough public sector land to build as many as 100,000 new homes and using right-to-buy receipts to build a further 100,000 homes.

I am sorry, Neil, but I have only 20 seconds left. Those measures will help to support 400,000 jobs. The banking reform bill will introduce a ring fence around retail banking and many other measures will be taken on stability and so on. Perhaps the SNP Government could start by taking some responsibility and answering some questions. For example, why do 30 small businesses go to the wall every day in Scotland? Why is there an 11 per cent slump in businesses with nine or fewer employees in Scotland, compared with a figure of 2.8 per cent in England? Why is the rate for company liquidations in Scotland eight times the rate in England and Wales? Why did insolvencies increase in Scotland last year by 13.6 per cent when in England they fell by 4.7 per cent? If we ever go down the road of separation, there will be the fiscal rules under the pound and the United Kingdom, with the Bank of England as the lender of last resort, or the equally—if not more—stringent fiscal rules of the euro. The SNP cannot make promises to spend money that it does not have. People in Scotland want a Government that works with and co-operates with others, including our closest neighbours in the United Kingdom, the European Union and globally.

It has long been recognised that employment law needs to be revisited. I remind Rhoda Grant that the proposal is out to consultation and the closing date is 7 June. Much that has emerged from the Beecroft report is being consulted on, and the proposals are not definitive.

Jackie Baillie has acknowledged how much she is opposed to welfare reform. I inform her that James Purnell, Labour’s former Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, is in favour of welfare reform; that Frank Field has said that Labour’s flagship welfare policy was an expensive failure; and that John Hutton, an ex-Labour minister, is at the heart of the reforms.

Does Siobhan McMahon agree that there should be a benefits cap of £26,000, or a housing benefit cap? Should benefits be limitless?

Will the member give way?

I think that, for once, George Adam does not know what I am going to say. On 17 May, a new appointment was made to the work capability assessment scrutiny group. He is a chap called Simon Gillespie, who is the head of the Multiple Sclerosis Society in the United Kingdom and is a trustee and treasurer of the Neurological Alliance. His appointment will ensure that the voice of people with brain injury or MS—I thank George Adam for all his work on that—is heard.

Given the member’s expertise in economics and his assertion that the Westminster Government does not have any economic sense, does he think that it is economic sense to pay £2,000 a week—£104,000 a year—in housing benefit? That is a sum that few families in Scotland could ever afford.

Kevin Stewart and others spoke about the absence of the Lib Dems from the debate. It is not out of grace that I come here today; it is my duty as a parliamentarian and as a member of the Conservative Party, which is also in government in Westminster. It is always an advantage to be on a committee that is considering a bill and to hear all the evidence and discussion surrounding the committee’s report. As other members have done, I thank the Welfare Reform Committee for its work. As I am not a member of that committee, my starting point was the committee’s stage 1 report. Given all the rhetoric that we have heard in recent months, I started looking for hard-hitting recommendations. I appreciate that the bill is an enabling one but, nonetheless, after reading the report, I found in total 24 paragraphs in bold, which are normally loosely termed as recommendations. Of those, I found one recommendation, in paragraph 61, which relates to stakeholder involvement. We all agree that that is absolutely essential. Against the background of the rhetoric, there was more support for the general principles and for universal credit than I thought there would be. In various paragraphs, the committee “notes” issues; one paragraph raises “concerns” and another raises “grave concerns”; another asks the Scottish Government to consider analytical trials to see what works; and one paragraph asks the Government to return to the issue of eligibility, as stakeholders do not have “a common or articulated view”. Although I have listened carefully to the debate, I am still not sure, despite all the criticisms of the eligibility criteria from Colin Beattie and others, whether the Scottish Government will bring forward its own eligibility criteria. It would be interesting to know that. A report’s conclusion is usually where one would find the committee’s overarching concerns. However, the first conclusion “brings the collective concerns from stakeholders ... to the attention of the Scottish Government”. Meanwhile, the second and final conclusion “looks forward to engaging further with stakeholders”. I agree with all that, but I was a bit shocked, because I had expected something stronger.

I will certainly keep a close eye on its reports and will respond in as honest and accurate a manner as I always do. I make no apology for putting it on the record again that Labour’s former Secretary of State for Work and Pensions pointed out that “Nine out of 10 people who came on to incapacity benefit expect to get back into work. Yet if you have been on incapacity benefit for more than two years, you are more likely to retire or die than ever get another job.” The removal of bureaucracy and the merging of seven different benefits into one has been widely welcomed. As Jamie Hepburn said—I agree with him on this point—it is the outcomes that are important. Rather than joke about the fact that we might agree on something, I say that I think that there is more that unites than divides politicians on the issue. Labour’s work programme scheme paid providers 53 per cent of the fee to place a person in a job. The new system will give work providers 5 per cent to get a person in a job and the remaining 95 per cent is paid over two years to ensure that people who need the support get it to help them hold down employment. No money is paid to the provider if the person becomes unemployed.

No. The member has not been in the chamber for the whole afternoon, anyway, and I have a short amount of time. Although George Adam dismissed the strategic changes, they are important. The DWP has already accepted the recommendations made in two reviews that Professor Harrington carried out to improve the assessment. The changes were needed. I welcome the fact that the chief executive of the Multiple Sclerosis Society has been appointed to the independent scrutiny group that is overseeing improvements to the work capability assessment. He will provide a voice for the charity sector as the scrutiny group oversees Professor Harrington’s third review, which is now out to consultation—the consultation ends on 30 June. There has also been an outcry from Labour and the SNP about the capping of benefits. That outcry was not shared by the majority of people who took part in a recent YouGov poll that was carried out across Scotland. It found that 72 per cent of people supported the £26,000 benefit cap, which is 3 per cent higher than the figure from the same survey in England. The benefit cap will have a top limit of £26,000, which is equivalent to a salary of £35,000. The average salary across Scotland is £22,694 and the average salary in the Highlands is £20,000. Members should tell people who are working whether they support the benefit cap. I have not been able to get information out of anyone today about whether it is supported. Something else that others have not mentioned is that households receiving DLA, PIP, attendance allowance and war widows allowance—and many other benefits—are exempt from the cap. No one has mentioned that. Another reason for the establishment of the Welfare Reform Committee in the Scottish Parliament was to examine—I support this—the effects of the legislation on benefit claimants in Scotland. Apart from when I had a quick cup of tea, I have listened to every word that has been said in the debate. I would like to know: what have the 40 Scottish Labour MPs been doing at Westminster?

I have less than half a minute left. It is not as if Scotland is not democratically represented at Westminster, so what are they doing? I have heard members say that the level of appeals upheld is up to 70 or 80 per cent—that is not true. In fact, both the company running the work capability assessments and the DWP have based the figure on the 39 per cent who were considered fit for work. Of those, 37 per cent appealed, and 39 per cent of those appeals were successful. That results in an overall 14 per cent success rate for appeals, because 39 per cent of 37 per cent is 14 per cent. We need to get that accurate. I am still not clear about what the Scottish Government will do to mitigate the measures contained in the Welfare Reform Act 2012. I am sure, however, that Labour and the SNP have significantly raised the expectations of the more than half a million people who are on benefits in Scotland. I think that those people deserve to know exactly what is planned and I hope that they will not be disappointed.

Does Drew Smith think that it is right that people on DLA are left for years or decades without reassessment when their condition may have deteriorated and they may need a far higher level of support and help? Does he not agree that reassessment is necessary?

There have been criticisms of the Westminster Government: that it has introduced a benefits cap of £26,000 a year—equivalent to a £35,000 salary—and a cap on housing benefit, which the SNP Government does not accept. Will the Government not accept any cap at all on those benefits?

Although the infection-control measures in hospitals are welcome, we should not ignore the role of antibiotics in cases of C diff. I understand that antibiotics can kill harmless bacteria while allowing C diff bacteria to multiply in greater numbers. Given the two outbreaks at Raigmore this year, has an audit been done of the prescription—or, perhaps, the overprescription—of antibiotics in the area?

We welcome another debate on the Scottish economy and, in particular, the growth strategy. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I very much welcome the 90 jobs that were announced today for Lewis. The Western Isles have the lowest average wage rate in Scotland and Moray has the lowest average wage rate for mainland Scotland. Against that background, the new jobs are very welcome. It is always constructive and interesting to compare our performance against economic indicators with that of the rest of the United Kingdom, other EU countries and the G20. However, rather than focusing on what is best for Scotland and what can be learned from elsewhere, our debates on the economy tend to become nationalist divisive, as we heard from Mike MacKenzie and Annabelle Ewing, at a time when people across Scotland do not really care whether something is a Westminster or a Scottish Government economic initiative, but just want jobs, opportunities, support to start a business, support to stay in business, training, education opportunities and an occupational health service to support staff through illness, along with other pro-business approaches. I say to Mike MacKenzie that, when John Maynard Keynes wrote “The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money” in 1936, he was living in very different times from those in 2012. Mike MacKenzie rose— Mark McDonald rose— For a start, international competition is quite different. If Mike MacKenzie wants an economics lesson, he should consider the time at which Keynes’s theory was indeed exceptionally successful.

I just said, I think, that the recovery in 1936, on the basis of Keynes’s general theory, written in 1936—he was of course a member of the coalition Government through the war—was very different from the recovery today. Maybe the member did not hear that. I think it was fairly clear. As joint convener of the cross-party group for Scotch whisky, I was drawn to the motion’s reference to the “growth sector” of “food and drink”. That sector is performing exceptionally well; indeed, I listened to what Richard Lochhead said at question time and welcome what is happening in that respect. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that whisky accounts for 80 per cent of all Scotland’s food and drink exports. Although that is very welcome, I note that it accounts for 99 per cent of food and drink exports to Singapore, 90 per cent of such exports to the United States of America and 72 per cent of such exports to China—and before Mr Swinney jumps to his feet I should tell him that I am going to talk about salmon. Given that Scotland has products of such fabulous quality, we should examine why whisky accounts for 80 per cent of food and drink exports and perhaps focus on other opportunities. That said, last year’s 23 per cent increase in whisky exports is obviously incredibly helpful to the economy. I also welcome exports of Scottish salmon to markets in China and elsewhere and the Scottish Government’s support for a sector that provides sustainable jobs in remote Highlands and Islands locations. Indeed, such developments are particularly welcome, given the reduction in demand across the European Union that Gavin Brown referred to. Whisky not only supports jobs but makes an enormous contribution to our tourism sector and has truly focused on energy efficiency and renewable energy. We should all welcome the building of new distilleries such as Ardnamurchan’s Adelphi, where the creation of 10 permanent jobs will be a huge boost to the local economy; mothballed distilleries being brought back to life; and production capacity increasing at several other distilleries. It is worth noting that over the past two years growth north of the border totalled 1.4 per cent, compared with 2.8 per cent for the whole UK. Moreover, with regard to the 0.2 per cent reduction in UK output, it should be pointed out that as we do not have the figures for Scotland we cannot make a like-for-like comparison. As John Swinney made clear, that figure will be available in July. Things could be looking good for Scotland in the first quarter of 2012, but we do not know yet. According to the briefing provided by the Scottish Parliament information centre, average forecasts for the Scottish economy for 2012 have been revised downwards since January’s economic indicators, while IMF growth forecasts for the UK have been revised upwards. There is a sharp contrast between the projections for the UK and those for Scotland.

I am just about to, Presiding Officer. Finally, the Scottish Government should welcome the measures that have been introduced to tackle tax evasion and avoidance, as they will not only deal with those who cheat and find ways of not paying tax but bring in more revenue.

I have to be honest and say that I have rarely found an opportunity to thank Dave Thompson for anything, as he knows, but today is different. It is worthy for a member’s business debate to commemorate the centenary of the Dewar report, and I thank Dave Thompson most kindly. I welcome visitors to the gallery—there are one or two familiar faces there, including Miles Mack. I also acknowledge today’s challenges, particularly, as the health secretary knows, in relation to Ardnamurchan. The motion is fairly polite and diplomatic in stating that “the report shocked contemporary politicians with its portrayal of the inadequate provision of health services in the Highlands and Islands”. It certainly was inadequate. Many crofters and their families could not afford medical care and treatment, and general medical practice rested largely on minimal subsidies from the poor law authorities and other public authorities. The Dewar report states that “the remuneration from these various authorities bears no proper relation to the work done or to the degree of responsibility involved.” As a result, as Joan McAlpine outlined, individual practitioners were discouraged and medical services as a whole suffered. I found the Dewar report interesting. I did not expect to read as much of it as I did. One of the most harrowing parts of the report is part 4, on evidence of the inadequacy of medical attendance relating to uncertified deaths. Figures provided by Dr Macdonald, medical officer of health for the county of Inverness, confirmed that, out of a total of 3,825 persons who died, 1,821 had not received medical attendance for some time prior to their death. That means that 47 per cent of those who died had received little or no medical attendance. At a time when, in the whole of Scotland, the average percentage of deaths that were uncertified was 2 per cent, in Uig it was 69 per cent, in Shieldaig and Applecross it was 78 per cent and in Coigach and Lochbroom it was 81 per cent. In the parish of Kilchoan, in Ardnamurchan, between 1907 and 1909 the total number of deaths was 33 of which 30 were uncertified and only three were certified by a doctor. Dr Macdonald of Inverness also stated that the deaths were among very young people—children—or very old people and were due, to a large extent, to poverty and inaccessibility. Another part of the Dewar report that I found interesting was under the heading “Qualifications of Nurses”. Under the subheading “Maternity Nurses”, the report states: “These are women—generally widows—who have attended a course of lectures and have conducted a certain number of confinements under the supervision of a medical man or midwife attached to a teaching institution ... The duration of the courses, both theoretical and practical, is three months.” “Cottage Nurses” trained “for a period varying from six to twelve months” and “Fully Trained Nurses” “had three years’ hospital training in a recognised hospital of not less than 100 beds”. The Dewar report highlighted the inadequate number of nurses and the need for efficient nursing for “(a) The birth and infancy of children. (b) The “following up” and treatment of diseases and defects in children as disclosed by school medical inspection. (c) Promoting among the people a knowledge of personal and household hygiene, dietary, etc. (d) The earlier detection of illness.” The outcome of the chapter was a recommendation that “all existing voluntary nursing agencies,”— many of them were charitable— “where practicable, be organised under a county or district scheme” and that nursing be an integral part of the medical service. We cannot imagine otherwise today. It was also recommended that suitable houses be provided for the nurses and that telegraphs/telephones be made available to them and to Scottish hospitals. Those recommendations and many others more than justified the committee of seven men and one woman going out on foot, on horseback and by boat to 17 remote locations from Argyll to Shetland and from the east Highlands and highland Perthshire to the Western Isles. With doctors guaranteed a minimum salary and reimbursement of travel, and with a guarantee of involvement in public health, school work and attendance at childbirth, the service was formed in 1913 with a grant of £42,000. Without any shadow of doubt, the Highlands and Islands medical service revolutionised healthcare for more than 300,000 people on half the landmass of Scotland. Unlike other local medical schemes, it was directly funded by the state and administered centrally by the Scottish Office in Edinburgh. By 1948, it had already been providing comprehensive healthcare for 35 years when the rest of Britain was about to experience a national health service for the first time.

Given that the question related to jobs that have been created, will the minister state what percentage of those jobs will be temporary to fulfil a short-term contract and how many are considered permanent?

I, too, thank George Adam for giving us another opportunity to debate multiple sclerosis. I spoke in the previous MS debate, in December, which Rhoda Grant secured. Like other members, I thank the Presiding Officer for her continued support since 1999, which is highly valued, given that families and friends of people across the chamber are affected by MS. I will address the importance of MS week and raise related issues. I will not deal with the Welfare Reform Act 2012, except to say that one of the many changes proposed by the occupational therapist Professor Malcolm Harrington, who is advising the Westminster Government, was to have a category to acknowledge and understand the importance of fluctuating conditions in determining benefit payments. Such a category did not exist at the beginning of the Welfare Reform Bill process. Mental health issues, myalgic encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis are the three conditions that relate to that welcome change. Last week, I was pleased to host a briefing on the health effects of vitamin D deficiency—I thank the many colleagues who attended that briefing, including George Adam. I raise the issue in this debate because a lack of vitamin D is often linked to many conditions, in particular, to multiple sclerosis. Dr Helga Rhein, a general practitioner at Sighthill health centre in Edinburgh, has carried out considerable research into that both in her own clinics and wider afield. As others have said, the further north in Scotland one goes, the higher is the prevalence of MS. We all know that the best way in which to get vitamin D is through summer sunshine, but I understand that between October and April, the sunlight in the United Kingdom—let alone in Scotland—has too low a level of ultraviolet B for vitamin D to be made. On its website, the MS Trust states that, as George Adam has highlighted, “Vitamin D may also play a role before birth as more people with MS are born in May than in November”— after the summer months. The Food Standards Agency recommends that pregnant women and those in groups that are at risk of vitamin D deficiency should take supplements of 10 micrograms a day. In 2009, the Scottish Government adopted the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guideline that all pregnant and breastfeeding women should be advised about the benefits of vitamin D supplements. However, according to a publication by Ahmed et al, in Glasgow only 25 per cent of the women who were advised to take vitamin D actually took the supplement. The shine on Scotland campaign website also states—I think that I am repeating George Adam again—that “researchers in North America suggested that high doses of vitamin D could dramatically cut the relapse rate in people with multiple sclerosis. According to scientists in Canada, more than a third of sufferers taking high levels of supplementation did not fall ill during the period of the trial, representing a marked change in the pattern of their disease.” Vitamin D deficiency is also linked with many other medical conditions, including depression, but that is for another day. Given that 80 per cent of the Scottish population is estimated to be vitamin D deficient and given the consistent link with MS, I ask the minister to provide a paper to the Parliament that clarifies or confirms the recommendations of the United Kingdom scientific review of the subject, which I believe is being carried out at the moment. We have heard so much about the link between vitamin D deficiency and MS that we need a peer review of all the research, the emerging evidence and the papers that link—or otherwise—those conditions. I hope that the study by the Rowett Institute of Nutrition and Health into MS in the northern isles will be included in that. I also ask the minister to update GPs on the latest research and give consideration to GP testing for vitamin D deficiency and the ability to prescribe a supplement where appropriate.

The member, a Highland councillor, mentioned that the tenants are being punished, because more than 50 per cent of rental income is used to pay interest. Will she also admit that the SNP campaigned against the transfer of the housing stock and the opportunity for that debt to be paid off?

You are punishing the tenants.

Across Scotland, 43 per cent of people who are on benefits have a mental health problem, and they have largely been isolated and ignored. Does the member agree that the Welfare Reform Act 2012 will support people to get into work and for 24 months while they are in work? Is that not progress?

If the SNP believes in localism, why is it not allowing the elected commissioners of the Crofters Commission to select their own chairman and, instead, is choosing to appoint one centrally by ministerial diktat?

Does the minister acknowledge that the proposals that will be announced on 4 May are just proposals? They will go out for further consultation and the consumer code panel will look at their implications. It is unlikely that a final proposal will be made by the end of this year. Also, discrimination is not allowed under the two European Union directives on renewable energy and internal electricity markets, so the proposal will have to be reviewed before it is finally accepted.

I notice that the minister favours the flat-rate charge. I am shocked by that, because Ofgem’s briefing points out that such a measure would cost consumers in the north of Scotland an additional £30 a year while it would cost consumers in the south-east of England nothing.

I declare an interest in the debate, as my son works in the renewable energy business. The Conservatives welcome the debate on project transmit as part of the on-going consultation on reforming the way in which the costs of providing the transmission grid are shared between users and potential changes to the current methodology. Transmission charging has been on the political agenda for some years, but it took only a few months for the coalition Government to help to initiate the review. We agreed on the review in a debate two years ago and do so again today. As Ken Macintosh said, the current locational charging model was established some years ago, when renewable energy and climate change targets were not at the heart of public policy. However, given the marine energy potential in the Pentland Firth and the level of renewable energy onshore and offshore in Scotland, there is no doubt that the time is right for change. Ofgem’s principal duty is to protect existing and future consumers by keeping costs as low as possible while promoting security of supply and facilitating the move to a low-carbon future. Therefore, I was surprised that the Scottish National Party motion does not mention consumer bills but favours flat-rate charging, which is also known as socialised charging. I cannot understand why it does that, given that Ofgem rules it out on the basis that “Average bills would rise most in the North of Scotland where fuel poverty is highest and least in London where fuel poverty is lowest.” We have Scottish nationalists proposing higher bills for Scotland and lower bills for London. The approach would cost at least an extra £30 per household in the north of Scotland—the SNP’s new Highlands and Islands tax.

As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I certainly will not be uniting to support putting an extra £30 on the bills of people in the north of Scotland but nothing extra on the bills of people in London. The SNP motion also welcomes the emerging outcomes on investment cost related pricing, but it then asks for change to be delivered quickly. That could be done only without full consultation with industry partners on the connection and use of system code panel, which could take some months. If the SNP favours full and proper consultation—I presume that it does—it should surely favour the industry panel scrutinising the proposals, rather than rushing them through and worrying about the problems later.

No. I have taken a long intervention already. Project transmit ended its consultation in February. The responses have been considered, modelling analysis has been done and a decision may or may not be made at the Ofgem meeting this week. Any decision will not be made known until 4 May due to the political purdah for the elections. If improved ICRP is the chosen option, as appears possible, the matter would go to the industry connection and use of system code panel and the option would be evaluated by looking at the implications and the technical aspects. The process could take months, and I am told that the panel could choose to go out for further consultation. That could take us to the end of the year. Given the complexity of the matter and the need to come up with the right solution for our islands, the process should not be rushed. The current locational element of investment cost related pricing is a disincentive for electricity generation in the north of Scotland and the islands. I trust that the improved ICRP will address that issue as well as ensuring that there is consistency of charging methodology for the three island groups and that it is in accordance with the two European Union directives on renewable energy and the internal market in electricity, both of which enshrine the principle of non-discrimination between mainland and islands. In speaking to the amendment in my name and thanking the SNP for bringing the power of its majority to vote on the issue, I suggest that ministers might wish to talk to their Westminster counterparts to drum up some enthusiasm for project transmit. Mike Weir, SNP member of Parliament for Angus tabled an early day motion on 1 February, but he managed to persuade only one of his SNP colleagues to support him, and it was not even Angus Brendan MacNeil of the Western Isles. We will not support the Government motion as we oppose the flat rate, which has been ruled out by Ofgem, and we do not agree that Ofgem should be urged to deliver change quickly, without going through the full process of consultation with the industry. I move amendment S4M-02623.3, to leave out from “opposes” to end and insert: “notes the current approach taken by Ofgem following its extensive consultation under Project TransmiT; recognises Ofgem’s concerns that the introduction of a flat rate of charging for all generators would lead to an increase in fuel poverty for the most vulnerable; further recognises concerns that the development of wind energy in the Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland will depend on having affordable transmission charges, and urges Ofgem to continue to engage with stakeholders to find a satisfactory solution to the issue of transmission charging.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member acknowledge that the project transmit consultation ended at the end of February; that a decision will be made on 4 May; that that decision has to be referred to the industry code; and that there might thereafter be further consultation on the decision? Many SNP members seem to be talking as if decisions have been made, even though the fact is that we are only halfway through a consultation.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

I simply point out that, earlier, I quoted page 36 of the consultation document on electricity transmission charging of 14 February 2012.

We cannot support the motion because the Government proposes an additional £30 charge for people in Scotland and no additional charge for those in London.

In the evidence to the Scottish Affairs Committee, was full account and cognisance taken of udal law relating to the Orkney and Shetland islands?

I, too, thank the Scottish Green Party for bringing the debate to the Parliament. I agree with most of Patrick Harvie’s motion—I am sure that he can guess the two or three lines with which I disagree. There is no doubt that much can be gained from local energy companies and that the topic merits further discussion and consideration. We can learn from experience, as highlighted by Kevin Stewart. I will highlight a good experience and a bad experience. I find quite exciting the enhanced support that is now in place for local energy companies that the Government’s amendment highlights. I noted the minister’s comments about local authority energy companies. As well as the private, public and third sectors, co-operatives and communities can work together to produce clean energy. I will give two examples: the Isle of Eigg, which is a blueprint for success, and the Caithness Heat and Power project, which is run by Highland Council but which cannot be deemed a success in any form. Highland Council proposed to tackle fuel poverty in Wick by forming a new limited company—Caithness Heat and Power—to establish a woodchip scheme to provide electricity and cheaper heating for tenants. Those aims were worthy. The scheme started in Pulteneytown in 2004 to provide a renewable heating system for up to 500 houses. There is no doubting the good intentions behind the project. However, after several years, many problems and an Accounts Commission investigation, it was found that there was a lack of appropriate risk management, and that Highland Council had faced many other problems, from the project’s inception in 2002 through to its delivery. Caithness Heat and Power was abandoned in 2008. At the time, it was said that “the technology originally chosen for the project is not capable of reliably and economically fulfilling its objectives.” Although the project cost £14.65 million, the company was transferred in December of last year for £1. Caithness Heat and Power experienced technological and financial problems, with Highland Council having to pay back a £2.9 million grant and also having to pay to reconvert the 247 properties that had been modified at a cost of £2.3 million. Highland Council tried to recoup money from the £14.65 million project by selling off 14 lots online last year, including a boiler and a woodchip drier. The council is still pursing £152,000 of outstanding electricity bills, but the system’s design prevents effective disconnection of individual customers without affecting others. A local councillor stated last week in the John O’Groat Journal that the £152,000 “was not run up as result of people in fuel poverty struggling to pay their bills but by opportunists taking advantage of a flawed setup.” I highlight the project because, as others have said, we have to learn from experience. The community on the Isle of Eigg had the opposite experience and its scheme is undoubtedly an outstanding success. Diesel generators provided electricity to the community for decades, but Eigg Electric can now provide 24-hour power through three hydroelectric generators that produce energy from water as well as four small wind turbines and solar panels. An essential consideration of the design and development of the project was that it should not impact on the natural beauty of the island. The cable routes, both grid and domestic, are buried—unlike the Beauly to Denny power line. The total generation capacity of the system is about 164kW at any time. The system is designed to provide 95 per cent of the power consumed on the island and it allows for population growth. Residents of Eigg can use only what they produce and, to ensure that no one goes short, each house has a maximum use limit of 5kW and each business a maximum use limit of 10kW at any one time. People spread their use throughout the day, the system is simple and meters are used to display electricity usage at all times, with surplus power distributed to community halls. Eigg is an excellent example of full support being given, altruism and partnership in the community as everybody pulls together for the common good. I will cover the other points when I sum up.

In my opening speech, I highlighted good and bad experience. Caithness Heat and Power could have benefited from the advice that is now available from Highlands and Islands Enterprise, which set up the Highlands and Islands Community Energy Company in 2004. That expertise and experience should help more local communities to develop clean energy. Last week, for example, it helped the Light House community cafe in the Hilton district of Inverness to benefit from solar installations to reduce its energy bills. As the cafe has fridges and freezers on all the time, those installations will reduce the charity’s overheads enormously. There are undoubtedly benefits and merits in local energy companies. Given the experience of Highland Council, I am pleased that Westminster has introduced enabling legislation—the Sale of Electricity by Local Authorities (Scotland) Regulations 2010—that permits local authorities in Scotland to sell electricity that is generated from specific renewable sources. The partnership between COSLA and the Scottish Futures Trust confirms that the regulations have promoted significant interest in how such projects can be taken forward. The first project to take advantage of the enabling legislation was a wind farm in Bristol. However, the Forestry Commission is establishing six development partnerships across Scotland, and Scottish Water is progressing a number of renewables initiatives. The “Report on the Commercial Aspects of Local Authority Renewable Energy Production”, which was produced in August 2011 by COSLA and the Scottish Futures Trust, gives a raft of advice on the appropriate commercial structure for a project, procurement contracts and tendering, as well as the use of frameworks for the design, installation, operation and maintenance of renewables facilities. When I read the report, I felt that if that advice and support had been available at the time of the Caithness Heat and Power project, the end result might have been quite different. The report highlights further themes for exploration and research. It would appear that we are building up expertise and experience in the development and management of community energy projects, which, in future, will surely overcome the problems that, unfortunately, were experienced in Caithness. I could not help but link community energy to the big society idea. As was stated about a month ago in Scotland on Sunday, Philip Blond, the director of ResPublica and the man behind David Cameron’s big society idea, has cited examples of community energy projects in a new paper by his think tank. The paper, “Re-energising Our Communities: Transforming the energy market through local energy production”, is excellent in showing how communities can work together to produce energy for the common good. Blond argues that community enterprises utilising renewable energy sources are the best way in which to tackle the problem. He highlights in that regard, as I have done, the Isle of Eigg Heritage Trust in the Hebrides.

I will do so in a second.

Also highlighted is the Fintry Renewable Energy Enterprise, which the minister highlighted.

Okay. I agree with Patrick Harvie that leadership is required, and I thank him for the debate.

If Labour is so fond of high taxation, why did it put the highest rate of tax up to 50p only one month before it lost the 2010 election? Would Ken Macintosh agree that increasing the level of personal allowance before people pay tax is worthy? Will he, unlike the finance secretary, welcome the reduction in corporation tax from 28 per cent to 24 per cent?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

If 50p is not a drastic top rate of income tax, why do the majority of European countries have a top rate of income tax that is considerably lower?

I am pleased to speak in the debate. It will come as no surprise that we will not support the Government’s motion. We can assume from the criticism in SNP members’ speeches that, if Scotland ever became an independent country, tax rates would rise, debts would be unpaid and borrowing would certainly increase. [Interruption.] If SNP members are not sure about that, they should listen to their own rhetoric. If we want to attract the brightest and the best and to increase economic growth and the number of businesses that come to our country, we certainly cannot have the highest rate of personal income tax in the G20, which we have had. The coalition Government inherited the highest top tax rate in the G20 in 2010, when Labour implemented the 50p tax rate one month before leaving office. Many people and companies are internationally mobile. The highest rate in the G20 provides no incentive to choose the UK rather than other countries as a place of work. At 40p, our rate will be in about the mid-range of G20 countries. The effects on tax revenues of varying tax rates are well represented by the Laffer curve, which highlights that the highest tax rates never yield the highest revenue. The 50p rate that Labour introduced was expected to raise £2.5 billion in revenue, but it raised about £1 billion at most, according to HM Revenue and Customs. The new lower rates of corporation tax will mean that 16 of the G20 countries have higher corporation tax rates than us—only the rates in Saudi Arabia, Russia and Turkey will be lower. A corporation tax rate of 28 per cent was inherited from Labour in 2010. That will be down to 24 per cent next month and 22 per cent in April 2014. Given that John Swinney ran out of time before he could welcome that reduction and the coalition Government’s ambition to reduce the tax further to 20 per cent, I am sure that he will now welcome that. The fiscal forum, which the coalition Government established in September 2011, has improved engagement between ministers, the oil and gas industry, the Treasury and the Department of Energy and Climate Change. That closer working will produce longer-term certainty, especially for the £34 billion of work from decommissioning North Sea oil rigs. With the industry, the Government is also considering the case for introducing a new category of field that would qualify for the field allowance. I very much welcome the work that is being done in Shetland. It is incumbent on all of us to ensure that as much as possible of the £34 billion of contracts is done in Scotland. The raising of the personal allowance to more than £9,200, which a Tory chancellor has delivered, will take 73,000 people in Scotland out of tax, so more of their earnings will be in their pockets. I am pleased that the coalition Government has been able to deliver on its long-held promise to raise the personal allowance, and I look forward to the achievement of a £10,000 threshold. In terms of supply economics, there is no greater incentive for a person to work than to get more of their earnings in their own pocket.

I explained that around five minutes ago; obviously, the member was not listening. That is well explained in the OBR’s and the Treasury’s Laffer curve. Taxes exist to bring in revenue, and the member needs to look more closely at that. It is important. The days are long gone when it could be assumed that higher taxes bring higher revenue. The enhanced capital allowances for Irvine, Nigg and Dundee are welcome—as others have said, they will deliver more than 4,000 jobs—and the pension rise, which is worth more than £5.30 a week, is the highest in 30 years. I am sure that we all agree that the chancellor has again shown his determination to tackle tax avoidance by introducing a new general anti-abuse rule to tackle artificial and abusive tax avoidance schemes. Tax evasion is illegal and wholly unacceptable, and I hope that all members welcome the clampdown on it and on the avoidance of stamp duty. I also welcome the £325 million for the Department for Work and Pensions to tackle fraud and error. The budget encourages honest, decent people to get out to work. I also welcome the £26,000 welfare benefits cap.

Is it a good idea to try to attract industry and the best people to the UK with the highest income tax and corporation tax in the G20? Is that an incentive?

Does Joan McAlpine welcome the increase of £5.36 a week in the old-age pension, which is the highest increase in 30 years?

Will the member give way?

Would the new progressive Labour regime also reinstate child benefit to people who earn in excess of £60,000 a year?

Will Kezia Dugdale give way?

If the 50p tax rate is so wonderful, why did it take the Labour Party 12 years and 11 months of a 13-year Government to introduce it?

I thank the Labour Party for securing the debate. There is no doubt that a new Lochboisdale to Mallaig ferry service is a popular option for people in the Uists as well as for businesses and tourists. I am delighted to learn that the cabinet secretary is contemplating the options. The motion states that the draft ferries plan does not include a new Lochboisdale to Mallaig ferry service, but it is worth restating that there is still an opportunity for people to respond to the Scottish Government’s consultation on the plan, the closing date for which is 31 March. The case for a new Lochboisdale to Mallaig service is fully supported by the local MSP and Minister for Learning, Science and Scotland’s Languages, Alasdair Allan. He has stated: “I made a strong case for the retention and development of Lochboisdale as a ferry port and continue to argue that the trialling of a service between Lochboisdale and Mallaig is an option” that the Government “should consider” and contemplate. There would be many advantages to the new ferry service. For a start, local people have suggested that it could be operated with a more fuel-efficient and smaller boat than some of the existing Caledonian MacBrayne ferries, which can use up to 1,500 litres of fuel per hour. Most deliveries to the Uists come from the mainland—the central belt in particular—via Inverness and Skye, through the Uig to Lochmaddy service. That results in considerable traffic pressure on the A9 and the A82. A new ferry service would alleviate that traffic and reduce travel times. I am also told that, at the height of the tourism season, it can be difficult for fish producers to get their product on the Lochmaddy to Uig ferry. As the Fort William to Mallaig road has been significantly improved in recent years, it would provide improved journey times from the central belt to Mallaig for onward transport and provide a quicker route for many travellers to and from the Western Isles. As other members have said, the sea journey from Oban to Lochboisdale is 74 miles, compared with a 48-mile sea trip from Mallaig to Lochboisdale. As Elaine Murray said, a normal journey from Lochboisdale to Oban can take more than six hours. The road infrastructure on Skye has deteriorated in recent years as a result of the high volume of heavy goods vehicles that use it. I put all those points in a letter to the previous transport minister, Stewart Stevenson, who responded: “Given the wide ranging nature of the draft ferries review—it will include consideration of a possible Mallaig-Lochboisdale service”. That takes me to paragraph 150 of the draft ferries plan, which says: “We have considered whether a Mallaig to Lochboisdale service could become the principal route for the Uists and Benbecula”, instead of the Lochmaddy to Uig route. That is where the problem is. As far as I am aware, no one has ever suggested that the Mallaig to Lochboisdale route should replace the Uig to Lochmaddy service. The community—and, I understand, the Labour motion—asks for an additional, new service between Mallaig and Lochboisdale. I appreciate what the cabinet secretary said, but paragraph 150 begins as I quoted it.

I am still discussing paragraph 150. In quoting the draft ferries plan, I am being absolutely reasonable with the cabinet secretary.

The Government says that it “will further consider the economic viability of this proposed service”. Economic viability is critical. I received a response to a parliamentary question last week that confirmed that no ferry routes in Scotland make a profit, so none is economically viable other than those that have no taxpayer subsidy and which provide an excellent service at competitive prices—the Western Ferries (Clyde) Ltd and Pentland Ferries routes.

Paragraph 150 says: “We will further consider the economic viability of this proposed service”. My point is that the answer to my written question last week said that every service needs to be subsidised, except the Western Ferries and Pentland Ferries services, which run at lower prices for passengers. Why does the Government not consider carrying out a trial, as Alasdair Allan suggested, and asking a private operator to see how it works out?

I welcome the review of the Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service and the support that is being given by the Government and other services in Scotland following the critical Accounts Commission report on the serious failures. I appreciated the cabinet secretary’s first answer, but I would like him to give a clear commitment to ensuring that the single force will be fully accountable to this Parliament, with the highest level of scrutiny, which, as Hugh Henry says, is not available to us at this time. Will the Public Audit Committee be able to exercise the same level of scrutiny as it does in relation to other Audit Scotland reports?

We very much welcome the statement and the approach that is being taken by the minister, and I thank him for the time that was taken to brief spokesmen at lunchtime. I also commend the Westminster Government for releasing the money. Given that we all want communities to benefit from the investment and that we want to ensure that Scotland gets its fair share of the manufacturing and assembling jobs that relate to renewables, will the minister ensure that existing fabrication yards and shipyards are fully utilised so that they get their fair share of jobs from renewables and energy innovation in the future?

I would have welcomed the opportunity to listen to the Remploy workers, but I was not aware that the demonstration was taking place today. I welcome the fact that the minister is working with Maria Miller, the UK Minister for Disabled People. That is very helpful and reassuring. As Fergus Ewing said, the debate over Remploy factories is not new. In 2007, the then Labour Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, Peter Hain, made the decision to close 29 out of 83 Remploy factories. He said at that time: “The reality is that without modernisation Remploy deficits would obliterate our other programmes to help disabled people into mainstream work. With no change, in five years’ time Remploy would require £171 million a year on current trends. That would be £60 million over the £111 million funding envelope, which represents nearly the entire current annual Workstep budget.” Peter Hain confirmed that the Government had “managed to keep open 55 sites only on the basis of very stretching procurement targets and a tough forward plan. It will be up to everyone with an interest in Remploy—Government, management, trade unions ... MPs and other political representatives—to pull together to ensure that those factories meet their ambitious targets, otherwise they, too, could be put at risk.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 29 November 2007; Vol 468, c 448, 449.] That was more than four years ago. Today, the same issues must be addressed by the coalition Government at Westminster. As Dundee has four Remploy factories, the issues are important to us in Scotland. Two weeks ago, Maria Miller, the minister for disabled people, made a statement in the Commons in which she confirmed the protection of spending—currently £320 million—on specialist disability employment programmes over the spending review period and her determination to help more disabled people to enter and remain in work.

I might do so, but I have a lot to say. Let me make progress. An additional £15 million has been made available in the spending review period for access work. The vast majority of the 6.9 million disabled people of working age in Britain could benefit from greater specialist employment support to find and retain work. The review that was conducted by Liz Sayce, who is the head of the UK disability forum, strongly endorsed the principle that money should be used to support disabled people into employment and that money should follow individuals and not institutions.

It is my choice to take the member’s intervention and not the member’s choice to intervene. I would like to exercise my choice. The 2,200 disabled people who are supported by Remploy’s enterprise businesses cost about a fifth of the total budget for specialised disability employment. The cost of each employment place at Remploy is £25,000 a year, compared with an average access to work award of £2,900. I add that Remploy’s factory business operated at a loss of £68.3 million last year. It is important to say that Chris Price, an independent living development lead at the Glasgow centre for independent living, has said that “the decision to close Remploy was uncomfortable but the right one ... Remploy was an outmoded and archaic model of disability employment.” Remploy’s closed-circuit television business is likely to continue, as are Remploy employment services, which have supported more than 20,000 disabled and disadvantaged people into work across England, Scotland and Wales, including people who have the same support needs as Remploy factory employees have. Remploy employment services provide personalised support and work in partnership with more than 2,500 employers. All Remploy employees who will be affected by the proposals are being given an £8 million comprehensive personalised support package. Any disabled member of staff who is made redundant will receive an offer of individualised support for up to 18 months, to help with the transition from Government-funded sheltered employment to mainstream employment. That was not available at the time of the previous closures of Remploy factories in Great Britain. The support will include access to a personal budget to aid the transition. A community fund will provide grants to disability organisations to support Remploy employees. The proposals fit in with the Scottish Government’s report “A Working Life for All Disabled People”, which responded to the Equal Opportunities Committee report of December 2006 entitled “Removing Barriers and Creating Opportunities”. The Government’s report says that one principle of supported employment is that “The job should be in an integrated work place”. That brings me to my last point, which the minister and Labour members have mentioned. The previous Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather, wrote that, “at the very least, every public body should aim to have ... one” contract under “The Scottish Sustainable Procurement Action Plan”, “to make the maximum ... use of reserved contracts for supported factories and businesses”. The Scottish Government must look at what it has done to award such contracts since the warning signals were given in 2006 and 2007. I move amendment S4M-02431.1, to leave out from “is deeply” to end and insert: “notes the UK Government’s decision to close 36 Remploy factories in the UK, including four in Scotland, which make significant losses year after year, in line with the recommendations in Getting in, staying in and getting on: Disability employment support fit for the future, a review carried out by Liz Sayce, the head of the UK Disability Forum, which advised that disability employment services should be focused on disabled people themselves rather than institutions so that they can access mainstream jobs in the same way as everyone else; notes that the factories made a loss of £68.3 million last year, which is a cost of £25,000 per employee, and that the UK Government intends to restrict funding to those factories that might have a prospect of a viable future outside government control; welcomes the £8 million package of tailored support that will be available for up to 18 months to help Remploy employees with transition, which is about £2,500 per person and includes a personal case worker with one-on-one sessions, access to a personal budget and existing back-to-work support, including Work Choice, the Work Programme and Access to Work; further notes that many disability groups are behind this move as they regard the supported factory model as outdated; agrees with the UK Government that support should be focussed on individuals through services such as Access to Work rather than segregated institutions such as Remploy so that more disabled people can work in mainstream employment, and commends the work of the Remploy employment service, which has supported over 20,000 disabled and disadvantaged people into work across England, Scotland and Wales and works in partnership with over 2,500 employers.”

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take following the recent Audit Scotland report on cardiology services. (S4O-00797)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that very helpful response, but I suggest that further work needs to be done in relation to patients in remote and rural areas and the islands, given the specified time for the most effective treatment and recovery of cardiac patients.

Given the highly critical report by the Accounts Commission on the Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service, which highlighted 35 substandard fire stations, a lack of investment in vehicles and information technology and, most damaging of all, a lack of training, equipment, and health and safety resilience for front-line firefighters, will the First Minister ensure that a thorough review is undertaken to find out how things went so badly wrong and to help to prevent that from happening again?

I am pleased to speak in this debate on tourism. I support the Government’s motion and the amendment—we are in for a consensual debate. I am delighted to see Stephen Leckie, from Crieff Hydro, in the public gallery. I had not heard the name or seen the man until this week, but I heard him give a speech on Tuesday night and again last night. Now it is his turn to listen to me. I cannot promise that my speech will be anything like as colourful as his were. Scottish Conservatives welcome the £2 million that will be available over three years to support bids for major conferences that relate to business tourism in Scotland’s key sectors—I trust that that includes the food and drink sector as well as commerce, science and medicine, given our wonderful, high-quality products in Scotland, including our whisky. Aviemore has built a reputation for excellence as a world-class conference centre, which brings many visitors to the area for the first time. Many of those visitors decide to come back with their families, so I hope that Aviemore and Strathspey will benefit from the investment. I am a Highlands and Islands MSP, so I acknowledge the investment in John o’Groats, which is well overdue but nonetheless very welcome. As the co-convener of the Parliament’s cross-party group on Scotch whisky, I want to highlight how much whisky contributes to tourism in Scotland. In 2010, about 1.3 million visitors visited the 52 Scotch whisky visitor centres. Some 87 per cent of those visitors came from outside Scotland. Spend was £27 million, and 91 per cent of the operating expenditure of the visitor centres is spent with Scottish suppliers. I recently visited the Strathisla distillery in Keith, which I was told is the oldest distillery in the Highlands. I saw round the distillery, the shop and the excellent rooms that can be hired for conferences. As well as offering the traditional distillery tour, many distilleries provide tasting sessions, corporate facilities, wedding venues and high-quality coffee shops and restaurants. Our whisky industry has fully embraced opportunities in tourism and has invested to enhance the tourist experience. Given that China is one of the fastest-growing markets for Scotch whisky, I hope that we can look forward to welcoming many visitors from that country to our distilleries in Scotland. We give a huge welcome to the United Kingdom Government’s decision to base the corporate headquarters of the UK green investment bank in Edinburgh. As the minister said, that is fitting, given that the Labour amendment “commends tourist industry partners for working together to develop green and eco-tourism.” It also proves what can be achieved through good working relationships between the United Kingdom Government and our Scottish ministers. The tourism sector in Scotland directly employs more than 220,000 people. In the context of private sector employment, that is second only to the retail sector. Tourism accounts for about 9 per cent of jobs, but, most important, in parts of the Highlands it accounts for about 20 per cent of jobs. In preparation for the debate I read the briefing that the Scottish Parliament information centre produced last year and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on issues affecting Scottish tourism. Both publications highlighted the target for a 50 per cent increase in revenue, which was set out in the 2006 publication “Scottish Tourism: The Next Decade—A Tourism Framework for Change”. I found it difficult to track any increase, although it is worth noting the wide variation in figures when attempts are made to define and measure tourism’s contribution to the Scottish economy. Figures in the SPICe briefing suggest that spend in monetary and real terms decreased between 2005 and 2009. The spend by visitors from within Scotland was down, as well as the spend by visitors from the rest of the United Kingdom, but there was a small increase in the spend by overseas visitors. All in all, tourism’s contribution to the economy is probably flatlining. I found it surprising that whereas Malcolm Roughead, the chief executive of VisitScotland, has said that it is realistic to say that the 50 per cent target will not be achieved, John Swinney has said that Governments should not run around changing their targets at the first sign of trouble. In paragraph 47 of its report on issues affecting tourism, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee states: “We are concerned that the Cabinet Secretary and the Chief Executive of our main tourism agency for Scotland have differing views on the achievability of the 50% growth target.” Nevertheless, there is much to welcome in Scotland and we should all be tourism ambassadors for our country. I welcome what the minister said about the Disney film promoting our own Billy Connolly, Robbie Coltrane and many others. The Castle Stuart golf course near Inverness is a prime example of the excellent increase in quality standards and professionalism, with its staff showing sheer determination in continuing a golf tournament despite heavy rain and even landslides on the course. My time is running out fast. I briefly mention Alan Taylor’s article in The Herald, in which he spoke about being stranded in Ullapool but finding a warm welcome at Jean Urquhart’s Ceilidh Place. I hope that more people who live in Scotland will holiday in Scotland and get to know their own country.

I do not understand why Chic Brodie criticised my speech because, as he is a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism committee, he obviously signed up to its report, which states: “We are concerned that the Cabinet Secretary and the Chief Executive of our main tourism agency ... have differing views”.

It is worth highlighting that the social services staff workforce is around 200,000 strong. There are 943 care homes for the elderly, with more than 39,000 beds, and they account for 90 per cent of care home residents. Therefore, our debate affects thousands of vulnerable people and their families, friends and carers. I enjoyed being a member of the Health and Sport Committee while it was carrying out post-legislative scrutiny on implementation of policy on care for the elderly—to be honest, I enjoyed most of that. I enjoyed working with the new members, Richard Lyle and Mary Fee, who have a background in local government and are both enormously committed to improving care for the elderly. I am pleased that the health secretary has accepted the committee’s main recommendations. For me, the main issues are the 70 per cent of elderly people in care homes who are being given psychoactive medication; training and support of care home and care-at-home staff; and the general feeling that the care inspectorate would bring confidence and reassurance to the sector after the dreadful events that members mentioned. In its response to the committee’s recommendations on psychoactive medication, the Government gave a commitment to “complete a baseline assessment on current prescribing levels in January 2012 ahead of an initial commitment on reducing such prescribing.” The Government went on to say that the care inspectorate has confirmed that it will have discussions with the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland on creating new guidance and improving awareness on the important area of psychoactive medication. It also said that the Royal Pharmaceutical Society is about to publish a report on pharmaceutical care in care homes, and that a review is under way, the report of which is due in the autumn. Of course I welcome the “baseline assessment”, the discussion, the guidance and the improvement of awareness as a result of the review, but am I reassured that there will be improvements in the use of what is often described as the chemical cosh? The truth is that I do not know. If I were being generous, I might say that, if all this works, it might improve the situation and things might get better. It is hardly surprising that I sound a bit impatient. All the same issues and more were highlighted—tragically—in “Remember, I’m still me”.

I have so many concerns about this issue; it should be the subject of a debate in its own right. If I may say so, Presiding Officer, I feel that an hour and a half is not sufficient for this topic. However, I hope that we will be able to debate it another day. “Remember, I’m still me”, which was a joint report by the care commission and the MWC, was published in 2009. Has anything improved since then? The truth is that I am not sure—I simply do not know. On the evidence that was available to the committee and from all the reports and reviews, it seems that not much has changed in the past three years. For example, “Remember, I’m still me” said: “very few people had a planned health check every year by their GP and there was little evidence that medication was regularly reviewed.” Three years later, the committee heard exactly the same thing. There is still little or no evidence of annual health checks by GPs and still little, if any, evidence that medication is regularly reviewed. “Remember, I’m still me” also pointed to “evidence of inappropriate and multiple prescribing” and the fact that “Very few care homes had the right information or legal safeguards ... to give covert medication” and said that, despite specific warnings, certain drugs were being used. My second concern—as I am summing up, I will finish it in my closing speech—relates to the training and support of care home and care-at-home staff. Hugh Henry, Richard Simpson and I were members of the committee that considered the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill, but we were never told—and indeed would never have expected—that it would take 20 years to train and register all existing staff. However, much of the training that is required for care home and care-at-home staff could be carried out through assessments in the workplace and distance learning. I will finish there, Presiding Officer.

I put on record my support for the points that my colleague Nanette Milne made. I was probably the most vocal member of the committee on the issue of training and support for staff. Again, I am sorry to say that I found the response disappointing. The best that I could find was that the Scottish Social Services Council “will continue to work with employers on the development of qualifications and products that support and delivers a competent, confident and qualified workforce.” I am not entirely sure what the SSSC is continuing and whether it means that more care workers will be trained, supported and valued, but I hope that it does. The fact is that care workers with little or no training are going into the homes of vulnerable elderly people. Investment in our colleges and the Scottish Social Services Council could secure training, would value and support the workforce and, most of all, could provide better-quality care to thousands of older people. Jackie Baillie gave us earlier the timetable for registration of workers in adult care homes, but I will add one date to that. Registration for workers for care-at-home services will not start until 2017, with achievement of registration by 2020. After reading the report again and reading the Government’s response, my conclusion is that there suddenly seem to be dozens of new plans and reviews. I totally agree with Malcolm Chisholm’s point about reducing bureaucracy and allowing the care inspectorate to focus on the job that we want it to do. He also raised the issue of the two paragraphs in the report on involving service users, friends and relatives, which is important, too. The care inspectorate’s response to those two short paragraphs is that it has already started to build on the issue; it has another recently completed review; a care inspectorate involvement strategy is being developed; it is working on developing new methodologies; it has held a series of focus groups; further work is now required to underpin the new scrutiny model findings; it is preparing a full public reporting strategy; there will be a new proactive approach; it is undertaking an evaluation of its risk tools; it is holding a series of scrutiny, intelligence and risk events; a new assessment tool is on its way; and it is currently developing its involvement and intelligence strategies. There are 11 initiatives in response to two short paragraphs. That is why I find things difficult. I hope that that is what is required, that this is not about building bureaucracy, and that what is being done will lead to improved standards, but the approach seems incredible. There are new plans, reviews, strategies and action plans, but the truth is that we really do not know whether things will be better. The response is typical of the Government’s response, although it is more the care inspectorate’s response. I hope that the committee’s report will improve the health, welfare and wellbeing of older people who receive care at home or in care homes, but I am not convinced of that on the basis of what I have heard today. I hope that we will visit the issue again soon, given that much work is being done in the background. An update on the improved inspection process and regulation would be helpful.

This has been a refreshing debate. I thank the minister for working constructively with the UK Government rather than taking the usual approach that we have come to expect. I also thank him for reporting back to this Parliament on the outcomes of the Durban conference, as well as highlighting the significant effect of climate change on women and children. I commend Rob Gibson for reminding us of the importance of our peatlands. I am delighted to tell Neil Findlay that this right-wing party is very much in accordance with the tone and content of the debate. However, he will not be surprised to hear that we are not in line with nationalising the renewable energy sector. I thank him for the work that he does on renewables and his commitment to giving local communities the consultation that they deserve. We are pleased to support putting climate justice at the heart of decisions on energy policy and economic and social development; therefore, we will support the motion and the amendments. It is right that we all support our model of best practice, because climate change poses a long-term threat to political stability and economic growth. There is a real need for countries, governments, businesses and individuals to work together to address the issue. As other members have said, those who are least responsible for climate change often experience its greatest impacts. As Oxfam puts it: “poor communities living in developing countries are the most affected by climate change, yet have done the least to cause it.” Oxfam further states: “Developing countries are the ones left paying the price for the developed countries’ unsustainable ecological debt.” I welcome the minister’s announcement of the climate justice fund, which we look forward to hearing more about over the next few months. One of the excellent briefings that members received for the debate suggests that the fund could be used to support investment in growing more weather-resistant crops; raising homes above the ground; developing early-warning systems for floods, hurricanes and other disasters; and establishing agroforestry and conservation farms as well as creating natural flood barriers. The United Nations states that every $1 that is invested in pre-disaster risk management in developing countries can prevent $7 in losses. That is certainly a worthwhile investment. The UK Government will drive forward proposals for new sustainable development goals at the summit in June. As Jamie McGrigor said, the Westminster Government is to be commended for its commitment to climate justice, which is demonstrated by the funding that it has announced of £2.9 billion in international climate finance specifically to help developing countries to pursue low-carbon growth and adapt to the impacts of climate change. That commitment has been given despite the very tough budget situation at Westminster. Although the volume of greenhouse gas emissions here fell by more than 28 per cent between 1990 and 2009, there is a recognition that much more remains to be done. As others have said, given that we have the most progressive climate change legislation in the world, it is worth monitoring our progress along the way. Members will not be surprised to hear that, as the deputy convener of the Audit Committee, I look to the Audit Scotland report, “Reducing Scottish greenhouse gas emissions”, which was published in December and raises several issues relating to the Government’s progress—in particular, the commitments that were made under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. A public engagement strategy was required under the 2009 act. However, according to Audit Scotland, two months ago: “The Scottish Government developed the Public Engagement Strategy independently of its plans for reducing emissions and there is limited connection between them.” Audit Scotland also highlighted the “separate engagement and communications activities in policy sectors, such as in energy, transport and agriculture.” According to Audit Scotland, “The Scottish Government has committed to reporting progress against” actions, but “there is no system in place for it to do so.” The report says: “the Scottish Government has been developing a system of scorecards which is intended to provide the Emissions Reduction Programme Board with more immediate management information about” policy and progress. I think that we all welcome that, but in December, the system remained under development and was not fully connected to the Government’s national performance framework. Audit Scotland stated: “The scorecards have not been made publicly available and this reduces the transparency of the Scottish Government’s performance management arrangements for reducing emissions.” We all support the Scottish Government in leading the world as a model of best practice, but there is a need to get arrangements in place so that we can all check the commitments that we and the Government have made, check progress, and provide essential information, as promised in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009.

We thank the Labour Party for bringing the issue for debate and I thank Dr Elaine Murray for her constructive contribution; unfortunately, the same cannot be said of the minister’s speech. In July 2011, the Scottish Government’s evaluation of the RET pilot stated: “the Western Isles have been historically characterised by higher levels of declining population and poorer economic performance in comparison to other parts of Scotland ... and also Scotland as a whole.” For that reason, routes serving the Western Isles were identified as the pilot routes. Clear reasons were given for choosing the Western Isles for the pilot, but there is now a distinct lack of clarity on why RET for commercial vehicles has suddenly been withdrawn. During the pilot, fares for commercial vehicles and passengers fell by up to 54 per cent, and RET helped to increase passenger traffic by more than 17 per cent in the first two years. As Elaine Murray said, an additional 30,000 tourism visits were made in each year of the pilot, and three quarters of tourism providers indicated that they had increased levels of occupancy, higher demand and a longer season.

No, I am very short of time. I will think about taking one if I get through what I want to say. The RET pilot allowed small firms to compete more effectively in mainland markets and to increase exports from the Western Isles. The initial response of business to an increase in trade was to make better use of existing staff, who might have been underemployed, but, understandably, long-term investment was deferred until there was certainty that lower fares would be permanent. Retail employment in the Western Isles increased during the pilot period.

We cannot take out the socioeconomic impact that the large-scale hauliers have in the Western Isles. All the figures that I have given are factual economic statistics. It is not possible to separate out the effect of RET on large hauliers. Paragraph 11.7.7 of the Government’s evaluation report of July 2011 says: “The predominant perception of both residents and businesses was that RET has been beneficial to island businesses and ... island communities as a whole.” Against that background, it is difficult to understand the response of Keith Brown, when he was questioned by the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, that the subsidy that was paid to hauliers was not passed on to businesses or consumers in 90 per cent of cases. That contrasts with the view of hauliers, whose spokesman said: “With RET we revised our prices and reduced costs to customers, we will now have to look again at our cost base, ultimately our customers will have to pay.” The SNP Government blames the hauliers for not passing the benefits of reduced ferry costs on to customers and it plans to punish them with increased charges, which, ultimately, people in the Western Isles will have to pay for. Transport Scotland has stated that the minister was pleased that the Western Isles community clearly understood the budgetary pressures that the Government faced. The question is whether the SNP Government understands the budgetary pressures that the community faces. It is not surprising that Western Isles Council holds the unanimous view that the withdrawal of RET for commercial vehicles will be detrimental to the economy and the community of the Outer Hebrides.

No, I have less than a minute left. I appreciate that RET was a pilot and that it has been evaluated, but I cannot understand why the Scottish Government is withdrawing it for commercial vehicles without giving the Western Isles community any idea of what will be put in its place, except that the rise in cost will not be any more than 50 per cent. The socioeconomic need that was identified at the onset of the pilot still exists, but no economic assessment of the withdrawal of RET has been carried out. [Interruption.] I must finish now to stay within my time. I hope that the SNP Government will act swiftly, will respect islanders, and will ensure that ferry fares are applied consistently and with certainty for the future of the economy on the back of a detailed social and economic assessment.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

John Swinney’s motion once again predictably criticises the Westminster Government’s economic approach to deficit reduction and recovery and goes on to talk about the Scottish Government’s “distinctive approach”. However, before George Osborne rushes to call Mr Swinney for advice, I am sure that he might just compare the figures for both economies. My party welcomes any initiatives to boost economic growth and jobs in Scotland, from whichever party. To respond to a point that Jamie Hepburn made, it was announced this week that the UK Government’s borrowing in the tax year to date is down by £15 billion and is well on course to meet the target.

No. The SNP might not support the UK Government’s economic approach and deficit reductions, but those are supported by the International Monetary Fund, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the European Commission, the Confederation of British Industry, the Institute of Directors, British Chambers of Commerce and many other bodies. Given that 40 per cent of our exports are to euro zone countries, as those countries experience a fall in demand, that will inevitably affect our economy and exports. The rise in personal tax allowance has taken more than 90,000 people in Scotland out of taxation.

No. We have very few speakers—the SNP has plenty of opportunities to get its points over. That figure will increase again, given the 8 per cent rise that is due in April. The official facts and figures for the Scottish and UK economies certainly do not justify John Swinney’s motion. Let us have a few comparisons. Over the year, Scottish GDP has grown by 0.9 per cent, whereas UK GDP has grown by 1.3 per cent. In the past two years, growth in Scotland totalled 1.4 per cent, compared with a figure of 2.8 per cent for the UK as a whole. Growth in the UK was higher by a distinctive 100 per cent. Manufacturing in Scotland has grown by 4.8 per cent in two years, compared with a figure of 6.6 per cent for the rest of the UK. SNP policy is distinctive in that regard. When the SNP came to power in 2007, the unemployment rate in Scotland was 4.6 per cent, whereas in the UK it was 5.4 per cent. At 8.6 per cent, the unemployment rate is now higher in Scotland than it is in the UK. Of the 20 areas that have experienced the greatest rise in the number of unemployment claimants, seven are in Scotland. As Neil Findlay said, youth unemployment in Scotland is now 3 per cent higher than the rate in the UK—that is certainly distinctive. According to the STUC, 30 small businesses in Scotland go to the wall every day. That 11 per cent slump is four times the fall in England, where the number of small businesses fell by only 2.8 per cent. That is another area in which SNP policy is distinctive. Instead of pretending that Scotland is doing so much better than the UK, the SNP should look at the figures on the situation after five years of SNP Government and start to take some responsibility for governing Scotland. In the time that I have left, I will focus on the retail sector, which, in employing 240,000 people, is one of Scotland’s biggest employers. It is a sector in which 90 per cent of retailers have fewer than 10 employees, and 97 per cent have fewer than 50 employees. The finance secretary’s taking a closer look at the retail sector would be welcome—[Interruption.] I ask Mr Swinney, if he does not mind, to give me the opportunity to speak. He had 13 minutes; I have six. In the same period in which footfall in Scotland fell by 8.5 per cent, footfall in Wales increased by 11.4 per cent. We go down by 8.5 per cent and Wales goes up by 11.4 per cent. In the same period, footfall in Northern Ireland increased by 7.2 per cent. Given that Glasgow is the second-top shopping destination in the UK and Edinburgh is the fifth, and that both attract UK and international visitors and continue to generate further substantial investment and improvements, could the Scottish Government examine how that success could be built on across the country, how retail rankings could be used to drive inward investment and how our retail sector could be developed to further Scotland’s reputation as one of the world’s best retail destinations, with retail outlets complementing other attractions, including tourism and food and drink? The SNP wants to impose a tax—a tax that was not mentioned in its manifesto. I ask the nationalist Government why the public health levy has not been underpinned by any objective evidence to support it. Is the revenue from the new, allegedly hypothecated tax to be ring fenced for public health initiatives? Any true health measure would be properly evidence based and would not discriminate in an arbitrary way, and the revenue would be ring fenced specifically for health purposes.

I hope that the finance secretary will be much more constructive in his summing-up than he was in his opening speech.

Will the member give way?

The SPCB currently has no plans to provide funding or other assistance. The corporate body considered a proposal for a scheme in 2009-10, including an analysis of the other schemes that are available—in the Westminster Parliament and the National Assembly for Wales, for example. It was felt that the current education service is effective and efficient and that, in the financial climate, the budget that is available would be best spent on continuing that provision, which is accessible to all Scottish schools.

I thank the member for raising that excellent point, which fortunately was covered in the briefing paper. Officials do monitor uptake by region and constituency and have undertaken initiatives to promote visits in areas that are underrepresented. Regular contact is made with all schools in Scotland to advise them of opportunities to arrange visits or to take part in major events. The cost of the inreach and outreach programmes is currently £233,000. In 2010-11, the service reached 12,000 young people through inward visits to the Parliament and a further 10,000 pupils took part in the outreach programmes.

The SPCB language policy supports the provision of information in different languages to facilitate the engagement of people with the Parliament. In addition, the SPCB also makes available some relevant information about the workings of the Parliament for visitors from other countries who are not fluent in English. Five languages were selected as the most predominant foreign languages and a further eight languages are used to provide information in the Parliament.

I am not aware that we have had more visitors since the referendum consultation was announced, but interpreters can, nonetheless, be booked for private groups of foreign visitors. However, official delegations of visitors usually bring their own interpreters. Should we see a massive increase in visitors from other countries because they have taken an interest in the referendum and the Parliament, I am sure that the SPCB will address that issue and facilitate any need that may arise.

First, I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests. By and large, the tone of the debate has been constructive. I particularly welcomed the speeches by John Park, Liam McArthur and Alison Johnstone, which I thought were highly constructive. I have congratulated Graeme Dey previously on completing a whole speech without mentioning a separate Scotland. I am afraid that I cannot congratulate anyone today in that regard. I listened carefully, but Jamie Hepburn, George Adam and Paul Wheelhouse squeezed in that reference in the dying seconds of their speeches. Alex Salmond would be very proud of them. We very much welcome having a dedicated minister for this area and look forward to regular updates from Angela Constance. We also welcome the regional youth employment events, because it is important that the issue is not centralised. The work with the private sector and chambers of commerce is welcome, as is the £2.5 million challenge fund for social enterprises, for which I have tremendously high regard; they can do a wonderful job in helping to get people into employment. Many factors underpin employment and there are as many types of unemployment, which are set against the background of huge uncertainty and huge national debt across the euro zone countries. The UK Government is to be congratulated on facing up to its responsibilities in tackling the debt and reducing waste and duplication in the public sector. Unlike nine euro zone countries that have lost their AAA rating due to their inability to put in place economic and fiscal measures to address their deficit, the UK retains the top rating. European economies and markets will recover only when the debt crisis is resolved and output, demand and employment growth reverse the current slowdown.

No, if the member does not mind. I might let him in later, but I would like to make progress. Scotland’s unemployment rate has been higher than the UK rate for 13 consecutive months. The new Minister for Youth Employment is welcome to her post because, under the SNP, youth unemployment rose from 11 per cent in the first quarter of 2008 to 23.5 per cent in October 2011. The rate has more than doubled since the SNP came to office, although, to be fair, youth unemployment has been rising since 2004, which was well before the recession. The topic of employability constantly crops up in researching the subject. The point has been made that the three essentials for a modern, progressive workforce are the right skills, the right knowledge and the right attitude. For young people without the right attitude, there is no better place to be than in further education classrooms with mature students who have suffered the hardship of unemployment, a lack of suitable job skills and experience, and jobs with long hours and low pay. Mature students’ focus and no-nonsense approach to learning can soon change negative attitudes to work, training and learning. I hope that the minister will address the issue of employability, as we seem to have got things right in our universities, but not in our schools. In fact, the unemployment level for graduates from Scottish universities is lower than the UK level, and graduates from Scottish universities have the highest rate of positive destinations, including employment, further study, and a combination of work and further study. Graduates from Scottish universities also start with a higher average salary within a year of graduation than graduates in the rest of the UK. The Smith group report states that Scottish education is still too rigid and focuses too much on preparing students for university and college. I listened carefully to the minister, and I hope that the closer working with the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will bring improvements in outcomes at school. Youth unemployment should not be tackled only when people become a statistic. I think that John Park said that issues should be tackled when people fall out of work, but it is critical to get people into work in the first place. According to the Scottish survey of achievement, one in six Scottish pupils is leaving primary school without being functionally literate. That is 17 per cent of 12-year-olds. It is worrying that while 75 per cent of pupils in primary 3 are able to meet the required standard in maths at that level, the figure drops to 40 per cent in S2. With more than half of Scottish school leavers finishing school without achieving a single higher, surely it is time to look more closely at better integration of schools and further education colleges. Jamie Hepburn talked about the resource to FE colleges since 2007. I was a bit surprised that he raised that matter. I have checked with the Scottish Parliament information centre. I asked whether it could confirm the further education cut following yesterday’s announcements. That cut is not £33 million; it is £33.3 million. A lot of figures have been going around in recent days, but if anyone wants to challenge the figure, the further education cut is £33.3 million.

I listened carefully to what the member said and I could not understand why, at a time when 105,000 youths are unemployed in Scotland, and given the increases in recent years to put youth unemployment at its highest, his Government has cut funding for FE colleges by £33 million. I welcome the Welfare Reform Bill and the support that it gives people for two years to get into work. I support the amendment in the name of Liz Smith.

First, I welcome the £60 million—which I appreciate is over three years—for health board maintenance. However, Audit Scotland recently highlighted that there is a maintenance backlog of £500 million, much of which involves essential work to achieve health and safety compliance, so there is a long way to go. Secondly, I welcome the additional resources for broadband, particularly as I represent a rural area. I also think that providing £1.2 million to build two roads and carry out the design works for dualling the A9 within one year is a wonderful achievement of economic competence, and I look forward to progress being made on the A9. However, it is important that we put Scotland’s economy in the United Kingdom context.

That was the good news—here come the facts. Using £1.2 million for two roads and design works within a year will be a similar achievement to using the loaves and fishes to feed the five thousand. We should put Scotland’s economy in a United Kingdom context. The Bank of Scotland purchasing managers index showed that Scotland had one of the slowest rates of job creation in the United Kingdom regions. At 1.4 per cent for the past two years, economic growth north of the border is half the United Kingdom figure of 2.8 per cent. The growth rate for manufacturing is 2 per cent less than the rate for the rest of the United Kingdom, and exports continue to lag, despite the 23 per cent increase in our whisky exports last year. Scotland’s unemployment rate is also higher than the UK’s rate, with no fewer than 88,000 young people aged 18 to 24 currently unemployed. That figure rises to more than 100,000 for 16 to 24-year-olds. Anyone who is looking for reasons to be cheerful need not read the SNP’s list of alleged achievements on our economy. The finance secretary has reduced the cut to further education from £40 million to £33 million, but that is still a huge cut—

I am almost halfway through, and I have a lot to say. That is still a huge cut in further education at a time of record high youth unemployment. Scottish Conservatives were right to use our debating time to highlight the cutback to colleges. Although the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning states that those cuts will not affect higher education, I can say from two decades’ experience in lecturing before coming to Parliament that further and higher education are totally integrated in our FE colleges. Any student can start with a national certificate, move on to a higher national certificate and then a higher national diploma: they are still in further education. They can go on to gain a degree at fourth year honours level. The point is that, with a loss of 1,000 lecturers from further education last year even before the cut was announced, colleges will inevitably cut back on courses at all levels, which will reduce the number of students doing degrees.

I have no idea what the member is talking about, but any students who can stay long at college would have great difficulty financing themselves. One thing that I do know is that many students study by distance learning and have full-time jobs. If John Mason is criticising the length of time for which students are at college, he should seriously question his judgment. We had hoped that the Government would think again about the retail levy, which is now a hypothecated tax; it has become the public health supplement. At the very least, as Hugh Henry said, the Government could carry out an economic impact assessment. The Government’s response is that such an assessment would be disproportionate, which is laughable given that the cost to business is now £95 million, and that the Seed Potatoes (Fees) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2011, which had an impact on business of £91,000, were impact assessed. I wonder about John Swinney’s constructive discussions with retailers, which have led to the timescale for the levy being cut to three years. What was the economic rationale for that and why is it being cut by £15 million? Those are serious concerns. Given the huge success of the town centre regeneration fund in revitalising town centres throughout Scotland, why has the initiative been dropped? Instead of penalising out-of-town retailers, the Government could be using resources to incentivise people to return to our towns for shopping and leisure. Why does the Scottish Government not intend to publish an efficiency outturn statement for 2011-12, and why are there no explicit targets for efficiency savings in 2012-13?

Finally, I would like some clarity on pensions, given that an additional £21 million has been given to police and fire service pensions in this year.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

If the cabinet secretary reads the Official Report, he will see that I welcomed the £60 million for maintenance of our hospitals. I also pointed out that the Audit Scotland report highlighted the £500 million that was required for essential work and asked where that would come from.

I welcome the tone of the debate so far. There is so much that could be included in the debate as so much has been done, is being done and needs to be done, particularly as the average broadband speed in Scotland is around 7 megabits per second and the Scottish Government aims to increase it to between 40 and 80 megabits per second by 2015. In preparation for the debate, I thought back to when the Parliament was set up. Many local people and businesses contacted those of us who are members for the Highlands and Islands as part of their campaign for access to broadband. First, proximity to exchanges and copper cabling were issues, then it was broadband speeds, superfast broadband and now new generation broadband and fibre to street cabinets. The phrase “new generation” is apt, given that all that has happened in just over a decade. We welcome the action plan. There is no doubt that first-class, effective broadband connections and speeds are essential not only for competitive economic growth, but to advance telehealth, online learning, worldwide communications and so much more. All countries aim for such services in these difficult financial times. Ireland, for example, aims in the next five years to have an advanced broadband infrastructure with download speeds of at least 100 megabits per second. The UK Government has invested £70 million in Scotland from the current £530 million pot. That is a 13 per cent share of the budget for our 8 per cent share of the UK population, which is essential, welcome and not unreasonable, given the geographic needs in Scotland.

I want to make progress, if the member does not mind. Scotland has the opportunity to benefit from the £100 million investment in urban broadband to create superconnected cities, with Edinburgh already having guaranteed funding in that regard. As Richard Baker and the cabinet secretary stated, Scotland will also benefit from the £150 million investment in improving the communications infrastructure for mobile coverage. Again, that is much needed. My colleague Alex Johnstone will discuss that issue further. Of course, there are many community broadband projects that are all working to find local solutions to connectivity problems. There is also the critical pilot funding for next-generation broadband in the Highlands and Islands, which was chosen as one of four UK pilot areas. That is a key part of the strategy. The UK Government is right to aim to have the best broadband network in Europe by 2015, and of course the cabinet secretary is committed to next-generation broadband being available to all by 2020, which is not unreasonable or unachievable. However, as the cabinet secretary said, in areas with some of the best broadband speeds in Scotland, such as greater Glasgow, take-up is only 50 per cent; for over 55s it is 34 per cent; for social groups D and E it is 30 per cent; and for those with household incomes under £17,500, take-up is 26 per cent. The United Nations target for universal broadband is to have internet access for 40 per cent of households in developing countries and 50 per cent internet-user penetration by 2015. As Richard Baker and the cabinet secretary said, the Government needs to work in partnership with the private sector, third sector and others to increase broadband take-up in Scotland, otherwise parts of Scotland could lag behind developing countries in that regard. I acknowledge the commitment in programme 4 of the action plan to increase take-up, and I hope that progress will be regularly monitored. There is work to be done to address the use of the internet by Scottish small and medium-sized businesses. I was quite shocked—as I think most of us were—when I read that 25 per cent of SMEs do not use the internet at all. Work is being done in Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise—and I accept the points that the cabinet secretary made—on business support for, and the upskilling of, SMEs. However, there is undoubtedly much more to be done to ensure that we keep pace with other countries. Finally, I noted on page 13 of the action plan the Government’s strategy on procurement for public sector investment and low-cost access. I am the deputy convener of the Public Audit Committee, which received a paper from the Auditor General about the Registers of Scotland and other organisations. An information technology contract that was initially estimated at £66 million is now estimated at £132 million, with considerable impairment charges. How will the strategy ensure that Scotland’s public sector procures at the right cost—offering good value to the public purse—in a way that achieves an IT system that is fit for purpose and provides much-needed returns on investment? I welcome those points in the action plan. The broadband action plan requires the monitoring of progress and positive and constructive working relations with the UK Government, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the public and private sectors and the third sector to ensure success. I can see that the cabinet secretary is nodding and I am sure that all the discussions will be both constructive and positive. I move amendment S4M-01893.2, in the name of Alex Johnstone, to leave out from “local authorities” to “funding” and insert: “the UK Government, local authorities and the public and private sectors to deliver open access future-proofed infrastructure and to support measures to increase take-up and participation in the digital economy and”.

In addressing the underlying problems, will Ken Macintosh acknowledge that 43 per cent of people on benefits in Scotland have an underlying mental health problem and that successive Governments have not given them the support that they need through the national health service?

I noticed that even the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth had his head in his hands for many parts of that speech. [Laughter.]

I welcome that—it was said with such a look of kindness. Many issues could be raised in this debate on the budget. However, as 88,000 people between 18 and 24 years old are registered unemployed, surely further education should be a priority for spending, not a target for cuts, if we are to be a wealthier and fairer nation, as the First Minister outlined earlier. As an economics and business studies lecturer in further and higher education for more than two decades before becoming an MSP, I know from experience the opportunities that further education offers to reduce inequalities and to provide not only skills, training and qualifications but—equally important—the self-esteem and confidence that individuals need to progress to work and in work. The Christie commission highlights that, in education, the inequalities gap between the bottom 20 per cent and the average learning outcomes has not changed at all since devolution. It also states: “A cycle of deprivation and low aspiration has been allowed to persist because preventative measures have not been prioritised.” If the Government is serious about realising our full economic potential, creating more and better employment opportunities and tackling the significant inequalities in Scottish society, further education should surely be the last sector to face cuts. If the Government is serious about driving and supporting the development of a competent, confident and valued social services workforce through the Scottish Social Services Council, it should understand that that could be achieved in further education colleges. There is no doubt that that would be an excellent example of a spend-to-save policy as it would not only hugely benefit the workforce but enhance care in the community in general. It is not acceptable to expect carers to do the job that they do with as little as a disclosure check and minimal training. Employability is a recurring theme in the Christie commission report, and there is no better place for people to start gaining the required skills than further education. Colleges have been innovative and enterprising and have been pruning their costs for years, including for many years before devolution. Given my experience in the sector, I find it difficult to understand how the Government can, at the same time, cut college funding, urge colleges to maintain student numbers and commit to provide a place in training, education or work for every 16 to 19-year-old. Having criticised the cuts in further education, I will give two examples of good ways in which to save money. I think that it was Maureen Watt who said that not much has been said about that.

I ask the member to let me make some progress. First, I highlight the ability of the public sector to procure and manage information technology contracts, and the cost of those contracts. Last month, the Auditor General for Scotland submitted two reports to the Public Audit Committee, of which I am the deputy convener: one on Registers of Scotland and one on the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. They are not two of the largest public sector organisations by any means, but they have worrying IT costs. Registers of Scotland’s initial contract cost of projects was estimated to be £66 million by the end of the partnership in 2014. By April 2011, the £66 million had become £102 million and the estimated cost to the end of the partnership was £132 million, which is exactly double the original estimated cost. The impairment costs are currently £3.1 million. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has an impairment charge of £2.3 million. That brings me to the Finance Committee’s report on the Scottish spending review 2011 and the draft budget for 2012-13. In paragraph 69, the committee reasonably asks the Government for “a progress report ... on how its strategy is bringing savings in ICT across the public sector”. The Auditor General has highlighted those two cases, stating that they raise “wider questions about the extent to which public bodies are equipped to manage IT projects delivered by outside providers.” When the previous Health and Sport Committee held an inquiry into telehealth and clinical portals, we discovered that there were almost 14 separate systems, with one for each health board. I welcome the fact that the Auditor General is to take a closer look at how such contracts are identified, defined and managed. The money that is wasted on poorly managed IT projects could be invested in employability skills and work to tackle inequalities. My final point is on the absenteeism rate in the public sector. The Government had to abandon the health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment target to reduce absenteeism in the NHS to 4 per cent when it became unachievable. This week, I received figures in a parliamentary answer on the average number of working days that are lost per full-time equivalent over a 12-month period. Although the rates for some organisations such as the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator and the Scottish Housing Regulator are less than six days, those in other organisations are more than 10 days, and at Disclosure Scotland the rate is three and a half weeks.

There might be good reasons for those rates, but they need to be analysed. I hope that the finance secretary will go home and think again about the savage cuts to further education.

Will the member give way?

Last week, I remarked on how unusual it was to have a committee debate before a report had been published. That worked well in last week’s Education and Culture Committee debate, and I am sure that it will work again, particularly given the importance of 2012 for negotiations on the CAP reforms. It is welcome that we are gaining wider views on those reforms prior to their implementation. I commend Graeme Dey—I hope that this does not damage his future career—for an excellent speech. I commend him not just for the content of his speech, but for the fact that he managed to focus on agriculture rather than on the constitution. This is my first agriculture and rural affairs speech. I say that with some trepidation, because I am surrounded by farmers, although Alex Johnstone has just left. I grew up in Angus and, every school holiday, all my school friends and I picked berries, tatties, daffodils and anything else that could be picked. My father worked on farms all his life and we lived in a tied cottage on a farm. I have lived in Scotland all my life and, as others do, I want what is best for Scotland from the CAP reforms. As David Stewart said, the many upland hill farmers across the Highlands and Islands receive their single farm payment not simply for farming or crofting, but for the benefits that they bring to their local areas. In the introduction to its session 3 “4th Report 2011: Report on the future of agricultural support in Scotland”, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee noted that hill farmers deliver public benefits beyond food production, such as “environmental protection, carbon capture ... biodiversity ... and ... retention of sustainable rural communities.” On that last point, although far fewer people are now employed directly in agriculture in remote and rural areas, it still provides much-needed employment, brings families to areas and helps to support the local school and the village shop. Although the debate may highlight regional differences in what is best for Scotland post-2014, as Alex Fergusson said, the bare statistics are clear. The CAP accounts for 43 per cent of the entire EU budget. Scottish agriculture currently receives in the region of £670 million through support payments. In an age of restrained and decreasing public spending, the limits and priorities of the current and the future CAP are clear. Jim Paice has said that he wants to see a CAP that encourages more food production while ensuring that farmers play their part in looking after the environment. Unusually, I commend the Scottish Government and Richard Lochhead, in particular, who have shown commitment to promoting Scotland’s food and drink. That is to be commended, but there is still more potential and more that can be achieved on that front. Putting on my consumer hat, I always look for food and drink that are made in Scotland. That is easy if one drinks whisky, but it is much more difficult to find Scottish food. At the moment, we are lucky if, in any supermarket, we can buy four types of vegetable that have been grown in Scotland and, outwith the berry season, it is extremely difficult to buy fruit that has been grown in Scotland. Even in the most remote shops in the Highlands and Islands, there is often little in the way of local produce. I hope that the Government will build on the work that has been done to promote local produce and allow Scottish consumers to support our producers, because however committed people are to doing that, it is difficult if the food is not there. I visited the island of Canna last year, where the National Trust for Scotland is bringing the walled garden of the main house back into production. The NTS has found types of apple and other fruit tree there that are not found anywhere else in Scotland or the United Kingdom. The fruit trees have been on Canna for centuries, helping to feed local people, so surely we could be doing more to incentivise local producers on the islands and in other remote and rural areas, particularly given the cost of transport and energy. I have been consensual, so I think it fair that I mention the Conservatives’ own John Scott’s on-going commitment to farmers markets. I welcome what is happening, but much more could be done. Many members said that fewer young people are entering the industry. The truth is that many farmers struggle with paperwork and bureaucracy, which seems to crowd out much of the time that they want to spend on farming enterprise. Audit trails are important and cross-compliance has its place, but if we want farming to flourish again we must consider loosening the constraints of red tape on the industry. I note that the NFUS said in its briefing that the new CAP system is likely to be much more complex than previous systems.

Will the minister ensure that the views of local communities and councillors are listened to? There is currently a belief that any wind farm application referred to the Government will be approved despite the strongly held views of many local communities.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy last met the chairs of NHS boards. (S4O-00555)

When the issue of emergency cover and a new district nurse in west Ardnamurchan was raised in the Parliament last year, the health secretary rightly said that it is crucial that the NHS and the Scottish Ambulance Service “come up with a model of service provision that is deliverable and which satisfies the community’s concerns about safety and sustainability.”—[Official Report, 24 November 2011; c 3864.] From the responses that I have received this week, I know that the community is not satisfied, as it has a nurse for the whole of west Lochaber and not just west Ardnamurchan, and no local emergency cover. Will the health secretary now intervene in the matter?

I, too, welcome Labour’s new education team. It is a formidable team, if I may say so. I trust that all education debates will be equally as consensual as today’s. In my past life, I lectured on economics in further and higher education. With that background, I am very pleased to speak in this debate, and my colleague Liz Smith will sum up later on behalf of the committee. In my two decades as a lecturer, my students came from all backgrounds and were of all ages, and many of them had life experiences that were not so good. However, further education in particular has the enviable reputation of giving many people a second chance. That is why Conservatives would pilot the concept of second-chance centres for pupils who are excluded from school, which would be separate from the school environment and would help to refocus young people’s lives. I am not sure whether this is the first time that we have had a debate following a committee inquiry but prior to the writing of the committee report, but it is certainly the first time that I have been involved in such a debate. I welcome this approach and I commend all members of the Education and Culture Committee for their work on and commitment to the issue. The evidence and briefings for the debate make pretty depressing reading. It would be depressing enough to look at today’s poor statistics and outcomes relating to looked-after children, but the fact that, despite the many actions that have been taken, they have barely improved since devolution should concern us all. The Scottish Parliament information centre briefing for the committee in October highlights the actions that have been taken, as Stewart Maxwell said. They include the introduction and implementation of legislation, Audit Scotland reports, priority funding, ministerial working groups, inspection reports prioritising looked-after children, pilots, guidance and so on in every year of the Parliament since 1999, yet there has been no significant improvement. Therefore, whatever the Education and Culture Committee recommends is unlikely to be enough unless measures are put in place to audit and monitor performance and outcomes and unless there is full co-operation, commitment and consistency of approach across local authorities. In addition, whatever the committee recommends must have the full co-operation and support of the ministerial team. That is undoubtedly how we achieve success in Scotland. My second point relates to integrated working. We should ensure that emphasis is placed on joined-up working between education and social work departments that are under the same roof. For years, there have been problems relating to care of the elderly because of the lack of partnership working between health and social work. However, that should not be a problem and it should not be allowed to be a problem in two departments in the same council. I was impressed when I read in the SPICe briefing about the improvements to care plans, corporate parenting, GIRFEC and more robust local authority statistical returns. However, the next paragraph in the briefing stated: “Few care plans ... took a long term view of the needs of the child ... care plans do not focus ... on outcomes ... There were fewer support staff in schools in 2010 than in 2007 ... Schools are not always sufficiently aware of relevant training materials”. It was also said that “it was rare to find a plan that linked actions to anticipated outcomes.” In evidence to the committee, witnesses have said that GIRFEC is not being implemented consistently or extensively enough across local authorities. However, on that issue, I commend Highland Council, which seems to have led the way on many aspects of GIRFEC in Scotland. Although 94 per cent of looked-after children had a care plan in 2009-10, that did not lead to the care, support and educational attainment that had been hoped for. If I can be less diplomatic, it could be said that the care plan was not worth the paper that it was written on. That brings me to the historic concordat that was the basis of single outcome agreements, with local authorities focusing spending on achieving agreed outcomes with the Scottish Government. The promised transparency has certainly not led to improved outcomes for looked-after children. Half of 1 per cent of children looked after at home achieve five or more qualifications, compared with 56 per cent of all leavers who do so. That has to be deeply concerning, given that almost 16,000 children are looked after in various settings in Scotland. The regulations for looked-after children state that the child’s care plan “must include arrangements concerning details of any services to be provided to meet the care, education and health needs of the child.” However, I am not clear about who is responsible for ensuring that that happens. Why are so many looked-after children falling through the net? I commend Jack McConnell, Cathy Jamieson and Peter Peacock for the action that they took in relation to looked-after children and I commend the initiatives that have been taken by education ministers in this Government. However, I must say that, although we in the Parliament pass legislation, along with guidance and regulations, I am not sure what we do to ensure that local government fulfils its responsibility to implement all that. Unless there is a more robust and consistent approach to the implementation and enforcement of actions that are recommended by the Parliament, future approaches will also not work, and we could be debating the failure of our approach to looked-after children in a decade’s time.

I welcome the tone and the constructive approach of all members in this debate. We have heard some startling figures, particularly from Joan McAlpine and Christine Grahame, who told us that 28 per cent of prisoners were in care as children. That is undoubtedly worthy of further investigation. When Kevin Stewart highlighted the success of Aberdeen City Council in achieving a higher-than-average level of positive destinations, I looked up one of the papers that we have for today’s debate, which contains relevant Government figures, and saw that 59 per cent of looked-after children achieve a positive initial destination, but that falls to 44 per cent for the follow-up destination. The number of all school leavers who find a positive initial destination is 87 per cent, and that figure falls by only 2 per cent for the follow-up destination. I hope that the committee agrees that that, too, is worthy of further consideration. I commend Dennis Robertson on his straight-talking speech—no more excuses, no more blame; we must get it right for every child. I think that he summed up the sentiment of the debate in his speech. There are other issues that have not been mentioned today. As part of the curriculum for excellence, every learner is entitled to personal support to enable them to gain as much as possible from the opportunities that the curriculum offers. That is good, but it brings me back to the point that I made in my opening speech. There is an entitlement to personal support, but is there a duty on local authorities to provide that support? What happens if the personal support that the care plan identifies as being required is not given? Who is responsible, and what is the appeals mechanism? Many worrying figures have been stated today. One of the worst and most shocking was the average exclusion rate, which is 45 per 1,000 children for all pupils, and eight times higher for looked-after children. Another point that many members have highlighted is that the number of exclusions is four times greater for children who are placed in six or more placements in a year, in comparison with children who have had the stability of one placement. I appreciate that there is a shortage of foster carers, as the committee convener mentioned. The minister said that it was the Government’s ambition for children to have just one placement. We need to understand why children are enduring so many placements, and look at what is being done to investigate why children are being shunted around with such a detrimental effect on their outcomes. I want to raise the issue of mental health in early years. I appreciate that other members have mentioned it, but only last year I found out through freedom of information legislation that children in Tayside were waiting for a maximum of three and a half years for mental health diagnosis, care and support. Three and a half years—and we wonder why we have a problem. In Highland, children can wait for a maximum of a year, and in Lanarkshire, Borders, Forth Valley and Greater Glasgow they can wait for up to six months. Research has confirmed that there is a window of opportunity to address poor mental health around the ages of two and three years. If that opportunity is missed, the consequence can be lifelong poor mental health. Unfortunately, our child and adolescent mental health services are not yet sufficiently geared up to identify issues and deliver early intervention to both children and parents. I understand that the Governments of Wales and Northern Ireland have in place a national strategy for school counselling and its implementation, which is backed by ring-fenced funding in every school. As a member of the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly, I feel that we can learn much by comparing our actions with what is done in other jurisdictions around these islands. Has the committee gathered any evidence from other jurisdictions on things that perhaps work better? I hope that the committee report will focus not only on the safety of children in care, but on ensuring that the factors that are associated with becoming looked after are addressed. That issue was well highlighted by Liam McArthur. On a point that Adam Ingram raised in his excellent speech, there are more than 60,000 children in care throughout the United Kingdom, but there were only 3,000 adoptions last year. I welcome the UK Government’s proposals that set out new minimum standards not only for the number of adoptions, but for what happens to children in the care system. I welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate, and I hope that we can look at other jurisdictions around these islands to share best practice.

I am listening carefully to the minister. How will she ensure that checks and balances are in the system to ensure that looked-after children get more and do better than they are getting and doing at the moment?

Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that Professor Malcolm Harrington has made significant changes since the pilots of the work capability assessment, including changes for fluctuating conditions, and that Atos Healthcare is constantly reviewing and changing its assessments?

Will the member give way?

Professor Harrington is currently reviewing cancer patients’ payments; his review is either with the Government now or is due in the next week. That is being looked at, along with many other changes.

I, too, am pleased to speak in the debate on the legislative consent motion on the Welfare Reform Bill, which covers subordinate legislation, kinship carers, housing support and how the change to the new personal independence payment will work alongside our legislation on self-directed support. At the last count, there had been more than 70 contacts and meetings between ministers and officials from the Scottish Government and their counterparts in Westminster. One would have thought that that would have helped to ensure the passage of the LCM, thereby assisting the people affected. That level of partnership, along with the representations of the 59 members of Parliament who represent Scottish constituencies, should help to ensure that issues that are raised here and elsewhere are addressed. Since our previous debate on the bill, it has been amended, and the bill’s third reading, which is due to take place in February, will provide another opportunity to make further amendments and changes. Since that previous debate, the UK coalition Government has amended the bill to retain the mobility component of the new PIP for care home residents, as Jackie Baillie mentioned. In addition, it has announced a review of the circumstances in which the housing element of the universal credit can be paid to landlords. That will be possible in situations in which tenants get into arrears, which I note was recommended by our Local Government and Regeneration Committee. Alongside those changes, Professor Harrington has recommended that recognition of fluctuating conditions be taken into account, which will affect people with ME, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s, mental health problems and many other conditions. That is welcome. Some of the recommendations that have been made on the Atos assessments are being implemented, while others are under review. I welcome last week’s announcement that 50 Atos jobs will be based at RAF Kinloss, and I look forward to an increase in that number. As Liam McArthur and Siobhan McMahon mentioned, Harrington is also looking at the situation of cancer patients, proposals on which are imminent. The point that I am making is that welfare reform is not a fait accompli. We must work constructively to ensure that the necessary changes are fed into the system. If the Scottish Government was more constructive in engaging in dialogue with Westminster, the need for more changes would be recognised and addressed.

If I have time, I will come back to the member, but my time is short. I see no need for another committee. In my humble view, this Parliament’s existing committees, the two Parliaments working in partnership and 59 MPs are more than capable of scrutinising welfare reform.

If the cabinet secretary had been listening for the past three minutes and 21 seconds she would know that I have outlined a raft of changes. I am happy to send her a letter with a full list of them. Given that around 44 per cent of incapacity benefit claimants have a mental health problem, it is appropriate to focus on that issue in relation to the legislation. Some years ago the Scottish Government set a target for a zero per cent increase in antidepressant use. Not only was the target not achieved but it has now been dropped. I imagine that one of the reasons why it was scrapped was that, last year alone, antidepressant use increased by 8 per cent; in the past 10 years, the defined daily dose has increased by more than 60 per cent. It is little wonder that people with mental health problems are worried about being faced with a work capability assessment, given that many of them have been parked on antidepressants and left isolated for years with no review of their condition. Instead of grandstanding on the need for new committees, constantly criticising the UK Government and carping about the legislation, it would be so much better if the Scottish Government used its energy, time and existing responsibilities to help those in need of better mental health services.

Certainly not. I do not want the member to tell us how much better things would be under independence, which seems to be all that her interventions consist of. If she is a bit more innovative in future I might take an intervention from her. Surely the SNP would welcome the introduction over a four-year period of one benefit to replace six existing benefits. Surely we would all welcome simplification of the system, making it easier for people to get support and get back to work. Surely the SNP Government would welcome the reduction to £500 a week of the maximum housing benefit, which has reached £2,000 a week. Following the pilots in Aberdeen and Burnley, not only did 36 per cent of people withdraw their claim when faced with the work capability assessment but 39 per cent were considered fit for work and 17 per cent were placed in a work-related activity group. The support provided is not just a tick-box exercise to get people into work. Under Labour, providers were given 53 per cent of the fee up front; now it is 5 per cent up front and support given over two years. I commend that, and I commend our amendment.

Paragraph 21 of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s submission to the Health and Sport Committee says that the committee is of the view that the current system of direct payment of housing benefit to social landlords should be retained. Does the member disagree with the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee?

I, too, am pleased to speak in the debate on the Finance Committee’s report on the spending review and the draft budget. I welcome the focus on a shared vision, a national evidence base and the collaborative approach outlined by Kenneth Gibson, our new statesman. I note the balanced and thorough analysis as well as the criticisms in the report. The 10-year NPF plan that was published some months after the Government’s budget sets out to reflect the lessons that have been learned since 2007. I hope that members will appreciate that I am new to my brief so I look forward to hearing what lessons have been learned since 2007, and what happened to the historic concordat. I trust that the minister will address those points in his summing up. In paragraph 19 of its report, the committee asks how the NPF “informed the spending review”; whether it will be “fully integrated into the Scottish Government’s spending plans and how that works in practice;” and how “the 15 national outcomes and 45 national indicators have been reviewed to reflect the shift towards preventative spending.” I highlight those points from the report, because I had assumed that the Finance Committee would have had that information to assist it in its scrutiny. In paragraph 31, the committee asks for details on the priority that was given “to maintenance expenditure within the spending review”. Kenny Gibson also highlighted that point. Audit Scotland’s “Overview of the NHS in Scotland’s performance 2010/11”, which was published this month, found a backlog of £500 million of required maintenance. In Grampian alone, the total maintenance backlog is £124 million, with 47 per cent of that being high-risk or very high-risk maintenance that is needed to ensure compliance with regulations or to avoid the risk of closing buildings. The Finance Committee was correct to highlight maintenance issues, as we must ensure that the public sector estate is fit for purpose and meets health and safety and infection control standards. In paragraph 62, and in many others, the committee continues to seek clarification on significant spending decisions, which takes me to the statements that are made on ICT. The procurement and management of ICT contracts in the public sector should be of concern to us all. To take another NHS example, five boards did not achieve the target for electronic management of referrals, a measure that has been in the planning for years. As a new member of the Public Audit Committee, I was surprised to find that Registers of Scotland wrote off £3.1 million and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service wrote off £2.3 million for ICT contracts that did not match the organisations’ expectations or needs. The total write-off for those two projects alone in this year is greater than the Scottish Government’s £4.7 million resource allocation for ICT issues over the next three years. The Auditor General for Scotland has stated that those cases “raise questions about how well public bodies are positioned to get best value from IT services they are commissioning from outside providers.”—[Official Report, Public Audit Committee, 14 December 2011; c 315.] I welcome Audit Scotland’s commitment to include an audit of outsourced IT contracts in its 2012-13 programme, which I hope will assist in answering the committee’s request in paragraph 69 for “an explanation where the projected savings in each sector have not been achieved”. I note the Government’s plans to develop a national public sector ICT strategy and I trust that it will take Audit Scotland’s findings into account. It is disappointing that the Finance Committee had to seek clarity over the change funds, preventative spending commitments and the integration of services, all of which are measures that the Conservatives support. As Rob Gibson alluded to, in the current difficult times, “a clear read-across” is needed between committees and the Scottish Government. The issue could not be any better stated than in paragraph 162 of the report, which states: “It is, therefore, concerning that information which has been requested on a key aspect of the Scottish Government’s economic strategy was not communicated to the two parliamentary committees with the primary responsibility for scrutinising this policy.” That is not good enough.

I expected much more of our highly competent and charming finance secretary.

It is Christmas, after all. With my Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body hat on, I point out that the recommendation in paragraph 201 to provide information on performance against budget reductions is reasonable. It is only fair that, as we criticise others, we ensure that our own house is in order.

As an MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I am aware of the significant structural change between NHS Highland and Highland Council. I believe that the change is on the way to success, and I had thought that the Government supported and favoured it. From what the cabinet secretary has just said, do I take it that the model is not one that she would support now?

I welcome the opportunity to discuss and support integrated health and social care. As Nanette Milne said, we support the Government’s motion and Labour’s amendment. Until James Dornan stood up, I had planned to say that, unusually, I agreed with all the speeches, but he spoiled that line. Jackie Baillie outlined Labour’s approach, which we have supported. The one inconsistency that she did not mention is that the cost of self-funded residential care can vary from £460 a week to more than £900 a week, depending on where somebody lives. I feel strongly about that issue, which we could go on about. It is worth looking at how integrated care has been dealt with in the Parliament’s lifetime and particularly at the attitude that Hugh Henry highlighted. In the Parliament’s first eight years, the Labour-Liberal Scottish Executive introduced several initiatives—all of which we supported—including the joint future group. I found a letter to all health boards, councils, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, directors of social work and many more from Malcolm Chisholm when he was the Minister for Health and Community Care in July 2002. He wrote to promote community health partnerships and said that they would “seek to bridge the divide that has existed for too long between primary and secondary care and between health and social care.” Today, nine and a half years later, we have a Government motion—which we support—which states that “the integration of services needs to be improved to deliver better health and social care services.” I acknowledge that some progress has been made since 2002, but it is not enough. The evidence that the Health and Community Care Committee took on the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill in the first session of Parliament was overwhelmingly in favour of having one organisation and one budget for care for the elderly, although there was no unanimity on what that single authority should be. At that time, up to 3,000 people were waiting in hospitals for councils to fund home care or residential care. Those people had delayed discharges or were bedblockers through no fault of their own. There are also examples, which Richard Simpson mentions quite often, of health and social care working together that have had to be abandoned. Millions of pounds have been spent over the years on initiatives to tackle bedblocking, and we also supported those initiatives. In 2004, we got the community health partnerships, whose main purpose was to integrate NHS and social care. Audit Scotland criticised the CHPs for their “duplication” of “existing health and social care partnership arrangements.” Not only did they not achieve integration, but it was found that any attempt to integrate often resulted in a duplication of existing services. That brings me to the £70 million change fund, which, again, we support, some of which will be used for health and social care partnerships to implement local plans for better integration of their services. Today, we hear that the community health partnerships are being replaced by new health and social care partnerships that will be jointly accountable to NHS boards and local authorities. The CHPs should have been doing that work since 2004. Excuse my frustration, but we have been here before. The Audit Scotland report “Overview of the NHS in Scotland’s performance 2010-112”, which was published today, states: “Improvements in partnership working are needed to deliver more efficient and effective services. ... joint working could be improved by tackling differences in organisational cultures”— which Hugh Henry mentioned—and “planning and performance and financial management arrangements.” That was highlighted in evidence as far back as 1999-2000, yet today we have an Audit Scotland report highlighting the same problem. I trust that, within the programme for improvement outlined by the cabinet secretary, organisational cultures will no longer stand in the way of patient care and support. I agree with Nanette Milne—I think that Dennis Robertson alluded to this, too—that some of the briefing papers for the debate have been considerably unhelpful. Against that background, I commend NHS Highland for taking the courageous step of becoming the lead agency for care of the elderly, working with Highland Council, which will become the lead agency for children’s services. I have already found that the single-agency model is very helpful for my constituents. Why do we need the integration of health and social work? As Malcolm Chisholm said back in 2002, it will “enable health and social care ... to look at the whole picture”. In a country of 5 million, it is unacceptable to have people working in silos, allowing patients and others to be marginalised behind bureaucracy, budgets and a dogged refusal to put the needs of ordinary people before organisational cultures. I support the Highland lead-agency model to integrate home carers into the NHS. I hope that the home care workforce to be redeployed from the council to the NHS will be given more training and support and will be better co-ordinated with other health professionals in their team. The Highland process of change has faced many challenges along the way, with NHS staff moving to council employment and council staff moving to the NHS. There are challenges ahead, but we should all commend what Highland Council and NHS Highland are doing.

On delayed discharge, I note that the Government motion refers to working with the independent and third sector. Will the Government consider using the up to 5,000 empty beds in the independent care home sector for respite care and to allow earlier discharge from hospital?

I was talking about rehab.

Does the minister intend some of the fossil fuel fund to go to yards in the Highlands and Islands, such as the Nigg yard, to give them the opportunity to play a key role in wind farm construction? When will the allocation of the fund be announced?

I note the progress that the minister has outlined. Professor Russel Griggs says that he is disappointed that there has still been no reply to the recommendations and findings that were sent to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities earlier this year. Is the minister also disappointed at that situation?

On the consensual approach of COSLA and the regulatory review group, COSLA has still not responded to the findings and recommendations that were issued by the regulatory review group earlier this year, as stated in this week’s report.

The debate has been mainly constructive, with some excellent speeches. Angus MacDonald made a first-class speech, as did Elaine Murray, Margaret McCulloch, with her background of business experience, and Tavish Scott. We all welcomed a first-class speech from Helen Eadie, who is a convert to regulatory review. I say to Chic Brodie that, when the hole gets 6ft deep, he should stop digging. We welcomed Rob Gibson’s point regarding the reduction in the number of inspections of farms and crofts. In preparation for the debate, I looked at pages 3 and 4 of last year’s annual report. They highlight the fact that legislation forced the care commission to undertake a specific number of inspections each year. The number of inspections was then reduced. However, after recent experiences at the Elsie Inglis and other care homes, and after the excellent report by the Health and Sport Committee into care inspections, the reduction in the number of inspections each year was reversed after only six months. Reducing inspections is not always appropriate. I see a significant difference between regulation and inspection. Overregulation—which others have mentioned—and unnecessary regulation can impede business, jobs and economic growth. We would welcome and support a reduction in regulation. However, the inspection of care homes is a different matter; it helps to ensure quality standards and a quality of life for many vulnerable people in Scotland. I would no more wish to see a reduction in the number of inspections of care homes than a reduction in the number of school inspections by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education. Rhoda Grant spoke about the regulatory review group, and I hope that it will consider more specific cases as well as considering overarching organisations and organisations such as SEPA. I agree with Rob Gibson: SEPA has undoubtedly moved towards having a much more positive partnership approach across Scotland in recent years. As others have said, all 32 local authorities can have different interpretations of planning issues. Some developers seem to face myriad obstacles over many years before achieving planning permission, while others sail through the process with no glitches. An example that the minister will be familiar with is that of Asda. Asda was unable to set up in Thurso, was unable to set up in Tain, and has taken almost seven years to get permission to build in Inverness, where it is opening next autumn. In addition to its overarching approach, it might be of benefit to the regulatory review group to pursue the experience of one organisation and the bureaucracy and regulation that it has faced. On page 3 of this week’s report, on the subject of working with local authorities, concerns were raised about local authorities’ interpretation, implementation and enforcement of regulations. The regulatory review group decided to consider a nationally agreed approach. That decision was unanimous. I therefore put on record again, as Professor Griggs said, that it is disappointing that COSLA has not yet responded to the paper, despite its being submitted to COSLA earlier this year. That reminded me of the historic concordat, which is so historic that I cannot remember the last time that it was mentioned. However, I am sure that the minister will resurrect the historical concordat today. I note that a bill on better regulation is to be introduced in 2012-13. Alongside the bill, I hope that we will see a new culture in the public sector for better working together. The old silos of the NHS and social work, for example, have not been helpful in the pursuit of an integrated approach in which the patient, client or customer is at the forefront or the centre of the service. It is worrying that the chair of the regulatory review group also said that local authorities play a key role in delivering better regulation across a wide area for business, and so have to be engaged and fully committed to the five key principles of better regulation. I mentioned the lack of response from COSLA, and it seems clear that a culture of understanding, respect and collaboration will be needed before any legislation on regulations is passed. Without such a culture of commitment, understanding and working together, there will be no improvement. Another point that I picked up from Professor Griggs is that, unfortunately, bilateralism and not multilateralism is the norm, and that is not the best way to resolve challenges. How many times since 1999 have we asked the Scottish Executive and now the Scottish Government—and I do not totally blame either—to take the lead in introducing, for example, single information technology systems in the national health service and elsewhere? That is also raised in the report; I hope that it will be listened to. In difficult financial times, such action is not only more efficient, it is more effective and it saves money.

I, too, congratulate Rhoda Grant on securing the debate. I acknowledge the support that you, Presiding Officer, have given to people with multiple sclerosis in previous sessions of the Parliament and your commitment to the issue. I remember your members’ business debate on the subject many years ago. I imagine that that is why you are here this evening, which is unusual for the Presiding Officer. I am sure that members are grateful for that. I welcome the progress that has been made since the Government published the clinical standards for neurological health services in 2009. However, although we should mark that progress, it is worth stating that the MS Society, in its briefing for the debate, states: “People with MS face a postcode lottery when it comes to their healthcare”. As others have said, MS is a complex and fluctuating condition. I am sure that most if not all of us know several people who have multiple sclerosis. John Wilson referred to the report on the Scottish MS register. I was shocked to discover that, for 9 per cent of people, it can take more than six years to have a diagnosis confirmed. We are debating the support that is given to people with MS, but it is worth understanding that, according to the report, “There is no single diagnostic test and other conditions with similar symptoms may need to be ruled out before a final diagnosis can be made.” However, the necessary help and support cannot kick in until an accurate diagnosis is made. There is a plethora of excellent research backed by substantial investment—as mentioned in the motion—which will be welcomed by the 10,500 people in Scotland who have MS. However, not only is that incidence one of the highest in the world; as Richard Simpson said, the further north one goes, the higher the prevalence is. With one in five emergency admissions and one in eight GP consultations relating to a neurological condition, it makes sense to focus on self-management and better diagnosis. The research and health services are critical, given the fact that people live with the condition for many years. As the motion states, the Western Isles now have a dedicated MS nurse. The announcement of the MS specialist nurse in Moray going from part time to full time is also very welcome, as is the creation of the post of area development officer for the Highlands and Moray—a post that has been funded by the MS Society. In fact, NHS Highland is highlighted in the MS Society briefing paper for developing an MS steering group, which has resulted in an increase in the number of staff. There is no doubt that specialist nurse support helps people to stay independent and helps many people to remain active and in work. There is now a better understanding of MS, and MS sufferers benefit from appropriate exercise and cognitive behavioural therapy—which Rhoda Grant highlighted—to alleviate depression. Enhanced self-management, the prevention of crisis and improved adherence to medication can all be assisted by the knowledge and support of a specialist nurse. The investment in myelin repair should also lead the way to clinical trials and new drugs that will, hopefully, transform the lives of people with MS in the future. I have focused on the role of the specialist nurses, but it is only right and fair to mention the GPs, the consultant neurologists—of whom we have many more in Inverness now than we had some years ago, thankfully—the physiotherapists and the many other health professionals and social care workers who play their part in supporting MS patients. I look forward to the publication of the Health Improvement Scotland report next year, which will address the implementation of the standards by individual health boards. Only through that type of exercise will we ensure that MS patients throughout Scotland have greater equality of access to the services that can do so much to alleviate their condition. I pay tribute to the MS Society, whose work I fully respect and commend. It also has a wonderful website that is easy to navigate and highly authoritative.

Is the member aware that, as a result of Professor Harrington’s review, the Welfare Reform Bill now takes account of fluctuating conditions, such as mental health, ME and MS?

Will the minister explain the next step in the process? I commended NHS Highland, but I was touched by Neil Findlay’s point that there are many fewer specialists in an area with a much larger population. What action will the minister take if a lack of support for MS is identified?

In comparing the United Kingdom with France and Germany, does the cabinet secretary accept that the coalition Government inherited the highest level of debt in the G7?

I welcome the tone of the finance secretary’s opening speech. I actually wrote in my speech that I regret the tone, because I was going by the motion— Members: Oh! —but I thought that his presentation was very appropriate, particularly in these difficult times.

Yes—I underestimated Mr Swinney’s ability.

The first line of the Government’s motion notes the Office for Budget Responsibility’s reduction in the economic growth forecast. What many have failed to mention is the context of that reduced forecast as stated by the OBR. With higher than expected inflation due to sharp increases in global commodity prices, the enduring crisis in the euro zone producing the increased instability and uncertainty that we witness daily, and the impact—as Gavin Brown mentioned—of the 2008-09 financial crisis becoming even clearer, the conclusion is that the boom was bigger and the bust deeper, which means that the effects of the crash are lasting longer than was previously thought. Even Tony Blair admitted in his book that, from 2005 onwards, Labour was insufficiently vigorous in limiting or eliminating the potential structural deficit. The Institute for Fiscal Studies stated—this has been mentioned today, but I do not apologise for raising it again—that “If the unprecedented transparency of the OBR had been in existence over recent years, it might have discouraged Gordon Brown from persevering with fiscal forecasts that most independent analysts thought over-optimistic from 2002 onwards”. Although we are addressing today the revised, lower growth figure from the OBR, it is at least an open, honest, factual, realistic and transparent figure. The IMF and the OECD have both said that, without a reduction in the budget, there can be no sustained economic growth. Indeed, the UK Government’s plans are backed by the European Commission, the Confederation of British Industry, the Institute of Directors, the Federation of Small Businesses, the British Chambers of Commerce and many others. It is worth comparing the UK economy with others in the euro zone, as many members have done. Our unemployment rate is still too high at 8.3 per cent, but it is 2 per cent lower than the euro average. The rate in Austria is as low as 3.8 per cent, but the rates in Spain and Greece stand at 23 per cent and 18 per cent respectively. The effect of the euro zone crisis cannot be overestimated and the full effects are not yet known, especially as British banks lent heavily to businesses and Governments in the euro zone’s worst trouble spots, as well as to French and German banks. Forty per cent of our exports are to euro zone countries, and as they experience their recessions, there is no doubt that they will drag down demand and affect our economy. I make no apology for stating that the budget deficit that the coalition Government inherited was not only the largest in the G7 but the largest in the developed world, with the result that the UK Government is spending £120 million a day on debt interest alone. As Gavin Brown said, the chancellor’s management of the economy has secured the trust of both the credit rating agencies and the bond markets, and every pound that the UK Government saves will be spent on measures to support growth, improve fairness and help families. Our amendment highlights a constructive and appropriate approach to the problems that we face, with a mixture of demand-led and supply-side policies. Bob Doris is welcome to read my copy of the autumn statement. Pages 53 to 57 are full of supply-side economics and capital infrastructure spending. Raising the personal tax allowance this year to £7,500 and to £10,000 for people who are aged over 65 has taken more than 90,000 people in Scotland out of taxation, which is welcome as a demand-led policy, and the allowance will increase by more than 8 per cent next year, compared with the 2 per cent by which it used to increase under Labour. The Scottish Government will also receive £433 million in additional funding. Its response that that is too little, too late is unfortunate and it is not in keeping with the tone that the cabinet secretary struck today, but I am sure that he will sort that out. Scotland will also benefit from the commitment to the provision of cross-border rail services in partnership with the UK. The decision to defer the 3p increase in fuel duty is also welcome, particularly in the area that I represent and in the islands. The policies of credit easing, increased capital investment and investment to support infrastructure and enterprise zones are quite similar to the policies that are being implemented in the rest of the United Kingdom, and the increase in the bank levy will raise an additional £280 million a year. Although I welcome the eventual investment in the A9, the A96 and Her Majesty’s Prison Inverness, I support the amendment in the name of Gavin Brown.

Does Kevin Stewart welcome the Treasury’s statement that “In future the Government will publish an assessment of progress on child poverty against the full range of indicators”? That was never done under Labour.

Well, have a referendum.

There is one issue where one size does not fit all. The public sector in Scotland is 15 per cent bigger than it is in the rest of the United Kingdom. If the SNP gets independence, will it raise the size of the public sector or maintain it?

Some SNP back benchers.

Facts.

If contributions are not increased, how does the member suggest that we fund the gap in 2014-15 between payments to pensioners and contributions from employers and employees in relation to NHS, teachers and civil service pensions? The deficit will be £489 million. Where will he get that money?

Will the member give way?

Those who earn £15,000 or less will pay nothing more, those who earn between £15,000 and £29,000 will pay 1.5 per cent more over three years and the increase in personal allowances is taking 1 million workers in the UK out of paying tax. All that will help families.

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests. Like other members, I record my thanks for the valuable contribution of public sector staff. I also thank the Scottish Parliament information centre for its briefing; I am only sorry that no one in the SNP read it, because if they had done so we would not be at loggerheads. I thank the SNP for bringing the debate to the Parliament. It is the second debate on public sector pensions in two weeks and the second in the Parliament’s 12 and a half years. When Labour MSPs picket workplaces today, they should tell union members that in the Parliament’s 12 and a half years, of which Labour spent eight in government and more than four in opposition, Labour never brought a debate on public sector pensions to the Parliament. The SNP is a party that aspires to government, but I see little sign that it will accept any responsibility on pensions. The party of Government would normally suggest ideas. Indeed, no Government front bench has ever looked more sheepish in the face of the facts.

The SNP has 10 speakers in the debate; we have three. I want to get the facts into the debate. The facts in the public sector pensions dispute have certainly not got in the way of the rhetoric that surrounds the strike, so I will put some truths on the record. First, public sector employees who earn less than £15,000 will pay no more in pension contributions. Employees who earn between £15,000 and £21,000 will pay 1.5 per cent, which will be phased in over three years. People who earn between £21,000 and £30,000 will pay less than 3 per cent, which will be phased in over three years. The average increase will be 3.2 per cent, which means that people who earn more than £60,000 will bear the brunt of the increased payments that are phased in over three years. Therefore, when members say that they are supporting the lower paid, they are talking nonsense. They are campaigning against an approach whereby the lower paid will pay no more and the higher paid will pay more. That is not socialism as I understand it. The UK Government’s proposals are fair, equitable and sustainable. Secondly, the Scottish Government has discretion in relation to the six public sector pension schemes in Scotland, of which only the local government scheme is a funded scheme. It is worth examining Audit Scotland’s figures on all the schemes, with reference to the snapshot figures for 2009-10. The only two pension schemes in surplus are the two schemes that have a tiered system of contributions, based on salary. The NHS scheme, which was introduced in 2008, has an employee contribution of 5 per cent for salaries up to £21,000, rising to 8.5 per cent for salaries of more than £110,000. The local government tiered scheme, which was introduced in 2009, starts with employee contributions of 5.5 per cent on earnings up to £18,000, rising to 12 per cent on earnings of more than £40,000, so council workers who earn more than £40,000 contribute the highest percentage in their funded pension scheme. The Conservative coalition Government at Westminster is proposing a tiered scheme for all public sector workers. That is what has brought people out on strike, although that type of pension scheme already exists in local government and the NHS, with the highest paid contributing the most. I do not recall NHS or council strikes in Scotland when those schemes were introduced two or three years ago. The cabinet secretary noted the overall surplus—

The scheme is in surplus at the moment, but according to Audit Scotland it will not be in surplus in two years’ time—far from it, as I said when I intervened during Jamie Hepburn’s speech. I thank the First Minister for his intervention. The cabinet secretary noted the surplus in 2009-10. However, his figures included the local government funded scheme; if we consider the five unfunded schemes we find a deficit of £56 million. Mr Swinney failed to tell us that in 2009-10 the teachers’ scheme had a deficit of £240 million, the civil service scheme had a deficit of £38 million and the police and firefighters’ schemes paid out exactly the amount that they took in in contributions—the figures are all in appendix 3 of the Audit Scotland report. As Gavin Brown said, the Government’s Scottish Public Pensions Agency said in its response to the call for evidence from Hutton: “Affordability should be considered in its broadest sense.”

I appreciate that, Presiding Officer. If the First Minister were to read Lord Hutton’s report, he would see that the only means of making the schemes sustainable is to pay in—[Interruption.] I am just about to come to that, Mr Neil. I am pleased that my contribution is so important that the First Minister has intervened on me repeatedly. I was interrupted in the middle of my point about the Scottish Government’s response to Hutton, which also states that a “consistent and holistic approach should be taken to reviewing pension schemes across the public sector”— those are the Scottish Government’s words, not mine— “based around common principles, issues and recommendations. This would help to avoid further divergence in public service pension scheme design”. I ask the finance secretary why, if the tiered employee contributions are acceptable for the NHS and local government schemes, they are not acceptable under the UK proposals for the other public sector schemes. The figures in the Audit Scotland report might or might not be exceptional, but we know that the voluntary early retirement and voluntary early severance schemes will hugely increase the pension pay-outs for last year and this year. I also want to put on record that there has been a loss of 14,700 jobs in the public sector between 2006 and 2010. Given that the Scottish National Party responds to Hutton with a call for affordability, consistency and common principles to avoid divergence, what is its view of the fact that employee contributions range from 1.5 per cent in the civil service to 6 per cent for teachers and 11 per cent for police and firefighters? Equally, employer contributions to pension schemes—funded by the taxpayer—range from 11.5 per cent for firefighters to 13.5 per cent in the NHS, 15 per cent for teachers, between 18 and 22 per cent in local government, 19 per cent in the civil service and 25 per cent for the police. There is a massive inbuilt discrepancy in employee and employer contributions. I ask the finance secretary: where is the fairness in that? Those divergences and inconsistencies are stark and wholly out of line with what the SNP is calling for. The three key tests of affordability, fairness and sustainability are at the heart of this pensions debate, and of the UK Government’s proposals. I thank SNP members for being here today to give us the opportunity to have a democratic debate on this issue, but I also ask them to read the SPICe briefing and to come back with a bit of honesty in their approach to the debate.

Will the member give way?

I respectfully remind the member that I am a Scottish Conservative MSP.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Page 22 of the Audit Scotland report tells us that the deficit in NHS, teacher and civil service schemes will be £174 million next year, and will rise year on year to £489 million in 2014-15. How sustainable and affordable is that? Where does the deficit money come from?

Will the minister confirm that onshore wind farms are productive for only around 25 per cent of the time and that, as the Institution of Civil Engineers stated earlier this week, coal-fired power stations will be essential to secure the energy supply in Scotland in the future?

I, too, thank John Scott for securing this debate. I am standing in for my colleague Jackson Carlaw, who is unable to attend Parliament today. John Scott is, indeed, a worthy local champion for health services in his constituency—and rightly so. After all, it is the duty and responsibility of all MSPs to ensure that the constituencies and regions that we represent get their fair share and equality of access, irrespective of geographical location. John Scott’s campaigning to keep A and E open at Ayr hospital is well recorded, and I also acknowledge Nicola Sturgeon’s role in the process. It is right to associate the threat to the orthopaedic trauma service with accident and emergency services. There is no doubt that a critical mass of services is required to maintain the level and diversity of staffing in hospitals. Over the years, we have all heard the saying “death by a thousand cuts” being used when one service goes and other services become unsustainable as a result. As John Scott said, since the motion was lodged, NHS Ayrshire and Arran has withdrawn its proposal to move trauma orthopaedics from Ayr hospital. There is no doubt that it helps if MSPs work as a team locally—I note the support from Adam Ingram and Chic Brodie, although there is none from Labour, unfortunately. Adam Ingram made a very good point in highlighting the like-it-or-lump-it type of consultation. I am afraid that that approach is all too prevalent across Scotland. The people in Kilchoan in west Ardnamurchan are currently experiencing it. The background to the threatened cuts at Ayr hospital should continue to cause concern, given that plans to cut local services and centralise elsewhere have been thwarted twice. The petition against the proposals that has been signed by 55,000 local people speaks volumes about how they value their NHS services. I am not normally partisan in such debates, but I hope that the same 55,000 people will be made aware that no Labour MSP who represents the Ayrshire area is present for this debate. In Highland terms, the distance between hospitals that members have mentioned is not significant. The main difference lies in the greater density of population and the increased ageing population in the area, given that Ayr is such a popular retirement destination. The increased risk of osteoporotic fractures, treatment and recovery highlights the need for the retention of the unit. We are all painfully aware of the need to continue to make efficiency savings, and there is no doubt that efficiencies can be made in the NHS while the high quality of care that we expect is retained. As the minister will know from listening to recent evidence in the Health and Sport Committee, there is no doubt that efficiency savings targets have brought a more rigorous financial discipline to NHS boards than existed previously. I have also taken from oral and written submissions that efficiency savings are possible without cutting priority front-line services. We can campaign against cuts to local services, but there is no doubt that we should always heed issues that medical staff raise, as John Scott highlighted.

Okay. I was going to mention that it is unfortunate that the TrakCare system has not been successful. Again, I thank John Scott for bringing the debate to the Parliament.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her response to Mike MacKenzie. The loss of the dedication and commitment of Nurse Jessie Colquhoun presents a tremendous challenge to the Scottish Ambulance Service and NHS Highland. From what I have been told, the option of local people training as emergency responders, given that a road or air ambulance can take more than an hour to arrive, is not acceptable to many in the community. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that even the most remote communities have an assurance of emergency care, in and out of hours, that is of a similar standard to that in other areas of Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I begin by acknowledging the valuable contribution that the public sector makes to the economy and society in Scotland. It is that hugely valued contribution by public sector workers that makes the potential strikes so devastating, particularly for the most vulnerable. Public sector staff make their contributions in their working lifetimes, and their pensions should be based on fairness, quality and sustainability in retirement. I understand that this could be the first focused debate on public sector pensions in the Parliament, although I appreciate that we are the warm-up act for the Government’s debate on pensions in two weeks’ time, for which I fully commend the Government. Earlier this week, the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body agreed to progress to the next stage of the external security facility to ensure that democratic business continues in the Parliament despite any security threats. I hope that all parliamentarians will ensure that their duties within this democracy and Government continue on 30 November should the strikes go ahead while negotiations continue. In five years’ time, the United Kingdom is due to spend £33 billion a year on public sector pensions. That is the same as the budget for the Scottish Parliament. Any politician who thinks that the figure can continue to rise must be explicit about where the money will come from. There is no doubt about the urgent need for reform against the background of people living much longer than when the funds were set up. Labour’s legacy was state spending of £4 for every £3 in revenue, with the UK Government having to borrow £1 in every £4 just to keep the lights on, pensions paid, teachers in schools and doctors and nurses in hospitals. That simply cannot continue, given the huge national debt, of which we are all aware. The former Labour minister Lord Hutton reviewed pensions in the UK and concluded that there is a clear case for change. He stated: “The responsible thing to do is to accept that because we are living longer we should work for longer.” I also agree with Rachel Reeves, Labour’s shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, who set out three key tests for a fair agreement on pensions: affordability, fairness and sustainability. I believe that the current proposals, which are under negotiation, meet those three tests. While I am being consensual, I also agree with Ed Miliband, who described strike action while negotiations are on-going as a “mistake”.

I will make some progress, if the member does not mind. As recently as 2 November, the UK coalition Government placed a new offer on the table of an 8 per cent increase in the accrual rate, and it is committed to continue working constructively with unions for a settlement. Having read the Labour amendment, I think that it is important to set out the facts. Most public sector workers will see no reduction in the pension that they receive on retirement, with many low and middle-income earners receiving a larger pension income on retirement. Any worker within 10 years of retirement will see no change to the age at which they can retire and no change to the amount of pension that they will receive when they retire. After all the reforms, people in the public sector will still have significantly better pensions than those in the private sector, especially given the former Labour Government’s tax raid on private pension funds of around £5 billion a year, which took up to £100 billion out of private pension funds. It is obvious that Scottish Labour has not read or understood Lord Hutton’s report, so let me give some examples of the proposals.

I would like to give some examples so that I can put the member right. A nurse with a salary at retirement of £34,000 would receive a pension of £23,000 if the reforms were introduced; under the current scheme, they would receive £17,000. A teacher with a salary at retirement of £38,000 would receive £25,000 under the proposed scheme; under the current scheme, they would receive £19,000. A hospital porter with a salary at retirement of £14,600 would receive pension benefits of £12,000 under the new scheme, as opposed to £9,000 in the existing scheme. Perhaps Labour is going on strike because some people will receive less. A senior civil servant, of whom there are many, with a salary of more than £100,000 would receive £37,000 under the new proposals compared with £44,000 at present. The hospital porter’s pension increases, whereas that of the top civil servant is reduced. The lowest paid and people who are 10 years from retirement will be protected and public sector pensions will remain far better than those in the private sector. It is worth noting that the settlement will not require further negotiation for a generation. The Government is not proposing any increase in the total employee scheme contribution rates in addition to the proposed 3.2 percentage points already announced. We value the contribution of the public sector, but it is worth comparing public sector pensions with those in the private sector, which is so critical to the recovery of our economy. After the proposed reforms, public sector pensions will still be among the best, with a guaranteed pension that very few in the private sector could ever dream of. In February this year, an Audit Scotland report highlighted the differences in contribution rates and levels among public sector schemes. There is no doubt that the Scottish Government will have to tackle the issue soon. I welcome the last line of the Scottish Government’s amendment—it is probably the only line that I agree with. The Scottish Conservatives encourage constructive debate and chose this subject for debate as there needs to be an open and honest discussion as well as a more realistic approach to public sector pensions. The Prime Minister has given a commitment to members of Parliament at Westminster that they should face exactly the same changes to their pensions as those imposed on public sector workers. We should remember that, without reform, public sector workers would retire much earlier than private sector workers. Is that fair? Two thirds of private sector workers are not even members of any pension scheme. The taxpayer contributes three times more to civil service employees’ pensions than the average private sector employer pays into its employees’ pensions. Is it right and fair that private sector employees contribute through taxation to a pension scheme that is far more generous than they could ever dream of?

I appreciate that, Presiding Officer. When it comes to a cut in pension scheme benefits, the biggest cut that anyone could ever see is the £100 billion that Gordon Brown took out of the private sector and occupational pension funds, which affected people the length and breadth of Scotland. On 30 November, instead of Labour members standing shoulder to shoulder with the strikers outside the Parliament, they should be face to face with people across Scotland, apologising for the £5 billion annual raid on private sector and occupational pension schemes, which reduced the tax value of those funds by more than £100 billion. I move, That the Parliament recognises the very valuable contribution that the public sector makes to the economy and society; accepts that, while government has an obligation to ensure that public sector employees are well rewarded with good quality pension schemes, there is an urgent need for reform, believing that the proposed reforms will ease the burden on taxpayers and still leave public sector employees in a far better position than their counterparts in many private sector schemes, and further believes that the planned strikes by the unions on 30 November 2011 are a deeply irresponsible action at this time and will do nothing to help Scotland’s recovery from the recession.

Will the member give way?

Given that the Government recognises the need for the long-term reform of public sector pensions, does the minister agree that they are not sustainable?

I put it to Mr Brodie that, in the 1970s and 1980s, it was impossible to gauge the lifespan of oil fields given the price of oil at that time. More marginal fields have now come into production because of the high price of oil. Does he agree that such estimates are more accurate now than they were then?

I thank the health secretary for her kind words. I know that Jackson Carlaw will be a great asset to the health debate in Scotland and I am sure that he is looking forward to coming back to health. Although I am leaving health, I certainly do not intend to leave some issues, such as mental health and care of the elderly. I am not quite sure whether I will feel as passionate about carbon capture in my new role, but I certainly do not intend to leave the issue of mental health. I thank the Labour Party for using its time to discuss the NHS workforce. Plenty of figures have been mentioned this morning, but the one that I cannot forget—and which should be at the back of our mind in everything we do—is the £120 million of interest that this country pays each day on its national debt. Given that, we should all be committed to better-quality and more efficient and effective healthcare that provides the best value for taxpayers’ money. Although, like others, I acknowledge the value, commitment and dedication of our NHS staff, I must recognise a very good point that Hugh Henry made. I, too, find that the complaints that I am getting are coming not just from patients but from the workforce—and from nurses in particular. The Government needs to explain why, of the 3,910 staff that have been lost in the past 21 months as a result of efficiency savings, 1,747 have been nurses and 1,100 administrators. Jackie Baillie also made a good point about the NHS providing services in prisons. That work has only just started, but we need to know what impact it will have on existing NHS service provision. After all, as the prison population amounts to more than 7,000, the move represents a huge increase in responsibility for the health service. We should also consider areas such as mental health, where more staff might be needed. A first-class example of preventative spending, early diagnosis and treatment can, as we know, prevent mild depression from becoming severe, chronic and enduring. That is why I was so shocked and disappointed by the response to a recent freedom of information request that I submitted recently, which revealed that children seeking mental health treatment can wait up to 182 weeks—or more than three years—in Tayside and 56 weeks in Glasgow and that, in adult mental health, an individual might have to wait more than two years in Grampian, Tayside and Highland for psychological services. Moreover, many health boards simply did not have the data. Given the increased demand on the mental health workforce to meet waiting times in future, which I welcome, I ask the cabinet secretary to look at whether retraining and redeployment opportunities are being offered to existing staff where appropriate. No one has yet pointed out that, compared with levels when the Parliament was established, the percentage of procedures carried out as day cases has risen by 10 per cent and the number of nurses by 5,000. As a result, we should be concentrating not just on the workforce itself but on what it is doing. In conclusion, I want to quote from the RCN. I do not wish to be flippant but I have to say that I do not remember a time in the past 13 years when the RCN has said that morale is good. Nevertheless, I accept that, as Jackie Baillie pointed out, it is making a comparison with the situation two years ago; indeed, I was going to make the same point in my speech. In its briefing for this debate, the RCN says: “a decision to close a hospital ward may be sound in the context of shifting more care to community settings. However, if the nursing posts from that ward are simply cut, rather than transferred to the community, the capacity to deliver increased preventative interventions is lost.” We need more honesty and accuracy with regard to current and future workforce planning in the NHS.

Given that physiotherapy will be one of the main focuses of the debate, I point out that, according to the response to a freedom of information request that I submitted two years ago, 20,000 people in Scotland were on the waiting list for that treatment. How many are on the waiting list now?

The minister talks about AHPs. Can I assume that he will not be looking at the waiting lists for mental health? Will that be included in his plan?

I welcome the debate and the minister’s commitment to do better and to listen to constructive points. The debate has been so wide ranging that I have found it difficult to know what to include in my summing up. It has been about the social wellbeing of the older population, people with long-term conditions, people who are trying to remain in or return to work after illness, and supporting self-management. I particularly enjoyed the speeches from Jim Eadie and Dennis Robertson, which were measured and made highly constructive points. That is what we were all looking for. Kevin Stewart was the only member to mention the Welfare Reform Bill, but he was right to mention it. It should be a catalyst for provision of better services, better rehabilitation and for giving people the confidence and dignity to get back into work or training when that is appropriate and possible. I can imagine people being placed in the impossible position of being asked to come in to have their benefits reviewed and then being told that they are on a waiting list for a year or 18 months to see a psychiatrist. We should be discussing that. Much has been said about the change fund. Whether the amount is £80 million, £120 million, £50 million or whatever, I welcome the change fund. However, I am one of the starters in the Parliament from 1999, when we on the Health and Community Care Committee said, “Why don’t social work services and the NHS talk to each other?” I am sorry to say that it is sad that, in the Parliament’s 13th year, we are now dedicating millions to trying to get those services to work together. Nonetheless, I welcome the fund and I hope that the action will work this time. I will mention another issue that I find sad, after listening to other members—Rhoda Grant, in particular. She and I represent the Highlands and Islands. In the past week, I have had about three phone calls from people who have constant battles to get the care packages for which they were assessed. They are exhausted and are phoning here and there. I feel embarrassed about that, because much of my time in Parliament has been spent on health issues. What we hear in Parliament often does not reflect people’s experience, particularly in Orkney and Highland. Last week, I had a bad case that I could do nothing about, but I went to Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland, which I am pleased to say responded excellently.

I will not, just now. Orkney and the Highlands are two areas where integration should be working. We are right to expect more. I welcome the minister’s national delivery plan. We constantly discuss health issues and strategies, but we need to do more to focus on the devastating impact on families of long-term illness, disability and inability to work. My colleague Nanette Milne gave a clear overview of her experience, which was most welcome. As I said earlier, I made an FOI request in 2009 that revealed that more than 20,000 people were on waiting lists to see a physiotherapist. A person who is on a waiting list to see a physio for more than three months is much less likely ever to return to work. The figure that I received was an underestimate, because many health boards had incomplete figures. There is no doubt that physiotherapy input and advice at the right time keep people in work and help people to return to work. We have spoken often about telehealth. I agree again with Kevin Stewart—telehealth has tremendous potential. When the issue was raised with the cabinet secretary at this week’s Health and Sport Committee meeting, she gave us a positive response, but we need to move forward. We have undertaken many successful pilots, but somehow they have not been rolled out. Telehealth can be used to deal with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and diabetes, and for cardiac and stroke monitoring and managing depression. I commend NHS 24’s cognitive behavioural therapy service. Many people in the Highlands do not want to go to meetings, give up work, travel to Inverness or be an in-patient in a psychiatric unit. CBT helps them to understand the triggers that cause their depression and to have the self-management and coping mechanisms that will keep them on an even keel, which is phenomenal. That initiative is welcome. I hope that it will be rolled out and that people will be given more opportunity to access it. Tonight, I will have a reception in the garden lobby, which 76 chiropractors will attend. It is odd that, although chiropractic treatment should be available on the NHS, no GPs refer patients for it. It provides one of the easiest and quickest ways for many people to be without pain and get back to work. I hope that the minister will take that point in the constructive way in which it was made. I do not have time to talk about chiropody or podiatry. Whatever the delayed discharge figures are, I welcome the fact that the target will reduce from six weeks to two weeks. After six weeks in hospital, people can lose their confidence and their independence. Much damage is done in that time, so I welcome the reduction to two weeks.

Given that the charitable, voluntary and independent sectors can provide high-quality respite care at competitive rates, how will the Deputy First Minister ensure that they are given equal access and consideration in the tendering process for respite care?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what assistance is being given to further education colleges to help unemployed people back into work. (S4O-00308)

The Welfare Reform Bill provides opportunities for support to get people back into work. Has the minister met the two main contractors who will deliver the programme in Scotland, Ingeus Deloitte and Working Links, to ensure that our further education colleges are given every opportunity to provide employability and training programmes for people who are currently unemployed?

Where is the answer? That was disgusting.

One of the fundamental problems relating to ME-CFS is that research funding still tends to be made available to those who believe that it is a psychological disorder, whereas the World Health Organization and other similarly highly respected organisations now recognise that it is a biological condition. What will the minister do to ensure that research is carried out into the biological rather than psychological causes?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement, given the death in Tomintoul last year, which shocked the local community. If the number of ambulance service call-outs during rest breaks for the 540 staff who signed up to the voluntary scheme in 2010-11 is similar throughout Scotland, as is likely, is there any reason why the average figure—fewer than four times per individual per year—is likely to be an underestimate?

This week, the bill is in the House of Lords. It still faces more amendment in the House of Commons and must come back for a third reading, so we are at the beginning of the process. I hope that it will not be judged on its current form, rather on the one that we have in the end.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The highest rate of housing benefit is currently £2,000 per week and the proposal is to reduce it to £500 per week. I think that that is reasonable.

The Welfare Reform Bill is an extensive piece of legislation that cannot be fully covered in the tight six minutes that I have. Our amendment recognises the need to reform the welfare system, become a fairer society and bring an end to the penalising of hard-working families. Although we can all disagree on the detail, I would have thought that every responsible parliamentarian would support the bill’s general principles. It is worth mentioning that the legislative consent motion will come to the Health and Sport Committee only in seven weeks’ time, before going to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee and another committee, so we are at the start of the process. I cannot understand why the Labour Party is opposed to the reforms, given that spending on working-age welfare rocketed by 50 per cent in real terms under Labour before the recession. A system that was originally designed to support the poorest in society is now trapping them in the very condition that it was supposed to alleviate. In Scotland, almost 500,000 people of working age are on out-of-work benefits. The former Labour pensions secretary Lord John Hutton pointed out, when he undertook his review, that “nine out of 10 people who come on to incapacity benefit expect to get back into work. Yet ... if they have been on incapacity benefit for more than two years, they are more likely to retire or die than ever to get another job.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 24 July 2006; Vol 449, c 621.] The former Labour welfare minister Frank Field is quoted as saying that Labour’s flagship welfare policy was an expensive failure and that it had to be acknowledged that the Government’s new deal and making work pay strategies had failed to get many unemployed people back into work, even at the height of the boom. In The Times on 9 November 2010, James Purnell, Labour’s former Secretary of State for Work and Pensions stated: “the plan to merge many current benefits into one ... is a good reform ... Before I resigned from the Cabinet, I proposed a similar plan to Mr Brown.” I find it astonishing that Labour here in Scotland is opposed to helping people get back to work. The universal credit will be introduced in 2013 with full migration by 2017. The credit combines into one payment jobseekers allowance, housing benefit, child tax credit, working tax credit, income support, and employment and support allowance, making it easier for people to see that they will be consistently and transparently better off for each hour they work and every pound they earn. Surely simplifying the system, removing the bureaucracy and making it easier for people to receive the support that they need has to be a good thing. The personal independence allowance will replace DLA and will introduce a new assessment system to assess individuals more accurately and consistently to determine who will benefit most from additional support. More than two thirds of people on disability living allowance have an indefinite award and are left for years with no reassessment. The current system is a mess of multiple benefits paid at varying rates and is open to widespread abuse. The result of massive error and fraud costs the taxpayer more than £5 billion every year.

I am sorry; I have a very tight six minutes. Given that the maximum housing benefit award has now reached £2,000 a week—I do not think that even any of us here could afford to spend £2,000 a week on accommodation—it is not unreasonable to cap the benefit at £500 a week for couples and £350 for single adults. Most hard-working families could not even dream of renting a property at £2,000 a week. According to the Department for Work and Pensions, on the introduction of the new work capability assessment 36 per cent of people withdrew their claim, deciding themselves that they no longer needed to claim benefits. [Interruption.] Some members may laugh, but this is a responsible debate and I would have hoped that the SNP would take it seriously. Some 39 per cent were considered fit for work, 17 per cent were placed in work-related activity, and 7 per cent were rated unfit to work and given the highest rate of support. Some 37 per cent of claimants appealed, of which 39 per cent were successful, resulting in an overall 14 per cent success rate for appeals.

The member will have his chance; I have just a very short time. Those were the figures on 26 July this year. Following that, the Harrington review was brought forward and many changes are being made to the system, including to take account of fluctuating conditions such as ME, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s and mental health issues. It will no longer be acceptable for the national health service to ignore the 47 per cent of claimants for incapacity benefit who have a mental health problem—everyone who spoke in the debate last week made that point. Another important point is that, under previous work programmes, providers were given 53 per cent of the fee up front to get people into work. Now they get 5 per cent of the fee, and the rest is paid over two years to ensure that the support continues. How can it be right that we ask the unemployed to move from benefit into work when they face losing more than 95p for every additional £1 they earn? As a result of that poverty trap, the poor are being taxed at a rate that far exceeds the wealthy.

I am just finishing. The Welfare Reform Bill is halfway through the Lords. It will then go back to the Commons to be amended. I hope that this Parliament will play a positive role in scrutinising it. I move the amendment in my name, and we also support the very sensible Lib Dem amendment. I move amendment S4M-01008.2, to leave out from first “regrets” to end and insert: “recognises the requirement to reform the welfare system to meet the demand for a fairer society and to bring to an end a system that penalises hard-working families and rewards those who refuse to take on paid employment despite being able to do so; commends the UK Government’s aims to simplify the entire benefits system through the introduction of the universal credit system; commends the UK Government for placing work at the heart of the reforms and for providing ongoing support for those in paid employment, and supports the UK Government in its pursuit of a fairer welfare system.”

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

That is very kind of you. The LCM does not even come to the Health and Sport Committee, which is the lead committee, for another seven weeks. Members will have the opportunity to scrutinise and change things then.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the debate and also the tone of all members’ speeches. We note the cabinet secretary’s commitment to look further into many of the issues that have been raised in the debate. We might disagree on many things, but many members raised concerns about transparency and so on. There is no doubt that huge progress has been made in cancer treatments and recovery rates. Discussions around cancer are now generally about treatment, hair falling out, Maggie’s Centre and getting back to work. No longer do we say, “How long has he got?” Although I acknowledge the progress that has been made on so many of the common cancers, there is undoubtedly still much more to be done on cancers such as pancreatic cancer, melanoma—which Kevin Stewart raised; I was also at the dinner that he mentioned—and cancer of the oesophagus, to name but three. As Murdo Fraser said, 14 treatment requests per million population in Scotland are approved under the individual patient treatment scheme. In comparison, 48 per million population are approved in England under the current system. I commend the work done by the Rarer Cancers Foundation to highlight the needs of people with more exceptional cancers. It was always going to be the case that drugs for the treatment of such cancers would be more expensive, given the lack of economies of scale in production and the smaller patient group for purchasing. The foundation said in its briefing for the debate that it has been contacted by patients in Scotland who have been unable to access treatments that their clinicians wanted to prescribe, which are available through the cancer drugs fund to patients who live in England. Therefore, it is right and proper that we have this debate to flesh out the differences between the two jurisdictions and ensure that patients in Scotland are treated equally and fairly. As the cabinet secretary said, the UK falls behind most European countries on the number of cancer drugs that are prescribed and on the amount of money that is spent on the drugs, according to a report from Cancer Research UK today. We should not just compare ourselves with England. As members said, even if a drug is approved by the Scottish Medicines Consortium, it might not be routinely available in NHS Scotland. As Richard Simpson said, the opinions of local drug and therapeutic committees can vary between the 14 health boards. The Liberal Democrat motion, in Alison McInnes’s name, makes a good point in saying: “nearly a third of NHS boards have no written policy governing exceptional case applications in place and ... NHS boards use variable criteria to assess exceptional case applications”. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary will look further into the matter. The Rarer Cancers Foundation’s reports, “The Scottish Exception? An audit of the progress made in improving access to treatment for people with rarer cancers” and “Exceptional Scotland? An audit of the policies and processes used by NHS boards to determine exceptional prescribing requests for cancer treatment”, showed that a number of treatments that had been applied for via exceptional case requests in Scotland were SMC approved. One or two members said that the individual patient treatment requests system is subject to serious and considerable delay. That is time that cancer patients often do not have. Malcolm Chisholm, Richard Simpson and Mary Fee talked about the need for greater transparency and clearer communication on the rationale for SMC decisions so that patients and clinicians fully understand why certain drugs are not approved for use by the NHS in Scotland. We have a nation of patients who are much better informed, through online information, and who clearly understand why drugs that are recommended in one country are not recommended in another. However, when a drug that the SMC has approved is refused by the local health board drug and therapeutic committee, it is natural that the patient feels that they have been denied something. It is also obvious that these difficult financial times could lead to postcode prescribing in Scotland. For all those reasons, the Conservatives support a £10 million national cancer drugs fund for Scotland. I understand that the cancer drugs fund in England has helped more than 5,000 patients. Mark McDonald made a good point about patients’ quality of life, which is precisely what cancer drugs bring. I remind members that Mike Gray, from Buckie, who lodged a petition on cetuximab, worked until three weeks before his death. On value-based pricing, I note that the Scottish Government is working with the UK Government to ensure that the scheme that is due to be implemented in 2014 will meet the needs of patients in Scotland. I thank all members who spoke in the debate. It is right that we highlight the progress that has been made, but much more can be done and is being done to diagnose and treat cancer. It is right that we continue to examine how we can improve treatment for all people with cancer in Scotland. I support the motion in Murdo Fraser’s name.

I should declare an interest as someone who was a lecturer in economics at the University of Abertay Dundee and Inverness College UHI before I entered the Parliament. I refer to my declaration of interests. I find it difficult to think of schools, colleges and universities as separate entities. I use the example of Inverness College, where I lectured at higher national certificate, higher national diploma and degree level before coming to the Parliament. It has more than 400 people taking highers, 250 of whom are full time and more than 150 of whom are part time. Many highers that are needed for entrance to university are not available in schools but can be done online with a monthly get-together at Inverness College. Pupils from 19 schools from all over the Highlands do highers in that way, so cuts to FE also affect school education. The vocational pathways and skills for work programmes have been up and running at Inverness College for many years. Hundreds of school pupils attend the college for a day every week to try out and receive skills and training in hairdressing, beauty therapy and a range of construction and information technology skills. That, too, is a highly successful partnership with schools to the advantage of pupils. Inverness College teaches many courses to degree level and has PhD research students in many academic spheres, such as rural, marine and environmental studies and tidal energy. It is one of 13 colleges that is not only an FE college but part of the University of the Highlands and Islands, so when we talk about cuts—or, I should say, positive reforms—to further education in Scotland, we are talking about cuts to school education and university education such as masters degrees and doctorates.

The evidence is that the cabinet secretary’s positive reforms—also known as cuts—to colleges such as Inverness College and the other 12 colleges in the University of the Highlands and Islands mean cuts to colleges that offer doctorates. If the money is cut there—

One intervention is enough. The point is that the Government’s funding plans affect schools, universities, our skills base and our ability to help people to get back to work. Jenny Marra mentioned unmeasurable benefits. I found that mature students often came to Inverness College with no confidence and no hope of a career but left with something unmeasurable: a touch of confidence and wellbeing. Colleges provide an opportunity for many individuals to empower themselves, gain skills and get themselves back to work. Their biggest success is often the mature students, who missed out at school and find that college brings out their talents and gives them the opportunities that they did not have. According to a briefing from Scotland’s Colleges, last year colleges turned away 35,000 potential part-time and full-time students because courses were full. That surely highlights the need for more funding and more opportunities. We welcome the Government’s commitment to giving all young people a training or education place but, having turned away 35,000 people last year, how can colleges provide those places with no additional funding—only a significant cut? I ask the cabinet secretary to review that cut. Our colleges will rise to every challenge that the Government sets and are ready to embrace the reform agenda, but they cannot work miracles on a reducing budget.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment has had with the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth regarding using distillery by-products for biofriendly renewable energy. (S4O-00221)

Given that the European Union is only 40 per cent self-sufficient in protein animal feeds, will the cabinet secretary confirm that the Scottish Government has commissioned work to assess the energy efficiency of using distillation by-products such as draff as alternative energy sources? Can he quantify their value as a protein source for the livestock industry?

I very much welcome the dementia strategy, but I do not see alongside it the commitment to training and to ensuring staff awareness and understanding of dementia.

The Scottish Conservatives welcome the publication of the Scottish Government’s consultation document on a new mental health strategy, and we support the motion and the two amendments. I agree with the Scottish Association for Mental Health, which has stated: “Without good mental health, Government strategies on education, poverty, employment and many other areas ... cannot succeed.” The consultation document is very NHS focused, but good mental health is not all about additional legislation or NHS treatments. I therefore hope that the recommendations of the McManus review of 2009 will be looked at again and implemented and not repeated in the consultation process. It is important to consider some figures on mental health, to put the debate into a health and financial context. The latest social and economic costs of mental health issues in Scotland are £10.7 billion, which is nearly one third of the Parliament’s budget. More than one third of GP visits are for mental health issues. In Scotland, 47 per cent of people on incapacity benefit and 50 per cent of looked-after children have a mental health problem. Seventy-nine per cent of people with mental health problems are unemployed and £1 million is lost every day in Scotland as a result of sick leave for mental health reasons. Up to 70 per cent of the prison population has mental health problems. Given that, from next month, the NHS will have responsibility for providing mental health care in prisons, has additional resource been given to the NHS or will the resource for the estimated 5,000 mental health patients who are prisoners be taken from the current NHS budget? Last year, 10.4 per cent of our population aged over 15 took antidepressants daily. This year, the figure is 11.3 per cent. I do not know how many pills they took, but the percentage is up according to the Information Services Division. Surely a review should be carried out of the 75 per cent of people in care homes who are given psychoactive medication daily, not only to reduce the amount of drugs but to ensure that people get the right medicine for their condition. Between 50 and 70 per cent of people who are addicted to drugs taken and alcohol have a mental health problem. Although they do not always get the sympathy that they deserve, their addiction is often a form of self-medication. Between now and 2014, all recipients of incapacity benefit in Scotland will be reassessed to find out whether they are fit or unfit for work. It is reasonable to say that many could be fit for work, but only if they get the right diagnosis and the appropriate care and treatment when they need it and are given the necessary support. Two of the best visits that I have made in the past year were to projects that cost the NHS nothing. They are social enterprises that support people with mental health issues. Rag Tag ’n’ Textiles in Balmacara provides a place for people to discuss their issues and focuses on bringing out creative skills. It successfully produces goods from donated materials such as old Harris tweed jackets, which last for ever, and sells them in its shop. I also praise the project at Redhall walled garden in Edinburgh, which I visited last winter with David McLetchie. The project, which is run by SAMH, brings people out of their homes to work in the garden. Each trainee is given a set of goals, which can be as basic as turning up at 9 o’clock for the first three weeks. For people who have chaotic lifestyles in which night is turned into day and there are no weekends, that gives a structure to their lives. We met trainees at Redhall who spoke of their isolation for years and their worsening condition prior to attending. They were able to talk to people and regain self-respect and confidence. Many people leave Redhall to go into paid employment, and there is a waiting list to join the project. According to Barnardo’s, 70 to 80 per cent of people with mental health problems recover. We always speak about postnatal depression as a temporary problem, but more could be done to empower patients with other mental health issues to believe that they can get better. Also, the workforce need to reinforce a much more positive message. When a Government places waiting targets on one patient group and not another, the resource inevitably follows the targets and leaves the rest to languish. Despite the Government’s new target for psychological therapies for children and adolescents, children still have to wait more than two years to have their target waiting time for mental health services reduced to six months. The consultation document also talks about dementia. As I said when I intervened on the minister, the key to implementation is to train and support the workforce that is working with people who have dementia. Better bereavement counselling is also needed, as is more work with health visitors—I am moving on quickly because I am conscious of the time. Outcome 9 in the document is critical of the reach of mental health services. Surely we should be trying to keep people in work rather than allowing them to become chronically and severely ill, unemployed, depressed and more isolated. That can be done through self-help groups and NHS 24. Outcome 13 says that “change is complex”. A change of attitude from can’t do to can do is not complex and is very cheap.

I—along with other members—am not advocating that everyone should suddenly come off antidepressants, but that people should have a choice of other therapies, which they are asking for, and that they should receive the support and advice that Fiona McLeod has outlined today. I also want prescriptions to be reviewed every three or six months or every year, as many people are on antidepressants for decades.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what safeguards there are to protect national health service staff who raise concerns regarding the quality of care and treatment. (S4O-00177)

According to a recent British Medical Association survey, many staff are unaware of whistleblowing policies. How will the Government ensure that there is better communication and feedback to NHS staff who have raised concerns in the knowledge that there will be no fear of retribution? Will the cabinet secretary ensure that NHS boards report on actions that have been taken in response to concerns that staff have raised?

I thank the Labour Party for giving us this opportunity to debate the procurement of social care services. Given the amount of information that I have on the care of the elderly, I will focus my comments on those care services, in the knowledge that similar procurement and pricing procedures are used for all vulnerable people who are in need of social care. The briefing paper from the Learning Disability Alliance, which Jackie Baillie quoted from, was very interesting. As she said, it highlights the fact that the hourly rates for care at home range from £7.76 in West Lothian to more than £22 in Angus, which is three times more. It also says that, in Highland, the hourly rate is more than £15 per hour, which is £5 more than it is in neighbouring Moray. There is no doubt that there is a postcode lottery for care, and we need to focus on improvement, development and redesign of services to provide long-term value for money and, as important, to raise the quality standards of care. Jackie Baillie said that she has raised those issues for three years. I have been raising the issue of the postcode lottery in relation to care home fees since 1999, and my persistence has not paid off—yet. The postcode lottery with regard to care is true, with 7 per cent of care homes for the elderly in West Dunbartonshire being given the highest grading, compared with 70 per cent in Highland and 69 per cent in Inverclyde. Quality matters—let us not all get caught up with the issue of the costs and the fees. Several councils have no care homes in the weak or unsatisfactory categories, but up to 35 per cent of homes in certain council areas are in those categories. Not only is there disparity between the gradings of care homes, but there are huge differences between the fees of those who self-fund their care and those who do not. As responsible parliamentarians, we need to do something to incentivise people to save for their old age but, with the way that things are at the moment, there is no incentive. I will give a few examples relating to council-run homes, which I obtained through a freedom of information request. In South Lanarkshire, a self-funding client pays £474 a week to be cared for in a council home. That rises to £552 a week in North Lanarkshire, £650 a week in Fife and East Lothian and £843 in Dundee—a difference of £369 between the lowest and the highest mainland councils. The costs of care differ widely, too. They range from £474 in a council-owned and council-run home in Midlothian to more than £900 in one in Angus—a difference of 91 per cent. In the independent and voluntary sector, councils pay £474.16, in agreement with COSLA. For the same quality of care and support, a self-funding client in the same home can pay £950 a week—twice as much. How can it be fair that two people in the same care home receive identical care, with identical quality standards, when one has to pay twice as much as the other is funded? We should ask why councils charge self-funders up to 78 per cent more in one area than in another, and so much more than they pay to fund a place in the independent and voluntary sector. How can there be a difference of 91 per cent in the costs of providing care between one mainland council area and another? There is another postcode lottery in relation to self-funding clients. As they are self-funded they are placed instantly in a care home, while others—through no fault of their own—must wait for funding packages from local authorities and are labelled as bed-blockers, the numbers of whom are rising week by week. That is why we are seeking a review of the charges. There is nothing complex in it: anyone with basic mental arithmetic could compare those figures. In March 2010, there were 39,150 places in care homes for the elderly, with 33,900 residents. In simple terms, we have 5,209 empty beds out there, yet the cost of emergency admissions to our hospitals is one of the largest health budgets. Those homes could be better used for respite care. If we were to concentrate on delivering high standards of care to people in their own homes, there would be many fewer emergency hospital admissions and less need for long-term stays in homes. It need not cost more to improve, develop and redesign services. If a general practitioner and a pharmacist visited a care home more regularly, medication could be reviewed and potentially reduced. With the right skills, knowledge and training, much more effective personalised and appropriate care could be provided. I find it quite upsetting that 75 per cent of elderly people in care homes are on psychoactive drugs, perhaps because they have become agitated in one instance. If our elderly people are constantly on those drugs, we are not serving them well.

I move amendment S4M-00854.1, to insert at end: “and calls on the Scottish Government to review the system of charges for care home places whereby, at present, self-funders pay considerably more than those placed and funded by a local authority.”

The health secretary rightly highlights the need to focus on quality, but for care workers, training to Scottish vocational qualification of level 2 is essential for registration with the Scottish Social Services Council, yet only 50 per cent of staff are currently trained or in training. Will the health secretary review the time period for registration so that it is sooner than 2015 for care home staff and 2019 for care-at-home workers?

I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing the debate and I, too, pay tribute to and welcome the veterans from the Arctic convoys who are in the public gallery this evening. This is an excellent and appropriate issue for members’ business. It is, in many ways, fitting that we discuss the motion this week, when the Prime Minister, David Cameron, has been holding talks in Russia with his counterpart for the first time since 2005. It is thought that more than £200 million of deals have been secured on the visit, creating more than 500 jobs for the UK. That continues the strong relationship between the two countries that was surely cemented back in September 1941, when the now legendary Arctic convoys of world war two began to carry vital supplies to Russia through the ports of Archangel and Murmansk. I commend Rob Gibson for setting up the cross-party group on Russia, of which I am the deputy convener. Three different areas in the Highlands played a part in the success of the missions. I will say more about Loch Ewe later. The merchant ships that delivered the essential materials and armaments during 41 convoys were protected by the Royal Navy, which was based at Scapa Flow, in Orkney, and those escorts were trained at Tobermory, in Mull, by Vice Admiral Gilbert Stephenson. There is no doubt that the protection was required. The Germans often had the advantage of being able to fly from nearby Norway, which was German occupied. As one American account of the voyages remarked: “Sea power was confronting land based air power under the most trying conditions imaginable.” As Rob Gibson was right to highlight, Winston Churchill described the convoys as the most dangerous of the war. The convoys faced severe adverse weather; they navigated through icefields; their magnetic compasses became unreliable; and they faced the hazard of floating mines. All that had to be considered before the threat from German planes and boats whose sole aim was to prevent the vital resources from reaching Russia was thought about. It is not surprising that the human costs were high. A total of 104 merchant ships, 20 Royal Navy ships, a submarine and two armed whalers were lost, but the human lives that were cut short are what we remember today. Nearly 3,000 seamen made the ultimate sacrifice—they lost their lives in the pursuit of beating fascism and bringing hope to the people of Russia. The Russian war historian and writer Oleg Rzheshevsky noted: “The moral aspect of the Arctic Convoys meant a lot. This was an extremely important factor both for the army and for all our people as it signalled that we were not alone in that war but had strong allies” in “Britain and the United States. This helped boost our troop morale on the battlefield and supported our people on the home front.” We move to the present day and the bold efforts to raise £500,000 to create the Russian Arctic convoy museum in Wester Ross as a permanent reminder of the heroic efforts of many brave men and in recognition of the area around Loch Ewe that made much of the activity possible. When Loch Ewe was chosen as an assembly point and commissioned as HMS Helicon in June 1941, that picturesque area of Wester Ross began a long history. That history will be secured for future generations when the plans for the museum become a reality. It is only right that we do what we can to support the plans and to ensure that first-hand accounts of crossings are not lost through time and that the efforts are never forgotten. Rob Gibson’s motion is right to support the worthy initiative to establish a museum, but I agree that keeping pressure on the United Kingdom Government to recognise the remaining seamen who undertook these most dangerous missions is equally important. In response to a question at Westminster about plans to honour the veterans, David Cameron said: “it would be good if we could do something more to recognise what they have done.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 12 January 2011; Vol 521, c 284.] I will certainly write to the Prime Minister following the debate. There is no doubt that, whether it be by the people who are establishing a museum, by the Parliament discussing the plight of those involved, or by the Prime Minister considering whether to create a special medal for veterans of the Arctic convoys, the veterans’ efforts and sacrifices are still recognised, 70 years after they undertook their most dangerous of voyages.

Bringing party politics into the debate is quite disrespectful. The member who lodged the motion was courteous and respectful of those in the gallery. Annabelle Ewing should reflect on her partisan approach.

Given John Finnie’s position as the secretary of the northern branch of the Scottish Police Federation in recent years, can he tell us whether the 93 per cent of officers in Northern Constabulary who voted against a single police force were wrong?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way now?

Will the member give way?

Is the member saying that he supports the continuation of the £180 billion structural deficit at the UK level and the payment of £120 million in interest every day?

On behalf of Scottish Conservatives, unionists, progressives and Tories, I particularly welcome the Government’s bill on self-directed support. It used to be called direct payments and was supported by all parties in the first session of the Parliament, with the formation and dissolution of Direct Payments Scotland. I welcome carers being in the driving seat. That will give them freedom and choice over the provision of care and respite and will help to ensure that they get care time in line with the assessment of need. The bill will break the stranglehold of local authority monopoly provision of care and I hope that it will drive up standards. My concern is about the quality of care and how carers can decide on what is and is not a good service. That concern is based on the fact that the registration of support workers for care-at-home services does not even start until 2017, with full achievement of registration by 2020. The Scottish Social Services Council was set up by Parliament and became operational in 2001. It will be 19 years from the set-up of the organisation before all support workers for care at home are fully trained, skilled, experienced and capable of registration. That is in no part the fault of carers who carry out their duties daily, often without the full support and training that they need from their employers for this important job. I ask the Government whether it will review the registration process, which is inextricably linked to training, with a view to reducing the registration period, and I ask it to incentivise employers to train fully and support their staff to undertake the tasks and duties that they are asked to carry out. We would not accept a teacher being unqualified and not registered with the General Teaching Council for 19 years, nor would we have a doctor practising medicine without registration with the General Medical Council, so why should we allow untrained, unqualified and inexperienced carers to look after our older people in Scotland? For care homes, support workers have to register by 2015—that is still four years off. I think that all MSPs would agree that most of the bad practice in recent years has highlighted the lack of training and support given to staff, and the self-directed support bill will be successful only if carers can choose from a pool of staff who they know are trained and equipped for the job now, not in eight years’ time. If elderly people were better cared for in their own homes, there would be fewer emergency admissions to hospital and much less need for long stays in care homes. My second point is on the mental health bill that was promised in the SNP manifesto. Where is it? My third point is on the minimum unit pricing for alcohol bill. The proposals in the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill led to many questions and excellent scrutiny by the Health and Sport Committee in the previous session of Parliament. I assume that further research will be brought forward to accompany the new bill on minimum unit pricing. I also assume that the Scottish Government will now have the answers to questions on internet sales, which is the fastest-growing market for alcohol, and on how to address cross-border sales. I trust that the Government has also done further work on the income elasticity and cross-elasticity of demand and has conducted an examination of binge drinking. That information was not available with the previous bill—I assume that it will be available now.

The Parliament’s having the opportunity to pass legislation depends on every parliamentarian being fully informed. Many questions were asked during consideration of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill and it is the responsibility of any Government, whether minority or majority, to bring forward that information. Then there is the legal case. Given the importance of the minimum unit pricing bill in relation to European Commission treaty rules on the free movement of goods, it is my understanding that a full range of alternative measures, including taxation, that might have the same public health impact, but which might be less restrictive to intra-Community trade, must be pursued before a measure such as minimum unit pricing can be deemed legal to address public health. I trust that the Government will give the Parliament the full list of public health measures that it has pursued since 2007 before resorting to minimum unit pricing, which will be needed if the bill is to be considered compliant with EU law. Please can we have that information now? The most high-profile piece of proposed legislation in this parliamentary session will probably be the referendum bill. After 77 years of campaigning for an independent Scotland, we now have a pick’n’mix option that involves neither independence nor leaving the current arrangement alone. As regards shared defence bases, why would any UK Government share bases with an SNP-controlled independent Scotland when that party is anti-nuclear, anti-NATO and has opposed every war and defence strategy for 30 years? “Unpardonable folly” was the phrase that Alex Salmond used to describe our humanitarian intervention in Kosovo to stop Milosevic’s brutal ethnic cleansing.

Given the lack of commitment in the past by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care to following up problems that were identified in care home inspections, I ask the health secretary whether all reports and follow-up reports by SCSWIS can be reported electronically to constituency and regional members within seven days to ensure that all members of the Parliament have the same information on care homes as we currently receive for school inspections.

I thank the Labour Party for using its time to debate this topic and I commend Jackie Baillie for her well-considered and measured speech. An estimated £4.5 billion—14 per cent of the Scottish budget—is currently spent every year on care for older people. With a projected increase of 84 per cent in the number of people aged over 75 in the period to 2033, that figure is likely almost to double. We therefore need to plan services and support for older people in a much more co-ordinated and proactive way than the current system, which tends more towards crisis management. As Jim Eadie said in his maiden speech yesterday, the starting point must be the £1.4 billion—a third of that budget—that is spent on emergency admissions to acute hospitals at an average cost of £3,349 per week. The 943 care homes in Scotland provide more than 39,000 places, but there can regularly be up to 5,000 empty places in them. Each place costs around £500 a week to the public purse, which is £2,800 cheaper than an acute bed. Given the fact that those care homes are able to provide the appropriate care, tailored to the person’s needs following hospital treatment, surely that resource could be more fully utilised to benefit patients and taxpayers. In talking about care homes and SCSWIS, we should remember that there are good and bad providers in both the private and public sectors. The old days of “public good, private bad” are long gone—one has only to read the care commission’s reports to see that. I hope that the fact that 85 per cent of care homes are in the independent and voluntary sectors will not present an ideological barrier to placing elderly people in high-quality appropriate care. For years, we have heard that elderly people become more dependent and less mobile the longer they stay in hospital and, as we all know, they often fall into the delayed-discharge category. Care homes could also provide more day care, respite care and home care. They have the knowledge and the management skills as well as the facilities to do so. Now that the cabinet secretary has personally taken charge of elderly care—which I welcome—I ask her to investigate the fees that are paid by councils for placing people in council homes, which can be up to 80 per cent more than the fees that are paid in the voluntary and independent sectors, despite the fact that all care homes must meet the same quality standards that have been set by the care commission. Although we can criticise care homes and care at home, many elderly people are cared for in our NHS. I found it very worrying—I found it very upsetting, actually—to read “Starved of care”, the Mental Welfare Commission’s investigation into the care and treatment of Mrs V at Ninewells hospital in Dundee. It begs the question of who inspects and monitors care and treatment in our hospitals. Yesterday, Joe FitzPatrick seemed to think that because we have a dementia strategy everything is going to be all right. Surely we do not need strategies, actions plans and legislation to get nurses to feed patients. That is all that the woman needed. It is also alarming that the case was only brought to the attention of the Mental Welfare Commission two months after the death of Mrs V, by an independent doctor who was a psychiatrist. That doctor thought that the Mental Welfare Commission had received information about his concerns, yet following the tribunal hearing it had no record of any contact. It was only when the independent doctor took action to send his report to the Mental Welfare Commission in March 2009—to register his concern that Mrs V had experienced distress and agitation as a result of being prevented from eating—that the investigation took place. The response to her agitation and distress at being starved was, instead of giving her nutrition, to give her sedation. This is our national health service. If this lady could be so badly treated and the case could come to light only due to one independent doctor’s diligence and conscience, how many more elderly people are starved of care and nutrition in our national health service? How do we all know that our parents—indeed, ourselves, one day—will be cared for, fed and treated with respect and dignity not only in the care home sector, but in our national health service? One of the main problems for older people is loneliness, with families being dispersed and older people being unable to go out alone. That is why I cannot understand why when councils—in particular, Highland Council—look for cuts, the first place they go to is day centres, which are a lifeline for many people. Regarding the motion and amendments, we will support the Government’s amendment, but we will not support Labour’s motion. We all supported the merger of the Social Work Inspection Agency and the care commission under the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 because we knew that there would be efficiency savings. I do not know whether the 25 per cent is a reduction in duplication, and that is why we will not support Labour’s motion. I move amendment S4M-00234.1, to leave out from first “believes” to end and insert: “notes the criticisms of the community health partnerships identified in the Audit Scotland report, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward a comprehensive strategy to support older people that will include plans for the integration of health and social care and proposals for better utilisation of existing care home capacity in the independent sector.”

When the Social Work Inspection Agency made recommendations to raise standards in councils, it always followed them up a year or two later. The Care Commission made recommendations, but it never followed them up. Will the minister ensure that recommendations are followed up now that those bodies are merged in SCSWIS?

I am listening carefully to what the cabinet secretary is saying, but I have also been reading the report “Review of Community Health Partnerships”, which was published by Audit Scotland last week. It shows that 30 out of 36 community health partnerships have seen an increase in multiple emergency admissions for older people for long-term chronic conditions. That seems to contradict what the cabinet secretary is saying.

I agreed with much that Nicola Sturgeon said, and I agree that we still face serious challenges. I am delighted that she will continue in the health portfolio for the next five years. I also agreed with Jackie Baillie when she associated the word “challenging” with Michael Matheson. I hope that he will take up that challenge and apply it to his new public health portfolio. Murdo Fraser spoke about better workforce planning. That is an important issue of which Nanette Milne constantly reminds us. I remind the chamber that we have a highly trained and skilled workforce that we never use—chiropractors. Not one NHS board in Scotland refers patients to chiropractors, despite the benefits that they bring. I commend Jim Eadie, Colin Keir, Richard Lyle and Margaret McDougall for making excellent maiden speeches. I also commend my colleague Ruth Davidson for making an excellent speech on mental health. It is wonderful to hear a new recruit speak so passionately on that issue. The health budget accounts for one third of the devolved Scottish budget. In its report “Financial overview of the NHS in Scotland 2009/10”, Audit Scotland discussed the significant planned efficiency savings in the NHS, but it did so before looking more closely at the 36 community health partnerships. That additional layer of bureaucracy was intended to make closer working relationships between GPs, social services and the NHS. However, seven years later, all the main parties that are represented in the Parliament are committed in some way to integrating social care and health budgets because CHPs have not succeeded in doing the job that they were set up to do. As NHS boards look for more efficiency savings while protecting front-line services, surely the starting point is the information on budgets and staffing that many CHPs were unable to give to Audit Scotland. It is a shocking fact that, according to paragraph 84 of the Audit Scotland report on CHPs, “Not all CHPs know their management and administration costs”. Community health partnerships were also tasked with reducing the number of emergency admissions—the cabinet secretary mentioned the issue earlier, and there will be more on it tomorrow—of older people to hospital, with greater emphasis on community care. Instead, the number of emergency admissions is rising. Money has also been invested in GP contracts to improve services for people with long-term conditions, yet the number of multiple emergency admissions for older people is rising in 30 out of 36 CHPs. In the previous session, the Scottish Government talked a lot about narrowing the inequalities gap; one or two SNP speakers have mentioned that. However, according to paragraph 106 of the Audit Scotland report on CHPs, the health inequalities gap is widening, including in relation to deaths from coronary heart disease. There are serious challenges, but the record that I have set out is hardly a ringing endorsement of SNP management over the past four years. As Alison McInnes said, against a challenging financial background, surely spend-to-save policies make most sense. Mental health, care of the elderly and tackling obesity are three areas that fall into that category. In the time that I have left, I will focus on obesity. About 1 million Scottish people are classed as obese, with a body mass index—BMI—over 30 and waists over 35 inches for women or 40 inches for men. The direct NHS costs that were attributable to obesity in 2010 came to £175 million. Seventy per cent of obese people suffer co-morbidities such as type 2 diabetes, cancer and heart disease, not to mention other illnesses such as sleep apnoea. Even the best treatments are not successful for every patient. The 100,000 Scots with a BMI over 35 and with co-morbidities undoubtedly need more radical treatment, as is stated in Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline 115, “Management of Obesity”. Paragraph 14.7 states: “Bariatric surgery should be considered on an individual case basis following assessment of risk/benefit in patients” with “BMI =35 kg/m2” and the “presence of one or more severe comorbidities which are expected to improve significantly with weight reduction (eg severe mobility problems, arthritis, type 2 diabetes).” Given the cost effectiveness of bariatric surgery and the fact that thousands of Scots are willing and able to undergo surgery and would benefit from it, why is it only offered to fewer than 200 people in Scotland each year? Such surgery would reduce the need for people in Scotland to go to Europe for surgery, in particular to eastern European countries where there is none of the essential follow-up care. On average, patients lose 58 per cent of their excess weight following bariatric surgery. That, in turn, benefits the treatment of diabetes, sleep apnoea, heart conditions, circulation problems and other conditions.

My final question is—I have 14 seconds left—to ask that, instead of spending £175 million on treatment of obesity, can some of that resource be used instead for surgery to ameliorate the various conditions that I have discussed?

This is the first time that I have spoken in a renewable energy debate, despite the fact that my son is a project manager on a wind farm that is being built between Keith and Dufftown. In his statement on taking Scotland forward, the First Minister said that renewable energy was a growth sector. As Fergus Ewing made clear this morning, that is undoubtedly true. The Scottish Conservatives, too, would like Scotland to lead the world in onshore and offshore renewable energy and to make much needed progress on marine energy. However, although there is no doubt that renewable energy will create wealth and jobs, our current and future projections will have to be realistic. Various speakers in the debate have referred to turbine manufacturers and other manufacturers setting up in Scotland. However, the truth is that about 70 per cent of the money for wind farms goes abroad for the manufacture of turbines and towers. For an average £50 million wind farm, £35 million goes out of Scotland and the remaining 30 per cent is used for civil engineering, electrical work and cables. When the Government talks about multimillion pound wind farms, we should be mindful that at the present time 70 per cent of the value of those multimillion pound projects goes out of the country. For that reason, I very much welcome Kenny Gibson and others talking about the setting up of production facilities in Scotland. My second point is that the First Minister and others constantly remind us of the jobs to be created. Yes, there are probably about 40 to 50 jobs for about two years in an average 50MW wind farm project. However, when all the contractors have moved off site, about two or three full-time staff are left long term, and technicians are called in for maintenance or breakdowns. There is therefore a lot of employment in the short term but not long-term jobs. Wind farms certainly generate energy, but they are not huge generators of long-term jobs. My third point relates to the grid connections. Many years ago when we were up the road in the old Parliament building, I met representatives from Scottish and Southern Energy, as I am sure John Swinney and others did, to be briefed on the proposed Beauly to Denny transmission line upgrade. Over a decade later, following a year-long public inquiry, it seems that very little has changed. The people around Beauly still come to my surgeries and ask whether there is any chance of undergrounding the cable and why, although there is undergrounding of cables in Perthshire, the visual impact did not seem to be taken into account in the Highlands. Further upgrades are required from the north of Scotland to Beauly to maximise the opportunities for tidal and marine power in the Pentland Firth. I say to ministers that I hope that some of the lessons from the Beauly to Denny upgrade have been learned. I hope, too, that communities will be better informed and consulted to ensure that developers can get the grid connection that they need and that Scotland can be the success that we want it to be in renewables.

I am aware of that, but little cognisance was taken of the community’s desire to underground the cable, despite the area being a huge tourist attraction. Much has been said about the SNP Government’s ambition to produce 100 per cent of energy through renewables. However, in the area that I represent in the Highlands and Islands, the Government’s determination to deliver that target is causing serious concern in local communities—another e-mail came in on that today—who now fear that every application that goes to the Scottish Government will be approved in order to meet ambitious goals and that there will be scant, if any, regard to the views of local communities. Among the communities in the Highlands and Islands that have spoken loudly in this regard is Shetland. Over 3,000 Shetlanders signed a petition about the proposed Viking wind farm for Shetland. The petitioner, Billy Fox, also won a 30 per cent share of the vote in Shetland on 6 May. It is difficult for people to make their voice heard in Shetland when the council owns the land and is the wind farm developer and the planning authority. I congratulate Billy Fox on standing up for the views of the people in Shetland. On other problems that local groups face in this regard, I received an e-mail today that refers to another wind farm application in the Highlands that had an environmental statement that ran to 2,100 pages. Local people had 28 days to read it, understand it and object to or support the application. Statutory consultees such as Highland Council and Scottish Natural Heritage had four months to study the statement. The document was available for viewing by appointment only at Highland Council offices. If that was not convenient, people could buy a copy for £850. That is not the best in consultation.

I am positive about renewables, but let us treat people and communities with the respect that they deserve in the drive towards meeting the target.

I appreciate Rhoda Grant giving way to me. I was critical not of Viking Energy but of its lack of engagement and openness in responding to the local community’s concerns.

The previous debate on chronic pain in the Parliament was secured by Dorothy-Grace Elder in February 2002. Nine years on, now is a good time to take stock of what is a serious issue in our national health service. I welcome Dorothy-Grace Elder to the public gallery. In her inimitable style as an excellent campaigner, she asked that chronic pain be moved up the political agenda. In 2002, she stated: “‘The Highlands and Islands are a disgrace to the NHS’ for lack of specialised services.”—[Official Report, 27 February 2002; c 6746.] In the motion for that debate, she highlighted “the wreckage of many lives through lost jobs, and the loss of millions of pounds to the economy”. It is estimated that 770,800 people in Scotland are affected by chronic pain. Now, nine years later, it is only right to mark the progress that has been made and to highlight how much more can be done. Chronic pain is now acknowledged as a condition in its own right, and not just as a symptom of other problems. In 2009, the first lead clinician in chronic pain, Pete MacKenzie, was appointed. The GRIPS report—“Getting to GRIPS with Chronic Pain in Scotland: Getting Relevant Information on Pain Services”—was published, and a managed clinical network was established in Glasgow. The Royal College of General Practitioners has now appointed Dr Martin Johnson as the clinical lead for chronic pain, starting from 1 April this year. The Scottish pain research community will be launched on 31 March in Dundee, led by Professor Blair Smith, and I understand that more than 100 delegates have already registered for the launch. A chronic pain community website, led by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, will be an information resource both for health professionals and for the public. Finally, there has been a submission for a guideline from the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network this year. People might therefore ask why we need this debate to highlight issues relating to chronic pain, and might ask why, if there has been so much progress, so many people, including adolescents, are being sent to Bath for residential treatment. Why is pain treatment in the national health service still such an issue? The briefing paper provided by the Royal College of General Practitioners for the debate confirms that chronic pain affects around 20 per cent of the population, with about 7 per cent having chronic pain that is severe and disabling. People with chronic pain consult their general practitioner around five times more frequently than those without chronic pain, and chronic pain is a presenting condition in around 22 per cent of GP consultations. A total of 50 per cent of GP visits are for either pain or mental health issues. A study in 2006 found that 25 per cent of people with chronic pain had to give up their jobs, 34 per cent had to change their jobs, and 24 per cent suffered from depression as a result of their pain. A total of 68 per cent of those people said that there were times when their medicines were not adequate to control their pain. Tracking studies in Grampian have shown that the prevalence of chronic pain is increasing year on year, while 78 per cent of patients continued to report pain after four years. I was surprised to learn that, in the United Kingdom, more than twice as many people are affected by chronic pain as are affected by heart disease. That leads to long-term absence from work, costing the UK economy nearly £4 billion and accounting for 180 million lost working days. A rough calculation shows that the cost for Scotland is £370 million, with 18 million lost working days. There can be no better case for a spend-to-save policy than the case for investing in services for chronic pain—with early diagnosis and early intervention. The chronic pain managed clinical network in Glasgow is undoubtedly the best that we have; what we now need is a similar service throughout Scotland—with clear referral pathways from primary care to secondary care pain services, and with access to tertiary services such as spinal-cord stimulators, where those are considered appropriate. I understand that health board funding for referral to secondary and tertiary care is available only in two or three areas. Last week, the cross-party group on chronic pain, of which I am convener, heard from Fiona Townsley—I have permission to use her name—who had an accident in 1997, which was followed by several orthopaedic operations. She was told that nothing else could be done and that she should go home and get on with her life. She could not use her arm; she lived on benefits and she lived on painkillers. In her words, she was “trying to get through life but wishing it was all over.” She eventually got referred to Dr Pete MacKenzie, who changed her life. The spinal-cord stimulator was used in 2007, and Fiona is now not only back in full-time employment but in a management position. I accept that spinal-cord stimulators may not be the answer for everyone, but I am concerned that the number of those procedures available is limited both at Ninewells in Dundee and in Glasgow. How can patients across Scotland be referred for this procedure and other procedures when we do not have a clear referral pathway and we have a capped service? If economic growth is our number 1 priority, surely we need to ensure that patients suffering pain are treated appropriately and given the opportunity to stay in work or return to work. Scotland has a reputation for parking people on methadone, antidepressants and, now, painkillers when other options could be tried if patients only got the chance. We need equity of provision. Given the cost of sending people for residential treatment in Bath, my question to the Minister for Public Health and Sport or the equivalent minister who is appointed in May is whether an audit can be done across Scotland to identify how many people could benefit from residential treatment, to determine whether it would be appropriate to have such a service in Scotland. Although I have only skimmed the surface of this important issue, I hope that others will recognise that progress has been made but we still have a patchy, postcode lottery service across Scotland.

I should bring some balance to the debate. Having quoted Dorothy-Grace Elder saying that NHS Highland was a disgrace in 2002, I should also say that we now have a pain service, albeit that it is not as good as it should be. Dr John Macleod, who is based at Caithness general hospital, is showing excellent leadership in developing the service.

I asked for an audit to be carried out across Scotland to see whether we could justify having here in Scotland a specialised service similar to that which exists in Bath.

The royal college and others have said that there is no clear referral pathway in Scotland, apart from through the managed clinical network in Glasgow. Consultants are not likely to know all the patients outwith Glasgow who need secondary or tertiary specialised treatment.

I understand the minister’s response and appreciate what she said at stage 2. None of us would wish to delay funerals, which would be difficult for families. I also appreciate what the minister said about the proposals being costly and complex and having a long run-in period. However, we had 100 years prior to the bill to change practice. This is the first change in 100 years. We have had 12 years of a Scottish Parliament. Perhaps Richard Simpson has a good point. I also have a more general point, on an issue that the Health and Sport Committee has considered over the years. Generally speaking, the national health service is extremely slow to adapt to e-health, telehealth, clinical portals and any other electronic system. I still have to write a letter to my doctor or turn up in person at the surgery in order to get a prescription—something that for many years could have been done electronically. Even the electronic bed management system is operated differently in different health boards. While I have sympathy for Richard Simpson’s point, I understand the minister’s response. When we are faced with legislation in future, surely it is incumbent on the bill team, ministers and all of those who prepare bills to ask themselves, “Can we introduce technology at this point that would make things better now and in future, and that could be utilised to the benefit of all?” My final point is one that I will also mention in my summing up. I am not yet sure that we have secured the provision of full and accurate information on the death certificate, although that is a proposition of the bill. It would be helpful if an electronic system managed to integrate information on hospital-acquired infections, as well as any other information that is useful to future public health planning.

I thank the witnesses, in particular Professor Stewart Fleming and Ishbel Gall, who scrutinised the bill effectively at all stages. I am pleased that we have reached stage 3, at the tail end of the parliamentary session, but I remain uncertain whether the bill will lead to a system that is more robust than the current arrangements and more likely to identify a potential Harold Shipman or even provide us with more information on cause of death, as Professor Fleming said when he gave evidence and as Richard Simpson said in the debate. Although I remain unconvinced by the bill, I am a non-clinical member of the Health and Sport Committee. I am concerned, however, that the two highly experienced doctors on the committee also have reservations about it. The bill has changed radically since it was introduced, as a result of the evidence that the committee heard and the minister’s evidence at the end of stage 1. That demonstrates how poorly the measures on certification of death in the bill as introduced reflected 21st century life, and it calls into question the extent to which the minister and the bill team took on board the written evidence that was submitted during the consultation. The committee heard the same concerns expressed in oral evidence at stage 1. Although up to 1,000 level 2 reviews will be more detailed than is currently the case, level 1 review and certification, which it is alleged will cover up to 25 per cent of deaths, will be significantly less detailed than is currently required. The minister has assured us that the number of level 1 and level 2 reviews can be adjusted up or down and that the matter will be covered in guidance. However, the bill will be passed in the final days of this session of the Parliament. In May we will have new committees with responsibility for health and subordinate legislation, and, perhaps, a new health minister. The members who agree to the statutory instruments that provide for the guidance will likely be unaware of the serious critical written and oral evidence that has been provided and there is the potential for the number of reviews to be adjusted downwards to the unacceptable levels that were provided for in the bill as introduced. We have been given assurances on the two pilots that will take place prior to full implementation. However, given discomfort at a review rate of 4 per cent of death certificates—that is up from the 2 per cent in the bill as introduced—will the minister consider having one of the pilots review 4 per cent and the other review a much higher number, for example 10, 20 or perhaps 30 per cent of certificates? Such an approach would enable the new system to be evaluated and might be better than having two pilots—one in an urban area and one in a rural area—in which the rate would be exactly 4 per cent. Currently, 62 per cent of deaths in Scotland result in cremation. Three doctors check the death certificate in cremation cases, two of whom are not part of the professional practice of the first doctor. After the bill is passed, not three doctors but one doctor will check the death certificate—yet we are told that that is an improvement. How many of the 25 per cent of deaths that are currently referred to the procurator fiscal are subject to medical examination and review? I understand that the number is likely to be low, and clarity on the issue would be helpful. Will the minister respond in writing on that? The Scottish Conservatives will support the bill, given that further changes will be made through guidance. We trust that the reservations that have been expressed throughout the bill’s passage will be taken on board by the Government and whatever Administration is tasked with issuing guidance after the election in May.

Despite Stewart Stevenson’s incredible experience in business, innovation and enterprise throughout Scotland, he seems to think that modern technology is incapable of overcoming all the obstacles and difficulties that he raised. That is the challenge for technology. Someone having more than two or three Christian names—indeed, someone having 11 Christian names, having been named after a football team—should not be used as a reason not to utilise and embrace technology. We need only consider telehealth and e-health, including the advent of clinical portals and electronic bed management, to see the advantages to the NHS of having such instant information and communication. Long-term self-management of many conditions also brings benefit to the NHS and the taxpayer, particularly in these difficult times. There is also the benefit to patients. We have to overcome these difficulties; obstacles cannot be put in the way.

I appreciate that, but I am sure that people around Scotland like Stewart Stevenson, working in an advisory capacity, can keep everyone right. My second point relates to the phone call to the doctor that is referred to on the first page of the supplementary financial memorandum to the bill, which states: “The MR will discuss any concerns with the certifying doctor (or another doctor in the team) by phone and any disagreements will be covered by the same procedure as currently set out in the Bill.” Had a medical reviewer phoned Harold Shipman, he might have said, “Well, she was getting old. She was over 80 and had been failing for a wee while,” and the medical reviewer might just have said, “That’s fine. Cheerio.” Is a phone call to the doctor who writes the certificate, with no further checks, enough? Having heard two doctors speak in the debate today, I still feel uncomfortable about that. As a list MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I listened with interest to what Jamie Stone said about Kevin McLeod and the devastating impact of his death on his family. I have tried to help in that case and I appreciate what Jamie Stone said. We should all be aware of specific examples that lead to problems with death certification. That takes me on to my next point, which I raised earlier. Sixty-two per cent of people in Scotland are cremated after their death; yet, in the future, only one doctor rather than three will check the death certificates and the evidence will be gone forever. In recent times, bodies have been exhumed and DNA samples have been taken for use in murder cases, et cetera. That is why I still have a level of discomfort about the proposal. I hope that the minister will raise the issue, as I am looking for assurances on the matter. I have been an MSP for 11 years, in which time many people have told me that their mother died of a hospital infection—that she did not die of whatever the certificate said. I welcome the fact that, under the bill, individuals and families will be able to request a review of their mother’s death or whatever. That is a step forward, as that is not possible at the moment. My concern is to ensure that hospital-acquired infections and things that contribute to someone’s death, although they may not be the actual cause of death, are taken into account. I thank Ian McKee for his point about increasing the number of reviews. I also support Rhoda Grant’s proposal that there should be piloting on the islands, where the culture around death is very different.

I am trying to clarify two things. We all know that the cause of death is listed, but I have seen death certificates on which the major contributory factor is noted. That was the point that I was trying to make.

Given that many national health service staff can be absent from work for weeks, months and, in some cases, years—both paid and unpaid absence—will the Government ensure that employment mediation services are available and do all that is possible to get valued staff back to work rather than punish people for raising issues of patient safety?

I just asked whether the Government will ensure that NHS staff who have been off work for months and years are given access to employment mediation services and that staff are not punished for raising issues of patient safety.

Given the benefits of integrated care, will the cabinet secretary ensure that, when health centres and community hospitals are built or refurbished, consideration is given to integrating in one place GP surgeries, ambulance services, social work services and other health services—including those for mental health—when possible?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made regarding discussions between the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities regarding funding of the Elgin and Forres (River Findhorn and Pilmuir) flood alleviation schemes. (S3O-13117)

I, too, apologise for being slightly late today. After the shortfall of funding for the Elgin scheme, Moray Council will be paying back prudential borrowing for the next 40 years. The scheme for the River Findhorn and Pilmuir in Forres seems to have fallen off the radar. The Government decision on the scheme was expected three months ago, but the council is still waiting for any comment or clarity, not only on the scheme but on funding. Will the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth give an assurance that that important scheme for Forres will receive the funding that it needs and that a decision will be announced before dissolution of the Parliament?

Amendment 28 was suggested by the Law Society of Scotland’s mental health and disability committee. It considered that the wording of section 15(4) is too narrow, in that it sets out an obligation only to provide advice and guidance to patients on their rights as contained in the bill by defining “a reference to the rights of patients” under section 15(2) as a reference to rights that exist only under the bill. However, patients have many other significant rights beyond those contained in this bill. As it stands, the bill places no obligation on the patient advice and support service to inform a patient of or provide advice or guidance on those other rights. The restrictive nature and wording of section 15(4) is considered to be a significant weakness in the bill. If the limitation in this section were not removed, any advice that was given could be fundamentally flawed in that it would imply that patients’ only rights are those under the bill. In effect, patients would be deprived of their other rights. There must be an obligation to provide patients with advice and guidance on all rights, whether contained in the bill or set out in other statutes or common law. I acknowledge that the cabinet secretary supports amendment 28.

The health secretary commented on patients’ loyalty to the NHS. That is a good point, but a small minority have a bad experience and often want to provide feedback to ensure that others do not have a similar experience. That should be seen as loyalty rather than complaining. Scottish Conservatives voted against the bill at stage 1, and rightly so. The bill at stage 3 is substantially different and builds on the first patients charter, introduced by the Conservatives in 1990, which was reviewed and updated by the Labour-Lib Dem Scottish Executive 10 years later, in 2000. Now, another decade later, we have a bill at stage 3 that brings patient rights and, indeed, responsibilities into the modern age. It is appropriate to outline our reasons for voting against the bill at stage 1 and to acknowledge the recognition by the Scottish Government that the first bill was not fit for purpose. The bill, as introduced, did not seek to enshrine all rights available to patients and the new rights could not be legally enforced. At stage 2, that changed to a patient rights charter, along the lines of the Conservative charter in 1990. The bill as introduced talked about a duty on NHS bodies “to have regard to certain rights and principles”. I lodged an amendment at stage 2 to change that to a duty to uphold health care principles. It was agreed to unanimously. As Richard Simpson said, there was a focus on complaints as the only means of feedback and communication. Many patients and families do not want to go down the road of complaining. That has changed to a more positive approach focusing on feedback, comments, concerns and, if necessary, complaints. There is undoubtedly a need to have a more open and accessible system of patient feedback and to handle patient concerns in a sensitive and supportive manner. Like others, Conservatives did not want a charter for lawyers that set out new rights that were not legally enforceable. The patients charter will address all those issues in a more modern and effective manner. The committee—or should I say Dr Richard Simpson—ensured that patient responsibilities as well as rights were included in the charter. That is only right. We were, and remain, concerned that the treatment time guarantee will skew clinical priorities, but I accept the health secretary’s amendment to ensure that the clinical needs of all patients are taken into account and hope that it will address the issue. The committee was unanimous in supporting that measure. However, despite the new health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment target for psychological therapies for 2014, I remain concerned that mental health services will remain the Cinderella of the NHS, given that resources will continue to be focused on meeting the treatment time guarantee. In the stage 1 report, the committee concluded that “a majority of the Committee is not persuaded by the evidence which has been advanced to date, that primary legislation is the most appropriate means of promoting patient rights.” The committee was, therefore, “unable to make a recommendation to the Parliament on the general principles” of the bill. As the health secretary said, what we have before us today has been achieved as a result of excellent committee scrutiny and the health secretary responding to all the concerns that were raised at stage 1 to bring forward a bill and a charter that are fit for a modern NHS and which are built on respect and dignity for patients, and better communications and working relationships between patients and the NHS. I appreciate that we have been on a journey, but I am pleased to say that the Scottish Conservatives will support this much improved bill.

Is the Cabinet Secretary for Justice satisfied with the response from Damian Green, the Minister of State for Immigration? In particular, is he not satisfied that the Prime Minister has undertaken to assess the effectiveness of the new arrangements that the cabinet secretary has been talking about at the end of February 2011, which is next week?

Some weeks ago, I spoke in the debate on the Equal Opportunities Committee’s excellent report on issues relating to the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. Today, we are debating an equally excellent report on migration and trafficking. Having read through the report’s main conclusions and recommendations, I was tempted to say that a lot of ground had been covered but that, despite the holding of 11 meetings on the subject and the fact that the report runs to 700 paragraphs, it only scratched the surface and raised more questions than answers. I had not intended to say that myself, in case it was perceived as a negative comment, so I was very pleased to read, when I finally got to paragraph 700, that “the Committee reluctantly recognises that although it has covered a lot of ground in its inquiry, it has only scratched the surface of what are major issues”, and that the inquiry had raised more questions than answers. Like others, I thank Margaret Mitchell and her committee for a substantial piece of work, and I trust that their work will be continued beyond May this year. In that context, I question whether 1 hour 20 minutes is sufficient time to debate such a first-class report. Like Richard Baker, I commend the fresh talent initiative, which the report praises highly. It is always good to know that Scotland can initiate good ideas that can be replicated across the UK. Likewise, I am sure that we can learn from other Governments and devolved Administrations. I do not think that the UK Border Agency is the only organisation in which there is confusion about devolution issues. There could be much-improved working and communication among the Scottish Parliament, the Scottish Government and Westminster on a host of issues across the board. Although the letter from Damian Green, the UK Minister of State for Immigration, came to us only hours before the debate, I was pleased to read that the memorandum of understanding between the Scottish Government and the Home Office “is due for review after the Scotland Bill has been concluded.” We welcome that. Paragraph 134 of the report mentions that migrants from eastern Europe pay 37 per cent more in taxes than they receive in benefits and are more likely to start their own business. I know from one of Scotland’s biggest shortbread manufacturers, which is based in the area that I represent, that if migrant workers were not available to be involved in its production, it would consider moving some production capacity to Poland or even China. The committee was right to raise the issue of language classes. Most migrant workers come here to work. They are not available in the daytime when classes are run and they do not mix so much outwith their own community. Investment in English learning for new migrants could save a huge amount of public money in translation fees. In the past, many professional and highly trained people who have come to the Highlands from Poland and other eastern European countries have had to take jobs that were well below their capability for some considerable time, just to get the opportunity to learn the language. We would all benefit enormously if classes were offered at a time that suited migrants and which did not interfere with daytime work commitments. It is now the case that many eastern European workers use their children to translate. I am sure that members would agree that presenting with symptoms to a general practitioner or to someone else in the national health service can be highly problematic without sufficient language skills. It is worrying that people do not have sufficient language skills, but it is even more worrying that, as the report says, public service and other service providers that advise and support migrant workers may not be fully aware of migrants’ rights and entitlements. I was surprised to read the point that the report makes about the Gangmasters Licensing Authority; I am sure that we all thought that the relevant power already existed in Scotland. Finally, paragraph 664 states that Scotland could be seen as a soft touch for traffickers because of the lack of prosecutions. None of us would want that to be the case. I highly commend the report.

In its 2009 report on child and adolescent mental health services, the Health and Sport Committee twice asked for urgent action to introduce regular health and development checks. The Government has brought in one additional health check at 24 months. Despite all the teamwork, still nothing is in place for development checks in the three years pre-school.

Will the member give way?

Does Des McNulty agree that although integration and intervention are critical, identification of the child’s need is most critical? He emphasised nursery staff. Does he agree that they need more support, help and training to identify that need?

I commend Des McNulty for his contribution. Not just the content but the tone of his speech was positive and constructive. It is helpful for us to have joint health and education debates. Too often, we talk about those subjects individually; they are not always as integrated as they should be. There is no doubt that early intervention, care, advice and support for parents and children can benefit people so much in later years in terms of good health, positive mental wellbeing, self-esteem and life opportunities. We know that—the evidence base supports it—and yet what we have in Scotland is a muddle of approaches: RONIC pilots combined the role of health visitor, district nurse and school nurse in the new role of community health nurse; the family nurse partnership programme is being piloted in Tayside and Lothian, whereby specially trained family nurses provide intensive support for first-time mothers and their babies in deprived neighbourhoods; some health visitors are still linked with general practitioner surgeries; and some health visitors are now being embedded in social work departments. I called the Royal College of Nursing yesterday, because I was getting a little confused by all those titles. It made it quite clear that health visitors now come under the umbrella of public health nurses, along with occupational health nurses and school nurses. So, when the minister says that we have more public health nurses, that does not necessarily mean that we have more health visitors. The uncertainty over the future of health visiting over the past decade has undoubtedly resulted in low morale, as revealed in the RCN briefing, with most health visitors feeling underpaid, undervalued and under too much pressure at work. We do not have a clear strategy for or approach to a clearly defined role for health visitors. The Government’s modernising community nursing board is due to finish its work by the end of this year—10 years after the generalist model of family health nursing was started. As part of the Health and Sport Committee’s child and adolescent mental health services inquiry, we heard about the link between nurseries and health visitors. From my knowledge, in the Highlands, the link is the health visitor’s phone number on the wall, which can be called only if the nursery staff think that a child or parent is in need of a health visitor’s advice or support. There have been occasions when parents have considered that the nursery is interfering by going behind their backs and calling in a health visitor. The current system of leaving it to parents to call a health visitor if they need to see or talk to one simply does not work. If parents do not realise that the child has a problem, the health visitor will not be alerted and they will be unable to offer help and support. The fact is that the parents who are most in need of help and support are, in many cases, the least likely to ask for it. It is not good enough for children not to be seen by a health visitor between their MMR vaccination at 15 months and the pre-school check at five years—that is three years and nine months with no check. I welcome the health check at 24 months, but I would like to know what is involved in it and who will do it. How different this could all be if a universal health visiting service was established with standard health and development checks on every child at crucial stages in the early years. That is precisely what the Health and Sport Committee recommended two years ago, but the minister’s response to the committee’s report was disappointing, and I think that the response today is still disappointing. We understand and acknowledge that some parents need much more health visitor input and support, but that should not detract from a basic, universal health service. In the same report two years ago, the Health and Sport Committee called for urgent action to address “the problems provoked by changes to the health visiting profession in response to the fourth edition of Health for All Children”. I am not aware that the Government has attached any sense of urgency to the issue. The Government publication “Towards a Mentally Flourishing Scotland: Policy and Action Plan 2009-2011” does not even mention nursery staff. That said, I am aware that in Moray Council, at least, nursery staff are attending courses on the identification of development and mental health issues. I would like to think that that is happening throughout Scotland ahead of all staff in pre-school education registering with the Scottish Social Services Council in 2014. However, given that the Scottish Social Services Council was set up in 2002-03, it will have taken 10 years for nursery staff to be required to be registered, trained and qualified. I understand that they will be the last profession in the social services workforce in Scotland to be registered. That says something about the emphasis that we place on pre-school provision. Furthermore, I understand that the registration will be subject to staff holding certain qualifications or gaining them within three years of registering, which will take us to 2017. Even with a universal health visiting service and interventions, there will still be a need for better trained staff in pre-school education to help to identify general and mental health as well as development issues in all children. I listened carefully to what Adam Ingram said about GIRFEC and all the rest. I looked at the publication “Early Years Framework: Progress So Far”, and the section on the workforce states: “By early 2011 this Group”— that is, the common skills working group— “will have agreed a draft common core skill-set for the workforce and will enter a period of consultation.” I do not see any urgency there. The evidence from Dr—

Right. Finally, I will say that health visiting is a non-stigmatising service. It is a positive input and approach to the family unit, unlike social work, which can be perceived as a threat or an accusation. If we all work together, we can do more.

Does the member accept any responsibility on behalf of the Labour Party for the huge mega-billion-pound debts that that party has left the Conservatives to deal with?

I welcome the 26 per cent increase in the number of psychologists and I agree about the need for the right care and treatment. What is the Government doing to identify at the earliest possible stage children who need specialist child and adolescent mental health services?

Given that we look for high-quality services and best value for taxpayers’ money, will the cabinet secretary discuss and review with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities council funding to council care homes, which can be up to 80 per cent more than that for care home placements in the independent and voluntary sectors? Dealing with that would enable what is a fixed budget to finance more care home places and help to reduce the number of delayed discharges.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what the planned growth in student numbers in further education is for 2010-11. (S3O-12825) Of course, it should be 2011-12.

Given the potential increase in student numbers at Inverness College at the new Beechwood campus, I ask the minister for a commitment that the Government funding will be put in place urgently in order to take advantage of the European Union money that is currently available, and also to ensure that the new Beechwood college campus will be ready by 2014.

I appreciate the timetable for dissolution in March, but in my view it is not good practice when committee members and those who are speaking in the debate do not get an opportunity to see or hear the Government’s response to the committee’s stage 1 report until the minister speaks at the start of the debate. That system might suit the Government, it might suit our timetable and it might suit officials, but it certainly does not enhance the democratic process or the debate. When the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill came to the Health and Sport Committee for scrutiny I thought that it would be uncontentious, that it would probably be fairly technical and that it was likely to pass all stages without hitches or criticisms. I could not have been more wrong. The policy memorandum cites the “need to examine the processes governing death certification following the inquiry into the case of Dr Harold Shipman.” At the very least, I expected proposals for a more robust system of death certification than is currently in place. It is only right to put on record that it was funeral directors who raised concerns about the deaths of elderly people under Dr Shipman’s care. Professor Stewart Fleming from Dundee stated with regard to the bill: “I am not convinced that it will necessarily improve accuracy on the medical causes of death. I am even less convinced that unnatural deaths will be identified as a result of it.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 1 December 2010; c 3750.] He said that, under the proposals, a doctor would be checked on every five to 10 years. Ishbel Gall expressed her concerns about a body not being examined by even one doctor before the medical certificate of cause of death was issued. The National Association of Funeral Directors said that the bill, as introduced, would mean that the system would be not nearly as robust as the one that we have in place at present, and that it would be nowhere near as robust as the system in England and Wales. Given that the certification of death sets out to confirm the fact of death, to confirm the cause of death for input into health care planning, and to detect and investigate unnatural death, the concerns that were raised in evidence are very worrying indeed. When I asked Professor Fleming whether there would be more accurate information on the death certificate as a result of the bill, his response was “I do not believe so”. There will be no improved input into health care planning. That is well outlined in the Health Committee’s stage 1 report. The committee welcomed the increase in the sample size for review to 4 per cent, but that falls well short of the 10 per cent that is said to be necessary if there is to be a realistic chance of errors being identified. I acknowledge the points that the minister made today, but there is a lack of experience and training. That and other issues were well covered by Dr Simpson; I have no doubt that we will return to them. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am concerned that there seems to be very little comprehension of the difficulties that are faced by remote and island communities, which could lead to potential delays in certification and review. Other issues that were raised in the committee’s stage 1 report relate to organ donation and bodies that have been donated for medical research. The minister addressed some of the concerns that were raised by the Association of Anatomical Pathology Technology, but the association still states its concern that there will be less scrutiny than there is at present when the deceased is to be cremated. With 62 per cent of deceased persons being cremated, that is a notable concern. Given the large number of cremations, there does not seem to be a system of identifying and removing implanted devices such as cardiac pacemakers, which must be removed prior to cremation. Currently many of those devices are discovered after the MCCD is issued by the second medical practitioner after reading the medical records or examining the deceased. The Scottish Pathology Network still contends that the new death certificate should bear two signatures for level 1 reviews, and it notes that the level 2 reviews are still considered to be too low. I will reflect on the minister’s statements today and I am sure that many of the witnesses will keep a watchful eye on the bill. In this age of technology, it is quite ridiculous that the idea of using electronic death certificates was first raised by Richard Simpson. That is a reflection of the poor standard of the bill. I hope that the Government has heard all the significant criticisms and that it will respond to them with amendments at stage 2 and stage 3. We support the general principles of the bill, while acknowledging that the Government and the bill team still have much work to do.

I thank Rhoda Grant for securing a debate on a Highland issue that affects many people. I also take this opportunity to commend Maureen Macmillan, one of our former MSPs, on her role as chairman of Highland Community Care Forum, and Caroline Thomson—who is in the gallery tonight—who is the ex-chairman of NHS Highland and is now the vice-chair of the forum. There is no doubt that local forums and all voluntary sector organisations need experienced leadership and a thoroughly professional approach. Between 1999 and 2003—the first parliamentary session—several local service users contacted me to ask how the Highland Community Care Forum was being used to provide front-line services such as carers and support. I wrote to Highland Community Care Forum to ask for that information and I was sent the annual report. My accounting knowledge was not sufficient to find the information that I sought on behalf of my constituents, so I asked one of my former colleagues at Inverness College, who lectured in accounting to degree level, whether he could get the information that I needed. He took the glossy annual report and spent a considerable amount of time searching for the information that constituents asked for, such as what was spent on salaries and what was spent on carers and support. His conclusion was that the information was impossible to find; it just was not there. I remember that experience clearly, and because of it, I welcome the new chairman and vice-chairman, and the approach that is being taken by Highland Council and NHS Highland to tender for services in line with national guidelines, and to focus on outcomes, information and transparency. The Highland Community Care Forum has been built up over 19 years. When I think about my experience, I find it odd that the organisation’s executive director’s briefing states that the forum has been closely monitored for only three years. That is not good enough in this day and age. In difficult financial times, all publicly funded organisations should be accountable for spending taxpayers’ money, particularly given the total value of the current contract of £1.4 million. How many hours of lifeline respite care could be provided for that money? I confess that I was not aware that the Highland Community Care Forum offered advocacy services. I regularly refer constituents and carers to Advocacy Highland—I referred two in January—and I cannot speak highly enough of the manager, Sheilis Mackay, or of Linda Renton and the other staff who carry out their duties in the most professional, sensitive and supportive manner. There is nothing but good feedback from local people who need and value that service. I hope that NHS Highland and Highland Council will also look at those organisations, which are delivering excellent services in these difficult times, to see how they can be supported. It is not good practice to continue funding without focus on outcomes and with no accountability. I am not surprised that the Highland users group, under the excellent stewardship of Graham Morgan, successfully achieves all its obligations within the service delivery contract. As an MSP, I regularly receive updates and reports from HUG, and I recently attended a meeting in the Fishertown day centre for mental health patients in Nairn. The meeting was well attended; we heard from users of the service as well as from staff and council officials. That is support for vulnerable people at its best. When I read about the lunch clubs that HCCF and Age Concern Scotland run in the most remote and rural areas, I wished that I had known about them before, given the unsuccessful struggle that I have had to maintain the lunch club for older people in Kilchoan, at which over-80s are serving other over-80s plates of soup. This week, I received a letter from Fergus Ewing about the threat to the lunch club in Caol, and I totally support him on that. Where is HCCF when those services are being withdrawn? How many lunch clubs does HCCF run, how well are they attended, and what funding is used for the purpose?

I am in my last seconds. Finally, I commend Highland Council and NHS Highland for bringing greater scrutiny and accountability to the funding of local voluntary organisations, and I trust that that will strengthen the Highland Community Care Forum to win contracts, provide services and support vulnerable people in an accountable and transparent manner in the future.

On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I share our sympathies for the passing of Jim Jackson of Alzheimer Scotland, who was a well-kent face in the early days of the Parliament. It is undoubtedly important for the Parliament to debate dementia—we have had Government debates as well as members’ business debates on the subject. The estimated 72,000 people in Scotland with dementia should expect no less. Everyone assumes that dementia is Alzheimer’s, so it is important to make it clear that 62 per cent of people with dementia have Alzheimer’s; 17 per cent have vascular dementia; and 11 per cent have mixed dementias. There are other groups, too. Richard Simpson made a good point about alcohol-related brain damage, which can happen to young people. The Government’s strategy was announced last June, and although it has taken seven months to secure the debate, it is nonetheless welcome. I welcome the information update that the debate has provided and I look forward to the first-year progress report, which is due this June. The Conservatives very much welcome the strategy—there is really nothing to disagree with in it. However, we want better implementation through better training and a better understanding of the condition. The target to increase the number of people with a diagnosis of dementia to 39,500 by March 2011 is welcome, but more important than meeting that target is that each and every person with dementia, and their families and carers, benefit from the diagnosis. We do not want a tick-box approach that says, “You’ve had your diagnosis, hen. Get on with it.” We need to know that people have benefited from better support and care, better training for family carers and paid carers, and better understanding of the condition. I appreciate that time is short and that the minister could not talk about everything, but I welcome what she said about psychoactive medication. We also need to know that hospital discharge is being better planned. It is clear from people at my surgeries that we are not quite there yet in the Highlands. That is a critically important point. In the most recent debate on dementia, in October 2009, Robert Brown and I both raised the issue of the shortage of psychologists for people over 65. That group makes up 20 per cent of the population but gets only 5 per cent of the psychology workforce. Again I ask why. What is being done to ensure that older people get the psychological support that they need? I fully agree about the importance of diagnosing people with dementia, but surely giving them the right support also includes addressing their psychological needs. I understand that there is an excellent clinical psychology rehab service in Glasgow, which works with older people to reduce mental health problems that are preventing their recovery from physical illness or surgery. The service works with patients and provides training, advice and clinical supervision to non-psychology colleagues in hospitals and the community. The service has been able to recognise and overcome psychological problems in older people, which has resulted in quicker recovery for patients and a reduction in the need for aids, adaptations and home care. Surely that is the type of service in which we should be investing. We cannot ignore the fact that behavioural challenges such as wandering and aggression can arise in the care of people with dementia. Those are most often treated with medication, commonly antipsychotics. Although medication is often seen as a quick fix for those problems and in some cases is the most appropriate solution, it does not always address the root cause of the behaviour and can also have problematic side effects. I understand that behavioural management can be an effective alternative in many cases. There is no doubt that investing in more posts in psychology for the elderly can improve outcomes and reduce the impact of depression, anxiety and dementia. Strangely, I could not find any mention of depression or mental wellbeing in the strategy.

Despite those issues being raised in the most recent debate on dementia in 2009, we have fewer psychologists for older people in Scotland now than we had then. I recently visited someone in hospital in Inverness who was very much a country woman—she had lived in the country all her life. She was not allowed to open a window or go outside; she was not allowed fresh air. If we are going to make progress we need to treat people as individuals, not as prisoners.

There have been several debates on the A9 in the three sessions of this Parliament, including two that were secured by John Swinney—in November 2002 and September 2005. It is interesting to look back at the wording, passion and commitment in the debates of Opposition politicians who now hold the reins of Government and have been in the position to fulfil their campaign pledges since May 2007: “I am one of those who has campaigned and will continue to campaign for the full dualling of the A9 to Inverness. Does the minister accept the case in principle? If so, when will it be delivered? Can he specify the year, decade, century or millennium?”—[Official Report, 24 September 2004; c 10056.] That was Fergus Ewing. We now know that the Scottish Government accepts the case to dual the A9 in principle, but the question today is on the timetable, just as it was then. In November 2002, John Swinney said: “I shall argue for the reconstruction of the A9 as a dual carriageway ... I ask the minister not to commit himself to immediate action to dual the A9, but to give a commitment to examine the case for doing so and to consider including the measure in the Government's programme in the short, medium and long term.”—[Official Report, 27 November 2002; c 15574-5, 15777.]

If Mr Swinney will let me finish, I have even more about him—he can make an even better response. In September 2005, Mr Swinney’s comments were even stronger: “What I want the Government to do is to get on with delivering its commitments to the people in my constituency, which is something that it has lamentably failed to do so far.” He continued by asking the minister to “tell Parliament why there has been such an abject failure to deliver on the promises made to my constituents by several Scottish Executive ministers.”—[Official Report, 21 September 2005; c 19312, 19314.] He also sought an assurance of the timescale over 10 or 15 years.

Being a reasonable person, I have already acknowledged that the Government has accepted in principle to dual the A9, but tonight we are looking to hold it to account and for ministers to produce the timetable that Mr Swinney sought so many years ago. In 2005, the now Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism Jim Mather stated: “To deny the Highlands the chance to see the A9 dualled is to limit their potential to converge economically with the rest of Scotland and the United Kingdom.”—[Official Report, 21 September 2005; c 19322.] It is on the basis of the promises and commitments in opposition that today we hold the Government to account. When we move the debate on to November 2007, the then Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change gave an assurance of the Government’s commitment to dual the A9, but there is still no timescale. The motion mentions 11 deaths on the Perth to Inverness section of the A9 but, with respect, I do not think that the headline figure reflects the full horror of accidents on the road—I know that local members will acknowledge that. I have met people who have been involved in crashes on the A9 who never walked again and never worked from the day of their accident. We should not forget the full toll of the accidents by looking only at the fatalities. The A9 death rate from Perth to Inverness averages at double figures over the period from 1979 to date. What we are seeking today is a timescale for upgrading the A9 to dual carriageway. It would also be helpful to look at better signage, particularly for drivers who are not familiar with the road. Are more signs needed to notify drivers of upcoming dual carriageway in order to discourage risky overtaking? For those of us who are familiar with the road, the road leading up to sections of dual carriageway is probably where most drivers take risks, overtaking vehicles in order to position themselves to overtake the lorries and slower-moving vehicles in the short dual carriageway sections. Finally, will the minister explain why taxpayers’ money was used to build an overtaking lane at Moy that, as Murdo Fraser said, was considered to be unsafe due to design flaws after only weeks of use? Does the Government not know how to build roads that are fit for purpose? I thank Murdo Fraser for this debate.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the chairmen of national health service boards. (S3O-12598)

I ask that the NHS 24 evaluation of cognitive behavioural therapy by telephone be discussed at a future meeting, given the recent positive and thorough evaluation of the pilot that cost only £176 for full completion of treatment. That highlights the benefits of addressing depression, particularly for people in remote and rural areas and patients who would not otherwise engage with or complete courses of therapy by conventional methods. Given the long waiting lists for access to psychology and psychiatry, what action will the Government take to ensure that more general practitioners can refer and that individuals can self-refer to the service?

I thank Bob Doris for securing this debate to pay  tribute to Scotland's Irish diaspora. Although the motion relates to Glasgow, there is no doubt that the Irish, and Irish descendants such as me, can be found in every part of Scotland, from the mainland to all the islands. My father was a Campbell from Morayshire and my mother an O'Donnell from Dungloe in County Donegal. They came not only from different countries but from very different religions. I am sorry that Margaret Curran is not in the chamber tonight; her mother and my mother lived very close to each other in Donegal. I will say a quick word on the census. I looked up today the census question and found that one option lumps together English, Welsh, Scottish, Northern Irish and British. Another option is Irish, but there is no option for Scottish Irish, which would be the most accurate in my case. It would also be the most accurate for many people in Scotland. I am not only Irish, but neither am I only English, Welsh, Scottish, Northern Irish or British. It is a bit late to be making a point on the 2011 census, but it is worth mentioning nonetheless. On a recent visit to Dublin for a family wedding, I was struck by just how close Scotland and, indeed, the United Kingdom, is to Ireland in social, economic, historic and cultural terms. Their news is almost as much BBC as it is Irish. They watch all our soaps and many other UK programmes. My mother was brought up speaking not Gaelic but Irish. My family still does. I have many family connections in County Donegal: in Dungloe, Ranafast and Annagry—the last the home of Aiden McGeady. In fact, my family helped to set up the summer school in Ranafast where school children from all over Ireland come to learn their own language. While I was researching for the debate, I found information about the British-Irish Council on its website—information of which I was unaware. The council was set up only six months after the establishment of the Scottish Parliament. Its formal purpose is "to promote the harmonious and mutually beneficial development of the totality of relationships among the peoples of these islands". The Scottish Government is one of eight council members. It would be helpful to have more parliamentary or appropriate committee updates on what is happening in that forum, given that we have so much in common and there would be many benefits in working together. It is also surprising that we discuss so little about Ireland in the Parliament. The areas of mutual interest that were discussed at the British-Irish Council summit that was held on the Isle of Man just last month included digital inclusion, demography issues, early years policy, energy including the electricity grid, marine renewables, the environment, misuse  of drugs, social inclusion and transport issues that relate to disability and concessionary travel. It would be very helpful to have more of that information in our debates; they are all areas are of mutual interest and benefit and of collaborative working and yet I have not heard many updates from successive Governments on the issues. Ireland is respected on economic issues. The Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne, recognised that only last month when, as he said, the Treasury team was working with the International Monetary Fund, G7, the European Union and the Irish Government "to provide the necessary financial resources for Ireland to implement its fiscal reform plans and stabilise its banking system." The reasons that the chancellor gave for providing the £3.25 billion loan to Ireland to implement those plans were more than economic—he said that there is no doubt that it is in our interests to have a stable Irish economy and banking system: "Ireland accounts for 5 per cent of Britain's total exports abroad. Indeed we export more to Ireland than to Brazil, Russia, India and China put together" And that two-fifths of Northern Ireland's exports go to the Republic. I am proud of my mother's links with Donegal and the links between Scotland and Ireland, but more could be done to cultivate the links between and knowledge and understanding of our Parliaments. The fact that so many members of this Parliament, from almost all sides of the chamber, can proudly state their Irish heritage is proof—if proof were needed—of the Irish-Scots influence and seamless integration in this country. I am sure that when my mother arrived at the Broomielaw in the Derry boat in the 1930s she never dreamed that I would stand here and talk about the Scottish-Irish diaspora. I thank Bob Doris again and hope that we can look forward to improving our relations with and links between this Parliament, Stormont and the Dáil.

I point out to Ross Finnie that I was not advocating a second chamber, but noting that post-legislative scrutiny is even more critical in the absence of such a chamber—as, I am sure, he understands. The debate could have been much longer than an hour and 15 minutes, given the Equal Opportunities Committee's excellent work. Issues that have been raised in the debate have not been given the time that they require. I record my appreciation of the excellent work of Advocacy Highland under the stewardship of Sheilis Mackay. I remind members that advocacy does not involve just one visit or meeting. As Hugh O'Donnell said, many people need regular advocacy support if they are to be able to live independently in the community and to cope with the pressures of daily life. I read about the millions of pounds that have been given to local government for advocacy. How can we be sure that the resources that are allocated are used for the intended purpose? The single outcome agreements and the historic concordat, which promised much, are not clear on specific aspects of spending. On children's services, I take the point that Donny Lyons, from the Mental Welfare Commission, made when he said that it can be better for a young person in, for example, Inverness to be briefly admitted to an adult ward to be stabilised. Ian McKee also made that point. However, there is a need for community-based children's services and for on-going support that is  tailored to the needs of the child. That is essential in every health board. The patchiness of provision for children and young people highlights inequalities, as the Health and Sport Committee noted in its report last year on child and adolescent mental health and wellbeing, which Richard Simpson mentioned. The Government's target to halve the number of child and adolescent admissions to adult wards meant that the number of such admissions should have been reduced to 93 in 2009 but, as the Equal Opportunities Committee's report says, the figure for 2009 was 149. The 2003 act is highly regarded internationally, but what matters is not the words of the act, or even the intentions that are set out in the policy memorandum, explanatory notes and statutory instruments, but service users' experiences and the outcomes and benefits that the legislation brings, as Christina McKelvie said. Mental health tribunals were introduced so that decisions could be made in settings that are more informal than sheriff courts, in cases in which compulsory mental health care might be needed. It is most concerning that the Equal Opportunities Committee noted that more than 50 per cent of tribunals result in adjournments and multiple hearings. The system appears to be highly bureaucratic and labour intensive. Under the 2003 act, tribunals have the power to restrict an individual's personal freedom, so administrative inefficiencies in the system should be urgently addressed, particularly given that the annual cost is estimated to be £12 million. Margaret Mitchell and other members talked about the needs of female prisoners. It is not just about the needs of females when they are in prison: if their mental health care needs were addressed in the community, they might not end up in prison. That also applies to males. Richard Simpson talked about children's services. There is no doubt that the reduction in health visitors who support children in their families is not helpful.

First, I thank the Equal Opportunities Committee for the report that we are debating on post-legislative scrutiny of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. I also thank the  members of the McManus group, who carried out a limited review of the act. I appreciate that not all aspects of the complex 2003 act were implemented in the year that it was passed. Nonetheless, it was right and proper for the Equal Opportunities Committee to undertake the inquiry almost eight years after the act was passed and around five years after its implementation. My starting point for today is my speech at stage 3 of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill in March 2003, when we supported Shona Robison's Scottish National Party amendment to monitor continually what the bill set out to achieve and to ensure that services were provided. It is worth stating that the bill extended to 242 pages at stage 2, with a total of more than 2,000 amendments at stages 2 and 3. I thank the two committee clerks—Irene Fleming and Jennifer Smart—who did an excellent job at that time. I see Jennifer Smart sitting next to the Presiding Officer today. At that time, I pointed out the 29 psychiatrist vacancies in Scotland and the need for an additional 28 psychiatrists and many other health professionals to implement the act fully. I do not know whether any of those health professionals were recruited, but this debate points to the need for wider post-legislative scrutiny of that complex act. It is right, as Margaret Mitchell said, that the Equal Opportunities Committee undertook the scrutiny, as three of the principles that the Millan committee set out to underpin the legislation were non-discrimination, equality and respect for diversity. Like the minister, I appreciate that some progress has been made, but it is disappointing to read the committee's conclusions. The report states at paragraph 26 that there is a "lack of data monitoring ... so that the Mental Welfare Commission can make a comprehensive assessment of whether the Act delivers on its equalities duties." Paragraph 38 states: "The difficulties some specific groups are currently facing in accessing advocacy services suggest equality is not being achieved", and paragraph 62 states: "The Committee is concerned at the failure to" reduce "the number of admissions of children and adolescents to adult" wards.  The committee asked why the "use of compulsory powers in Tayside is 23% higher than the average, while their use in the Borders is 34% below it", and at paragraph 85 it requested "further investigation ... so that ... inequalities ... may be identified". On advance statements, the committee concluded at paragraph 97 that they "are not widely used". In my view, mental health does not enjoy anything near to equality of status across the NHS. The Equal Opportunities Committee has highlighted the failure of the 2003 act to address those issues. The committee's report provides a limited insight into the implementation of the act, which has certainly not met the expectations that we had as Health and Community Care Committee members when the bill was passed. A wider review is undoubtedly needed. The increase in the known number of people with dementia highlights the need for better communication with carers to ensure that they are aware of their own rights and responsibilities. The report highlights the need for better post-legislative scrutiny, given that the Parliament is almost 12 years old and given the absence of a second chamber to scrutinise, revise and review.

I take this opportunity to commend the approach that Nicola Sturgeon took last year to the potential flu pandemic. She kept Opposition spokesmen—Cathy Jamieson, me and others—the media and organisations throughout Scotland updated clearly and regularly on that potentially worrying issue. I suggest that the new Minister for Transport and Infrastructure take a similar approach, which could  be helpful in the circumstances that we are discussing. Andy Kerr argued that a single telephone line should be provided. His point was well made, but it was equally well made by my colleague David Mundell 10 years ago, when it fell on deaf ears. I hope that a single source of information and information will be made available at this point. The weather has seen off one decent, law-abiding and, in my view, well-respected minister. I hope that lessons will now be learned. I strongly support Jackson Carlaw's proposal for a traffic-light system as a means of providing further clarity. On the radio this morning, it was suggested that certain roads in the Highlands are "passable with care". I have often driven on roads that are "passable with care". Some of those roads were akin to a toboggan run; on others, there was a slight fall of snow. What does "passable with care" mean? The phrase is not exactly helpful. Many people who took the journey that led to such chaos may have heard on the radio that the roads were "passable with care". I turn to the six-point plan that has been produced. I have serious concerns about the stacking of HGVs in lay-bys to keep the traffic moving. I understand that, yesterday, the Government had further talks with the Road Haulage Association but, as a regular commuter on the A9, I know how few large lay-bys there are to store the significant number of HGVs that use the road. What will happen to the movement of livestock? Will livestock be stacked up at the side of the road, with no feed? What will happen to essential deliveries of freight, food and fuel? Will they, too, be stacked up at the side of the road? What will happen to ordinary motorists—such as me and other MSPs from the Highlands—when they need to stop in lay-bys to clear their windscreens because their screen wash and wipers are frozen, but they cannot get in as lay-bys are stacked up with HGVs? I understand from work in my constituency that the law in Scotland does not allow caravans or mobile homes to be parked in lay-bys overnight, because of serious traffic and safety hazards. I would like to know what those serious traffic and safety hazards are and whether they do not apply to HGVs, too. A little more clarity on that is needed. Most of the complaints that I have received relate to trunk roads and not to local authority roads. Snow and compacted ice were still on the A96, which is the main trunk road between Aberdeen and Inverness, days into the recent cold snap. In recent times, the Keith area has experienced temperatures at 8 o'clock in the morning of -19°. I do not want to go down the road  that Rob Gibson took, but let us not forget that that is a very serious issue, too. At a meeting with Moray councillors on 19 November, BEAR Scotland was asked what lessons it had learned from last winter and what changes would be made. Councillors were told that nothing would change, although the A96 around Keith and Huntly was one of the worst-affected roads in Scotland last year. People in the farming community have undoubtedly rallied round to support their neighbours. Many have assisted in the snow-clearing effort and have taken water and food to animals with frozen water troughs in snowbound fields. The added problem of heavy snow and limited wind has put severe pressure on buildings and roofs. The quick thaw might have reduced the number of buildings that collapsed, but I hope that the Government will do all that it can to assist farmers who lose buildings, given that some farmers are still waiting—because of hold-ups in funding and planning—to build replacements after last year's bad weather. When the roads are dangerous, surely every effort should be made to maintain public transport links. As other members have said, it has been difficult to obtain accurate information on the train system just to go from here to Inverness. On days when no trains run north of Edinburgh, surely it would help to tell people that the buses are running. I thank my friend Rhoda Grant for texting me at 7 o'clock last Friday morning to say that Citylink buses were running and could be booked. Although the bus journey took about eight hours and the driver had to have a 45-minute break in Aviemore because of the travel time, we finally got home. It is unacceptable that the far north rail line from Inverness to Caithness is consistently closed—as it is again today. When the weather is bad, surely people in Caithness deserve the attention that is paid to the rail network elsewhere in Scotland. I also agree with Iain Smith's point about the First ScotRail website. There is little to disagree with in Labour's motion. Lessons must be learned, changes must be made and a northern country such as Scotland must not grind to a halt because of a severe snowfall.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made since 2007 in the early diagnosis and treatment of people with mental health problems. (S3O-12154)

Given that 54 per cent of new courses of antidepressant treatment last for more than 90 days, and that 36 per cent of the new patients are on antidepressants for more than 180 days, is it not time to ensure that patients with mild and moderate depression are given access to appropriate talking therapies as soon as possible, to reduce the likelihood of their condition becoming severe, chronic and enduring?

I, too, put on record my thanks to Margo MacDonald for bringing the bill to the Parliament and giving people in Scotland an opportunity to discuss end-of-life issues. As others have said, the views that I will express are my personal views. My starting point is paragraph 62 of the policy memorandum, which states: "It is cruel to force a dying person suffering uncontrollable pain who wishes to die to continue living." I have read a lot over the past year—newspaper articles, et cetera—and everything that I have read tends to focus on uncontrollable pain. My first point is on chronic pain. So often in the debate, people talk about the fear of pain at the end of life. If we had better chronic pain services in Scotland, considerably fewer people would be suffering unbearably. I take Ian McKee's point here. I am glad that Gil Paterson is in the chamber, because he and I are the co-conveners of the cross-party group on chronic pain—a group that I have been involved with since 2000, when Dorothy Grace-Elder set it up. To be fair, there has  been progress on chronic pain services in Scotland, but it is progress from a very low base and provision of services is still patchy. If we put more energy and resources into high-quality pain management and equality of access to pain services, we might not have the fear of pain that exists at present, whether related to terminal illness or not. My second point is on the requirement in sections 6, 7 and 9 of the bill for knowledge and belief that the person is not "acting under any undue influence in making the request." There is no doubt but that it can be difficult to interpret the wishes of a terminally ill patient if they are delirious, confused or, as in many cases, depressed. How can a clinician be absolutely confident that a request for a life to be ended sooner does not arise from a person's state of mind and whether or not that state of mind is treatable? The bill also seems to assume that undue influence would come from a third party. In fact, any person who feels that they are a burden to their family, the health service or the state could be unduly influenced by those factors.

Not at the moment. I want to make this point. Many older people who see the savings that they have built up for their families dwindling at a rate of up to £800 a week in care home fees may feel guilty that the money is being spent on them and not on their family as intended. How can a doctor, faced with an adamant patient, be sure that the patient is seeking to shorten their life because it is intolerable when there might be other reasons of greater influence? How can any doctor know the basis of an individual's value judgments and opinions? At paragraph 124 of its report, the committee states: "The Committee accepts that it would not necessarily be possible, in any circumstances, to determine with absolute certainty that there was no undue influence". I would say that that influence might be from the individual in question as well as from a third party. I also agree with the committee's concerns about the definition of "end of life assistance" and its view that the terms "assisted suicide" and "voluntary euthanasia" should be used. Indeed, I believe that the best end-of-life care and assistance is good palliative care. We should be talking about better end-of-life assistance, not assistance to end life. In that respect, I commend Gil Paterson for his excellent Palliative Care (Scotland) Bill and the Scottish Government for its living and dying well strategy and action plan. I am not saying that living and dying well is the answer  to end-of-life assistance and care but it is fair to mark the progress that is being made and acknowledge the fact that more progress has still to be made. At this point I should say that there is a disappointing lack of timings for many of the strategy's action points, which I hope will continue to receive priority despite the difficult financial climate. Last week, the cross-party group on chronic pain was told that good pain management by a pain specialist should not hasten death. That view has been confirmed in a letter from Highland Hospice, which says: "Modern pain control is sophisticated, involving the use of a variety of drugs and non-drug measures, and is not simply a case of an inexorable increase in the dose of morphine. Moreover, patients taking morphine in carefully prescribed doses for pain relief are resistant to side effects of the drug and the concept that life can be ended with an increased dose appropriate to the level of pain is spurious. ... Double Effect with regard to pain relief has been overstated and provides no basis for the legalisation of assisted dying." We should listen to palliative care consultants. For such reasons, I cannot support the bill.

I thank my colleague Dr Nanette Milne for securing the debate and admit that my knowledge of anticoagulation therapies is considerably greater than it was two hours ago, when I sat down to write my speech. Like others, I know of people who are on medications that have been found to be effective in preventing thrombosis and embolism but, despite their effectiveness, I understand that they can have several shortcomings. I have learned that many commonly used medications interact with warfarin, as do some foods, and that its activity must be monitored by blood testing using the international normalised ratio to ensure that adequate but safe doses are taken. As Nanette Milne said, blood samples are sent to labs through the operation of a centralised anticoagulation clinic. There is no doubt that hospital-based services can be inconvenient for patients and expensive to the taxpayer, and Nanette Milne mentioned the time delay. If better care can be achieved through greater emphasis on self-management, we should encourage that. I understand that stable patients will make visits to the hospital or GP about every 12 weeks but that unstable patients might have to do so every week. The provision of self-monitoring equipment—which is now far cheaper than it was in the 1990s—to patients for use in their own homes has two substantial benefits: the first is in cost and time, and the second relates to control. Regular INR testing is essential in providing patient stability, and home-based units can be used as frequently as necessary. As Jackie Baillie said, it must be acknowledged that not all patients will adapt to self-management, but many will and they should be given the opportunity to do so. Putting patients in the driving seat on their own health is undoubtedly empowering and might even help them to understand the cause of the changes in their readings. It is about treating patients with dignity, trust and respect, and allowing them to adjust their drug levels depending on the results. Earlier today, I picked up an NHS Quality Improvement Scotland evidence note on the issue from the back of the chamber. It may be a bit out  of date—it is dated May 2009—but I would still like to quote from it. It says: "Recent systematic reviews and meta analyses indicate that for selected and well trained patients, self-monitoring of oral anticoagulation therapy (OAT) is safe, more effective than usual care provided by family doctors and as effective as monitoring undertaken in specialised anticoagulation clinics and laboratories." That is the good news. The bad news, on which I trust that the cabinet secretary will provide clarification, is that "Two recent economic models concluded that patient self-monitoring and testing of OAT was not cost effective compared to clinic-based usual care." I hope that the cost of anticoagulation therapy will be compared with the cost of hospital admissions and clinical care. It seems incredible that only one health board has made provision for self-testing and self-management in adults, and that Scotland lags behind England and the rest of Europe on levels of self-monitoring and self-management. Given that it is estimated that a million patients in the UK receive such therapy, the figure for Scotland is likely to be around 100,000. I hope that tonight's debate will raise awareness and assist in increasing access to self-monitoring and self-management of anticoagulation therapy.

To ask the Scottish Executive how its budget will impact on the Highlands and Islands. (S3O-11961)

In his post-budget deliberations relating to the Highlands and Islands, will the cabinet secretary guarantee that the £32 million construction contract that was previously given to Rok will go ahead? Will the retendering process be carried out as soon as possible? Will the cabinet secretary ensure that the subcontractors who are owed money from the contract are involved in completion of the work to avoid their losing money to Rok and then losing out on completion of the contracts?

I remind the minister that Orkney has already set up a social care organisation that involves the NHS and the local authority working together. Would the minister like to consider how that model is working?

There is no denying the changing demographics of Scotland. In the past 10 years, the number of people aged 75 and over has increased by 14 per cent and the number of people aged 60 to 74 has increased by 12 per cent. It is projected that, in the period up to 2031, the number of people aged over 75 will increase by about 80 per cent. The number of those aged 65 to 74 is projected to increase by 40 per cent in the same period. It is estimated that, in the next six years, the number of older people who need care and support will increase by 25 per cent. I hope that today's debate will help us to plan services, as part of the Government's reshaping care for older people process, to ensure that value for money is coupled with continuing high standards of care for our older people. In March this year, there were 943 care homes for the elderly, providing 39,150 places, with more than 5,000 empty places. The independent and voluntary sector provides about 85 per cent of care home provision in Scotland, with the remaining 15 per cent in the council sector. All care homes must achieve equal quality standards, as set and regulated by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. Undoubtedly, there are excellent, good and not-so-good care standards in all sectors. We look to the care commission to take the necessary action against any home that is not performing to agreed standards of quality care; ultimately, that can lead to closure of a home. Against that background, and in the current financial climate, questions need to be asked about the amount that councils pay for a placement in their homes, which is £800 a week on average, although the amount that is paid to the independent and voluntary sector for the same placement and standard of residential care is £480. I appreciate that local authorities pay higher wages and have significant pension provision for all employees, but some independent providers pay rates that are similar to those paid by local  authorities. As an MSP who represents the Highlands and Islands, I am also acutely aware that in remote and rural areas, councils provide care in smaller homes, which are more costly to operate due to the absence of economies of scale and which would not be viable in the independent sector. However, although the cost of providing care is a matter for each local authority, section 22 of the National Assistance Act 1948 requires local authorities to set fees in their homes at the full cost of providing care. Therefore, if the cost of providing care is around £800 per person, surely that would be the cost for all sectors to provide the same level of care to the same standards. That takes me to my next point: how do independent care homes stay in business when they are paid almost half the amount per placement that is paid for the same level of care for a person in a council home? The answer for many is that care home providers enter into contractual agreements with self-funding clients. The self-funding person in standard residential care tends to pay a considerably higher rate than the £480 that is paid for a council-funded placement. That means that there is significant variation in payments for the same level and quality of care. I am not proposing that the fees that the independent sector receives should increase from £480 a week to the council level of £800 a week. However, the Government's review provides us with an opportunity to look afresh at maintaining high-quality care, appropriate placements and value for money, especially given that £4.5 billion of the Parliament's budget is spent on care for older people. As I mentioned in a speech last week, independent and voluntary sector care homes could be used to prevent hospital admissions. That would ensure that patients receive the rehabilitation that they need to retain independence and go home, instead of waiting for six weeks in a hospital bed and becoming a statistic for delayed discharge. It would also help to utilise the 5,000-bed spare capacity to which I referred. The fee to care homes in the independent and voluntary sector is £480 and £550 per week, compared with costs of £800 a week for council residential care, around £1,400 a week for general hospital provision and upwards of £2,800 a week for acute hospital care. In these difficult financial times, that is a significant factor. Care homes could also provide significant amounts of day care and respite care, as well as home care. That would enable elderly people to become familiar with the care home and its staff and lead to a more joined-up service, enabling people to have temporary stays in care homes before returning to their home.  More support could be given to unpaid carers, and our care home sector could be utilised more for respite care. Greater volunteering and community support could be developed by better integration. Telecare and telehealth developments have real potential to enhance quality of life and to create even more efficiencies, as well as better-quality care. The situation could be improved by extending telehealth links to care homes and using technology to provide direct connections to clinics and hospitals, which would help to prevent unnecessary out-patient and in-patient visits. I understand that West Lothian is working on a project of that type. The independent care sector employs more than 100,000 staff, with an annual turnover of more than £1 billion. It is only right that we utilise that capacity and knowledge to enhance care for the elderly. Although the coalition Government at Westminster is considering a range of ideas through its Commission on the Funding of Care and Support, including a voluntary insurance scheme, it is up to the Parliament to ensure that older people get the care that they need and deserve, at the time when they need it, and in the place of their choice. The motion in my name asks the Government to review "existing models of funding and provision" as part of the reshaping care for older people process, "to ensure that value for money is coupled with continuing high standards of care." I hope that all members will support it. I move, That the Parliament recognises the changing demographics of Scotland and the increasing financial pressures on services providing care for older people; notes that independent and local authority-run care homes in Scotland are regulated in accordance with standards set by the Care Commission; further notes the wide disparities that exist between different service providers with regard to fees and costs and the disparities in the amounts paid by or on behalf of service users for the same service, and accordingly calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that its public engagement process, Reshaping Care for Older People, reviews existing models of funding and provision to ensure that value for money is coupled with continuing high standards of care.

Can the minister tell me who does not have a right to complain at present? Who will have a new right to complain if the bill is passed?

In scrutinising any piece of proposed legislation, it is right and proper that parliamentarians look for the benefit that it will bring—in this case, to patient rights. At the end of the stage 1 process, I am still looking for those benefits in the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill. Section 1 states: "Health care is to ... be patient focused ... anything done in relation to the patient must take into account the patient's needs". It goes on to say that health care should provide "optimum benefit to the patient's health and wellbeing ... and encourage the patient to participate as fully as possible". Do we need to legislate for that? Is that not happening? Surely NHS staff do not do things to patients that are not patient focused, that do not provide benefit and that do not involve the participation of the patient. If they are, there are  disciplinary procedures to address such unacceptable behaviour. Sections 6 to 10 cover the treatment time guarantee. What happens if it is breached? "The Health Board must ... make such arrangements as are necessary to ensure that the agreed treatment starts at the next available opportunity ... provide an explanation ... give the patient details of ... advice and support" and tell them "how to complain." Is that not happening at present? As the Health and Sport Committee confirms in its report, "there is an inherent contradiction between ... setting out patient rights in primary legislation" and having no legal enforceability for those rights. The treatment time guarantee does not apply to the majority of patients with mental health problems—they will still have to wait months, and sometimes years, to see a psychiatrist or psychologist or to get cognitive behavioural therapy; neither does the guarantee apply to patients who are waiting for physiotherapy. It does not apply to treatments that are undertaken in hospital out-patient departments, and it does not apply to diagnostic tests. It is a fact that someone can get a hip replacement or heart bypass in 18 weeks—or, in future, in 12 weeks—but people can wait months or years to talk to someone about their depression. I agree with the Scottish Association for Mental Health that this bill perpetuates the division between mental health and other NHS services. I asked the Law Society of Scotland whether that was considered discrimination against mental health patients and its response was: "the provision clearly appears to be discriminatory under the normal meaning of the word."—[ Official Report, Health and Sport Committee , 29 September 2010; c 3430.] The fact is that in mental health there is absolutely no doubt that early diagnosis and early intervention can save NHS spend on treating severe, chronic and enduring mental health problems in the long term, allow people to enjoy a quality of life and allow many to remain in work. The cabinet secretary spoke of the support for the bill. I attended every minute of every evidence session and I can tell her that the support was minuscule. The Law Society, the British Medical Association, the General Medical Council and many others highlighted the point that nothing in the bill is enforceable by legal action. The Scottish Public Services Ombudsman, who I think knows something about NHS complaints, stated: "the Bill does not appear to provide any significant extension to existing rights and expectations in relation to  the quality of NHS services provided in Scotland. Instead, it confirms and makes explicit rights and expectations that currently exist." He went on to say that the bill "carries the risk of an unwelcome increase in legalism and litigation in disputes between members of the public and the NHS." As Jackie Baillie said, there is no provision for patients who wish to give feedback, raise concerns or complain. They will all be channelled to patient rights officers. I commend the convener of the Health and Sport Committee, who managed to get us all to agree on a final conclusion, which was: "the Committee is unable to make a recommendation to the Parliament on the general principles of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill." For all those reasons—and because of the Scottish Conservatives' commitment to patient rights and responsibilities—I ask the cabinet secretary to examine and produce a revised patient rights charter under the power available to her under the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978. The Conservatives produced the first patient charter in Scotland in 1990. It was revised—and rightly so—and enhanced by the Liberal-Labour Scottish Executive in 2000. A further 10 years on, it is appropriate and justified for the Scottish Government to review it. In doing so, it would have our full support.

I remind the minister that although the list is short, there are thousands of mental health patients who are not covered by the treatment time guarantee.

In debates on anything remote and rural, I am generally able to give examples from the Highlands where the situation is worse than it is in the rest of Scotland, so I was delighted that the example of best practice for rural out-of-hours care was brought to our committee by a representative from Lochaber and Wester Ross, where they had "community buy-in, integration of services, and practitioners sharing the responsibility for out-of-hours care at a local level." That compared very favourably to what was found in Kinloch Rannoch. Not only has this been an interesting debate but, as Helen Eadie said, the inquiry—very unusually—allowed the Health and Sport Committee to hold a meeting outside Edinburgh. It was right and proper to hold the meeting in Kinloch Rannoch, given the  problems faced by that community in recent years. We found that issues raised in remote and rural communities were generally very similar to the concerns about NHS out-of-hours provision across Scotland. I thank the Kinloch Rannoch group that submitted a petition to the Parliament. It helped to lead to this inquiry, which I believe will, in time, benefit patients throughout Scotland. The BMA and the previous Government may have negotiated every last detail of the new GMS contract but, unfortunately, they left people throughout Scotland with no idea of what they should expect in terms of emergency response and clinical care, as no standards were set. As Liam McArthur said, neither did patients throughout Scotland know the circumstances in which it was appropriate to call an ambulance, call NHS 24, visit accident and emergency or wait until the next day to see their GP. That is acknowledged in paragraph 39 of the committee's report, which states that there is "a great deal of confusion amongst the public over accessing out-of-hours services." The Health and Sport Committee recommended what countless committees and MSPs in the Parliament have recommended since May 1999: for our publicly funded services to talk to each other, work together and put the patient first. That does not even cost money—only good will and a commitment to a patient-focused health service. Like other members, I am pleased to note that the medical director of NHS 24 is also a board member of the Scottish Ambulance Service. I was a harsh critic of NHS 24 in the early days, and I think that my criticism was justified, but I feel that Dr George Crooks has turned the organisation round by improving response times and bringing a more professional and integrated approach. The inquiry highlighted the need for standards based on clinical outcomes rather than on processes and tick boxes, which is something that should have happened in 2004 when the contract was implemented. As recommended in paragraph 66 of our report, patients need to know the minimum service that they can expect. That is what the people of Kinloch Rannoch were asking: what is the minimum that we can expect? Process-driven health standards will, I hope, be consigned to the dustbin, with a new focus on clinical outcomes becoming the norm. I do not think that it is helpful when local BMA representatives compare the out-of-hours service in Kinloch Rannoch to the NHS needs of people in Dundee. Our NHS has evolved to ensure that the health needs of all the people in Scotland are catered for, whether that relates to out-of-hours provision in a remote area or to narrowing the health inequalities gap.  I met Pauline Howie of the Scottish Ambulance Service last week and I have been assured that much has happened since the Health and Sport Committee inquiry started, with improved integration of the Scottish Ambulance Service, NHS 24 and others. In the Scottish Ambulance Service's annual report, which was published today, Chris Bennett from Orkney tells how the "ambulance got to" him "in minutes", and how the paramedics "diagnosed a stroke" and got him "to Aberdeen Royal Infirmary for a CT scan, after which" he "was given clot-busting treatment". He has "now made a full recovery". Given that NHS Orkney is the only board without a computed tomography scanner, we should give all credit to the ambulance service. Like others, I feel very passionate about the need to embrace telehealth, which is simply not being used to its full potential. After complimenting George Crooks of NHS 24, who is now in charge of the matter, I send him the message to please move this issue forward. I suggest that the care home could provide the most appropriate environment for rehabilitation for many elderly people who might otherwise be placed in hospitals for weeks, sometimes months. Given that ambulance crews are now able to take X-rays in a person's home, such a move might result in more accurate assessment of and placement for elderly people. The final four points in the health secretary's response to the Health and Sport Committee's report sum up precisely what is needed for rural and, indeed, urban out-of-hours care in Scotland: "Improved collaboration", "Clear communication", "Clinical excellence" and "Continuity of care". I hope that the inquiry takes us in that direction.

The Health and Sport Committee, of which I am a member, is currently working on four bills. I am relieved that we have got to the end of at least one of them. I acknowledge the thanks that have been expressed to committee clerks and others. I do not intend to go over all the arguments for a minimum price but I will briefly mention the matter in the context of the committee's cross-party trip to France and Finland. The French could not understand why we would want to give more profits to retailers and producers, rather than give more income to the Government. We had a bit of difficulty trying to explain the policy to them. It was crystal clear that when Finland tried having a minimum price the result was an increase in booze cruises to Estonia. When the price fell, demand increased, but when the price rose again, demand stayed the same. The evidence is there. In Scotland, we have a complex relationship with alcohol. The prices and promotion of alcohol are the same in Scotland as they are in England, but in Scotland we consume almost 25 per cent more alcohol. That is not simply about price. Scottish Conservatives share the concern about the drinks culture in Scotland. There is no single magic bullet, but many things could be done better, including enforcement of existing laws. We have often asked why on earth a bad licensee should pay a social responsibility levy; the question is whether they should have a licence at all. Perhaps we need to ask licensing boards to be much more rigorous. Despite what the cabinet secretary said, we need more robust evidence taking and research. Everything must not be based on a single piece of research. I hope that today marks the start of consideration of a far better evidence base, as Nicola Sturgeon said. I mentioned our complex relationship with alcohol. We drink it when we are happy and to celebrate occasions. We drink it when we are sad. Psychologists who came to the Parliament recently told us that for elderly people wine is the new cup of tea. We need to look much more closely at the age and income groups who are the greatest consumers of alcohol. People tend to assume that we are talking about 15 to 18-year- olds. The opposite is the case; we are more likely to be talking about 50 and 60-year-olds. We need to try to understand why young people binge drink. Why do young people want to go out and drink to the extent that they suffer memory loss? Does anyone understand that? The issue was not covered in the Sheffield report. We also need to examine price, income and cross-price elasticity of demand. I am sorry to make a negative point—although the two previous speakers did so—but I must put on record that I find it offensive and insulting that the cabinet secretary should accuse Health and Sport Committee members of making up their minds without looking at any evidence. If that were the case, I could have saved myself hours and hours of reading and a lot of time attending committee meetings. If my mind had already been made up, I would not have needed to go to Finland and France or even turn up at committee meetings. I say to Nicola Sturgeon—respectfully, because I respect her as Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing—that even when Opposition members of the Scottish Parliament disagree with the Government, there is no need to criticise their commitment or the conscientious approach that they take. There is no justification for that.

I represent my party as a member of the Health and Sport Committee, so the points that I made still stand. It is also unfortunate that the social responsibility levy was included in the long title of the bill, as that did not allow members to lodge amendments to remove it. No one on the Conservative side of the chamber would laugh off concerns about Scotland's high consumption of alcohol. I find that idea offensive, too. More unites us than divides us. We will support the bill, as amended. We look forward to further evidence and information about, and understanding of, our drinking culture.

I have no need to wind up.

Amendment 42 would ensure that ministers undertake an economic impact assessment and publish the results prior to introducing a social responsibility levy. The cabinet secretary made it clear to the Health and Sport Committee that the Scottish Government does not intend to introduce the social responsibility levy in the current economic climate, but that it wants the powers to introduce a levy at a future date. We believe that, before the levy is introduced, ministers should be required to undertake an economic impact assessment to ensure that the  economic consequences, particularly for consumers, small shops and pubs, are scrutinised fully and made publicly available for debate. There is a fear that introducing a social responsibility levy in Scotland would make the economic climate even more difficult for Scottish businesses, with all the costs ultimately being passed on to Scottish consumers. The levy will place Scottish businesses in the retail, tourism and hospitality sectors at a competitive disadvantage compared with businesses that are online or elsewhere in the UK and beyond. An economic test before regulations for a levy are introduced would ensure that businesses, consumers and politicians are fully aware of the impact prior to new measures coming into force.

Amendment 43 would delay the introduction of the social responsibility levy and set 1 September 2014 as the earliest implementation date. That would give small shops and businesses that are still coming to terms with the costs associated with implementing the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 time to prepare for the introduction of the levy, and it would avoid additional costs for retailers at a difficult time for the economy. The amendment is supported by the hospitality industry and the Wine and Spirit Trade Association. I move amendment 43.

I thought that I would be invited to stand up to thank the Government. I welcome the fact that it has listened in respect of the amendment that I lodged, which was suggested by the Law Society. Amendment 8 is a reasonable amendment. I thank the minister for her consideration.  Amendment 8 agreed to.

I am delighted that the minister took on board my comments and the example of the Asda magazine, which contained 100 pages of which four were dedicated to alcohol. People throughout Scotland will now be able to continue enjoying their recipes without having to go down the alcohol aisle to get their free booklet, which was the Government's original proposal.

It is rich for the Labour Party to quote Laurence Gruer, who said: "There is little published evidence that combining alcohol with caffeine increases the risk of aggressive or violent behaviour." That was the reason why Labour members did not vote for the minimum price. I agreed with them then. That cannot be right in one case, but not in the other. As Jackie Baillie said, caffeine is a stimulant. I understand that over-the-counter headache and pain relievers mixed with alcoholic drinks can have the same effect. Dr Forsyth confirmed that when I raised that matter in the Health and Sport Committee. However, supermarkets can be innovative and enterprising, and someone who is looking for a certain effect from a certain drink can be innovative and highly enterprising. If the proposal is agreed to, it can be easily overcome by cross-border trading. We simply have not had the opportunity to gauge a wide range of views and opinions on the caffeine content of drinks, which has not allowed us to scrutinise robustly Jackie Baillie's amendment 28. On that basis, the Conservatives do not support it.

I feel that Ian McKee's amendments are open to interpretation, which is why, like Jackie Baillie, we seek clarity. The hospitality industry feels that amendment 23 would apply to a range of promotions and reductions in hotels and restaurants, such as deals that enable a bottle of wine to be purchased at a reduced price when it is consumed alongside a meal. We feel that amendment 23 would disadvantage moderate consumers of alcohol and remove many of the positive promotions that retailers, restaurants and hotels offer consumers when they purchase alcohol. Amendment 26 would make it much more difficult for small and new businesses to enter the marketplace and to challenge existing products. In the long term, that would reduce the range and quality of products that are available to Scottish consumers. That view has been supported by the industry in Scotland. I could get no better backing than that of Gordon & MacPhail of Elgin—the company has given me permission to name it—which says that amendment 26 would prevent the practice of offering a distiller's dram at the distillery visitor centre. The Scottish Government has stated that it would not introduce measures that would prevent such practices. No evidence has been presented to suggest that they drive alcohol misuse. The proposed measure is extremely broad and the unintended consequences have not been fully assessed. Gordon & MacPhail believes that the giving of a discount on the purchase of a bottle of Benromach, for example, to a consumer who has paid for a tour of the distillery could also be caught by amendment 26. I seek further clarity.

If, as Nicola Sturgeon says, the Scottish Conservatives indulge in crude party politicking, surely we would not have supported the Government budget for the past three years. As parliamentarians, it is our duty to scrutinise evidence and decide whether the measures that are proposed address the problems that Scotland faces. The Sheffield study did not look at all the economic factors. It includes no evidence on the substitute effect, cross-border sales, sales over the internet—which is the fastest growing means of buying alcohol—and the effect of minimum unit pricing on binge drinkers or people on low incomes. Instead, we have evidence from Finland that, when prices fall, demand for alcohol increases and that, when prices rise, consumption remains the same. Prices are the same in Scotland and England. The same is the case for promotions and yet we drink 25 per cent more alcohol in Scotland. The Scottish health survey for the period 2003 to 2008 shows that the number of people who drink over the recommended weekly limit fell over the period by 4 per cent for men and 3 per cent for women. The prediction in the Sheffield research was for a 2.3 per cent reduction. A reduction in consumption of 4 per cent and 3 per cent has been achieved without minimum unit pricing. Nicola Sturgeon called the Sheffield study internationally peer reviewed and so forth, but there are two Sheffield studies: mark l and mark II. If the first study was so perfect, why did the second study show a change in units per year that was almost half that of the first study? Why did it say that alcohol-attributed deaths would be 35 per cent fewer than was predicted in the first study?  Why did it halve the prediction for deaths in 10 years and reduce the number of hospital admissions by 20 per cent? If the Sheffield study is so internationally peer reviewed and perfect, how could there be such disparity in a number of months?

Many elderly people in Highland have been taken off the list for regular podiatry assessment. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that podiatry services are provided on the NHS to all elderly people who are assessed as being in need of such services? That is a wonderful investment that helps to ensure mobility and independence.

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, thank David Stewart for securing the debate. Like others, I commend the work of the local campaign and of the task force and the Northern Scot 's petition. David Stewart's motion could go further. He says that "the economy and population of Moray are heavily dependent on the RAF", but Moray is the most RAF-dependent community in the United Kingdom: it has more than 5,700 full-time RAF employees; annual gross income from the bases is £158 million; 2,000 RAF spouses and dependants live in the area; and RAF personnel families account for almost 20 per cent of the school population. None of us could be happy with the decision to close the RAF base at Kinloss, but I would be incredulous at any suggestion that other parties would not have taken such difficult decisions in government. The £38 billion overspend in the defence budget that the previous Labour Government left meant that difficult decisions would always have to be made. The coalition Government listened to the advice that the military gave. Unfortunately, the decision to cancel the Nimrod replacement will result in the closure of the base at Kinloss. However, the fight to retain RAF Lossiemouth is still very much alive. I and all my Conservative colleagues fully support it and I confirm that I will be alongside my party's leader and others on Sunday.

Not at the moment—I am worried that I will run out of time. The coalition Government is considering Kinloss as a base for the Army. In the next 10 years, 20,000 military personnel and 23,000 spouses and children are due to return to the UK from Germany, and 50 per cent are due to return no later than 2015. The facilities, infrastructure and well-maintained housing that are available at Kinloss are first class. Along with my colleagues in the Parliament, I urge the UK Government to accelerate the resettlement of troops in Kinloss, which will assist the local economy when RAF personnel leave. We are all getting e-mails and letters from ex-RAF personnel. One such person who is still based in Moray has suggested to me the possibility of using part of the expansive estate at Kinloss as an air salvage unit. Has the Scottish Government considered that option? How would it assist a company that wished to base itself at Kinloss for that purpose? I understand that, in the aviation industry, 12,500 passenger planes around the world will reach the end of their useful life in the next 20 years—that is more than 400 annually. Such planes are stripped of their useful components and recycled; engineers spend between two and three months on each plane. The suggestion was made because a company near Cirencester uses a former RAF airfield at Kemble. Something like that would utilise part of the Kinloss base and could provide local employment for many of the highly skilled engineers who are based there and wish to stay in the area after the RAF presence has gone. The aftermath of the removal of the RAF at Kinloss will not be easy, but those difficulties can be reduced with assistance from the UK Government and the Scottish Government. While the social and economic arguments for saving RAF Lossiemouth are compelling, so are the strategic issues surrounding its location. The number of flying hours at RAF Lossiemouth is greater than at any other UK base. The skies are uncluttered and the flying conditions over the North Sea and the mountainous terrains provide ideal tests for pilots.

We can and must do more to support RAF Kinloss and RAF Lossiemouth.

Will Mr Thompson give way?

Due to the exceptional pressure on the Moray economy and infrastructure, would the cabinet secretary consider focusing infrastructure investment in the area, making the most of available regional selective assistance and introducing targeted incentives to support new and  existing businesses in the Moray area, whether or not it is called an enterprise zone?

The previous Scottish Executive introduced a strategy for carers in 1999 to improve the information on help and support for carers; to improve local services; to propose consistent national standards for carers short breaks; and to check that carers got the help that they needed. The plight of carers has undoubtedly been on the Parliament's agenda since 1999, although progress can be difficult to measure on all issues and for all carers; that is why the point that was raised by Jamie Stone and Jackie Baillie on monitoring the strategy is so important. It is, therefore, right to publish another carers strategy for Scotland to 2015 to examine and address the needs of carers in 2010. More work needs to be done to support carers. I welcome the strategy, particularly the investment in telecare and telehealth, where appropriate. Yesterday I attended a meeting of the cross-party group on carers, which was ably chaired by Cathy Peattie, to launch its carers manifesto. We heard about the different experiences of three carers and the effect that being a carer has on their lives, opportunities and careers. One carer just wanted to go to the park with her family, but faced huge obstacles to doing so. Her family was refused help with certain aids and adaptations because they are homeowners. The father is in full-time employment, but the mother told us that he does not earn a huge amount—certainly not enough to make the necessary changes to their home to accommodate their child's needs. The second carer highlighted the language problems that her mother faced in receiving care, and her mother's lack of confidence in receiving care. That led to the carer giving up her civil service career. The third carer spoke of the wonderful help, understanding and support that she received at her local carers group. The experiences of those three carers confirm the need, if we need it to be confirmed, for a carers strategy, particularly the carers rights charter and the need to improve the quality and uptake of carers assessments and support plans, as well as other measures. A local carer who is well known to me has allowed me to use her name. Bunty Macdonald from Carrbridge asked me to highlight the fact that the biggest challenge she faced was the move from children's to adult services. She asked that the minister take that on board. Chapter 17 of the carers strategy sets out the benefits of advocacy support to carers. It is shocking that only three carer advocacy organisations exist in Scotland. As others have said, the carers manifesto also states that breaks  are increasingly offered only as emergency relief, rather than as the on-going support that, as Jackie Baillie said, helps to prevent crisis situations. In these difficult financial times, surely we need to focus on investing in services that save money elsewhere in the public sector. Research on specialist support for young carers illustrates that for every £1 invested in it, there can be a saving of more than £6 to the public purse as a result of better educational outcomes and fewer young people going into care. The issue of kinship carers is regularly championed by my colleague Nanette Milne. The Citizens Advice Scotland briefing, which talks about the information and experience of kinship carers, is very helpful on that issue. The need for kinship care arises generally as a result of upsetting and stressful situations for both the child and the carer; 36 per cent of kinship care situations are a result of addiction problems, 24 per cent are due to bereavement and 15 per cent are related to neglect. Around three quarters of kinship carers are grandparents, and many give up employment to meet their responsibilities. I was shocked when I read about the kinship care allowance in the Citizens Advice Scotland report. The allowance is paid by some local authorities but not all, and the rates vary from £23 a week to £148 a week for a child under four—the highest payment is six times greater than the lowest. As the CAS briefing states, 62 per cent of kinship carers are eligible for the allowance, but whether it is paid depends on where someone lives in Scotland. Although the payments are considerable, there is no doubt that they are less than the amount that would be required to pay for residential care. In the new strategy, I could find only one paragraph on kinship carers; I refer to paragraph 3.18, which states: "They should receive a kinship care allowance from the local authority." Will the minister respond to that in winding up?

Finally, I hope that the Government will continue to support direct payments.

Of our three island communities, Orkney seems to be leading the way on closer working between local authorities and NHS boards, with the setting up of Orkney health and care in April this year. Given that governance arrangements in the NHS are different from those in councils, will the cabinet secretary work with the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to support Orkney health and care to overcome what are seen as serious obstacles?

Children 1st has also suggested intervention in early years to help parents deal with their substance abuse and to prevent children from entering the cycle of abuse. Does the First Minister agree that, if we are to protect the children of drug and alcohol-abusing parents in Scotland, we need more health visitors providing a consistent service to all families and focusing on those in need?

To ask the Scottish Executive what is being done to ensure that dairy farmers receive a fair price for their milk. (S3O-11564)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his response. In 1998, there were 43 milk producers in the Highlands and Moray. Today, there are just 11. There is no doubt that dairy farmers in that area and across Scotland need a fairer price for their milk to ensure survival. Does the cabinet secretary agree with the chair of NFU Scotland's milk committee that a greater share of the sale price should be passed back to our dairy farmers? Although I appreciate what has already been done, there seems to be an incredible amount of dissatisfaction in the sector. What will the cabinet secretary be doing in addition to what has already been done?

I, too, congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing tonight's debate. I also thank members of all parties who signed my motion on mental health awareness week, which runs next week. As Jackie Baillie said, one in four people in Scotland will experience some form of mental health problem. More than 30 per cent of GP visits in Scotland are for mental health issues. We must discuss mental health: we must discuss the causes, how it affects the patient, how to deal with it, and how it affects families and friends. We all could do with a bit more advice on how to talk to people about their depression or other mental health problems and the effect that mental health issues have on employment. We all have to be bolder in that respect. The see me campaign, which aims to end the stigma and discrimination that is associated with mental health, deserves every accolade that it has been awarded and more. While everyone accepts that work is still to be done, the difference that see me has been made since it was launched in 2002 is significant. The results from this year's hear me 2 survey showed that 61 per cent of people who have experienced mental health problems now feel more able to be more open about their illness  than they were five years ago. Also, when social attitudes in Scotland towards mental health are compared with those of the UK as a whole, it is obvious that the plaudits that this campaign has attracted are well deserved. A recent YouGov survey showed that, on a UK basis, employers rejected someone with a mental illness in 33 per cent of cases whereas, in Scotland, the rejection rate was 24 per cent. We can all agree that the figure is still too high, but the difference is clear. There is still some way to go before we eradicate the stigma, but it is clear that attitudes to mental health issues in Scotland are changing. When people talk about mental health, they tend always to talk about schizophrenia and yet the majority of people with mental health issues suffer from stress, anxiety, low mood and depression. As Anne McLaughlin said, people can suffer in that way at times of bereavement and so forth. Mental health issues are a normal part of everyday life and yet many people do not discuss the issues. People not only feel the stigma but believe that their career opportunities may be jeopardised if they should say that they are depressed. Jackie Baillie mentioned the NHS 24 cognitive behavioural therapy pilot that delivers telephone support to people in their own home to help them self-manage their condition, understand the triggers that bring them down and provide coping mechanisms to get them back up again. I have seen an interim report on the pilot and am sure that with earlier diagnosis, referral and early intervention the figure can be improved greatly. After all, the treatment is being delivered in the wholly unstigmatised manner and setting of a person's home and not in what is often perceived as an institutional setting. I am in no doubt that 99.9 per cent of those who work in the health service exhibit no stigma towards patients with mental health issues. That said, I cannot ignore the fact that attitudes in the health service to mental health have been raised with us in the past. People feel that NHS staff could be more compassionate and understanding of mental health issues. It is right that we should praise the work that is being done to reduce the stigma that is associated with mental illness, but we all have to look at how we can improve things further. This is not only about see me and patients with mental health illnesses, it is an issue for everyone. We all—family members, work colleagues and friends—have a role to play. The stigma will finally be lost only when we all understand the complexities of mental health issues and how widespread they are. I am pleased to contribute to the debate.

The three island health boards receive quite different levels of funding per capita under the current funding formula, much of the basis of which is historic. I ask that that be investigated and research be done to ensure that NHS Orkney, NHS Shetland and NHS Western Isles receive the funding that they need to meet the health needs of their populations.

I remind the member that the issue is not only about Aberdeen and the north-east. The closure would probably have an even greater impact on the Highlands and Islands.

Does the member agree that the public-private partnership between optometrists and the NHS is one of the best in Scotland and puts patients at the heart of the service?

Much is said about consensus in the Parliament, although it tends to be lacking in many debates. However, the considerable consensus in committees—particularly when it comes to committee inquiries and reports such as the one that we are debating on clinical portals and telehealth—is often missed. The ministerial response came in May, and I agree with Richard Simpson that Shona Robison's speech was undoubtedly much more positive in tone and content than the written response. The report is the culmination of written and oral evidence taking. I hope that ministers have picked up the fact that it reflects frustration among committee members of all parties at the extremely slow progress that has been made in e-health in general and telehealth in particular. The Scottish centre for telehealth merged with NHS 24 in April, so it is possible that parts of the report may already have been overtaken by events. Paragraph 87 highlights the lack of any progress on telehealth systems to date: "The approach adopted by Government to encourage health boards in the use of telehealth systems, to date, has been largely unsuccessful. While many boards have undertaken effective pilot projects, there has been no real incentive to ensure telehealth development overcomes ... cultural resistance". The committee welcomed the merger between the Scottish centre for telehealth and NHS 24, and the report acknowledges the intention to "drive forward the telehealth agenda", but notes that "it is clear from the evidence received, that much of the work to establish a clear focus within NHS 24 on taking forward its new telehealth remit is yet to be undertaken and this needs to be addressed." That sounds to me like more and more delay. There is no doubt about the efficacy of telehealth. When Rhoda Grant and I met representatives from NHS Highland last week, they confirmed the 100 per cent reduction in hospital admissions as a result of the pilot telehealth study in Argyll. Given that telehealth systems lead to better monitoring of patient health and empower patients to self-manage their conditions better, it is unacceptable that such systems have not been rolled out elsewhere in Scotland. I hope that the increased focus on reducing emergency admissions to hospital and finding solutions that will benefit patients and save  the NHS money will lead to the increased use of telehealth. The Government's response to the recommendation for a HEAT target with deadlines for health boards on the use of telehealth systems is disappointing. Stating the need to establish the business case when there have been so many pilots is not encouraging. The Government states that NHS 24 and the Scottish centre for telehealth will "contribute to appropriate events and activities covering a broad range of key stakeholder audiences," but that is best described as a Christine Grahame fudge. I hope that NHS 24 and the Scottish centre for telehealth will do that regardless of any committee report. However, more heartening was the Government's confirmation that "technology offers opportunities to support healthcare in rural and remote communities" and that it "will continue to invest in these technologies and encourage these linkages". I note that Liam McArthur is in the chamber, but I will take advantage of the opportunity to say that NHS Orkney is the only health board in Scotland that does not have a computed tomography scanner for stroke patients, which undoubtedly puts those patients at a disadvantage. I hope that the provision of a telehealth system will be a priority under the new stroke telehealth initiative. The move to develop national services is encouraging, particularly in the areas of paediatrics, stroke, mental health and long-term-condition management. Although no timetable has been given, I hope that that approach will be prioritised in the coming months. Long-term conditions such as asthma, heart failure, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension, depression, drug and alcohol addiction, obesity, smoking and congestive heart failure can all be managed by telehealth products that are designed to benefit doctors and patients through time-saving monitoring and improved confidence. In addition, visits to GP surgeries, hospital admissions and social services visits can be reduced, while better information is gathered. In parts of the Highlands and Islands, patients with mental health problems have been able to access cognitive behavioural therapy via NHS 24, and the feedback from patients and health boards on that has been very positive. On clinical portals, evidence to the committee highlighted the fact that 15 per cent of hospitalisations are complicated by medication errors, one in seven hospital admissions occurs because care providers do not have access to previous hospital records and 20 per cent of  laboratory tests are requested because the results of previous investigations are not accessible. Although 94 per cent of GPs have electronic access to information about patients' current medication, only 12 per cent of hospital doctors and 23 per cent of hospital pharmacists have that information. Surely if the patient is at the heart of our NHS, the patient record should be electronic so that appropriate information is available to health professionals. Indeed, that should also be extended to pharmacists now that they have a prescribing role. Although having an emergency care summary is helpful, it is used only in emergency care. Having heard all the evidence, committee members had no doubt that the aim should be "the development of a single portal system across all health boards, rather than a range of differing systems across the NHS." That point is made in paragraph 31 of our report. In paragraphs 47 and 48, we raise concerns that "multiple portal systems ... will add to the time, complexity and coordination of staff being granted access to such systems". Although the Government does not intend to develop a single database of patient information, I believe that its proposal to have a limit of three databases must be better than having 14. In conclusion, it is important to put on record that we constantly check the NHS to determine whether IT, e-health and telehealth are being used in what we would hope is a modern and innovative health service in Scotland.

Why did the minister decide not to set a health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment target for telehealth, as recommended in paragraph 87 of the committee's report? Why did she decide against setting health boards clear deadlines for the use of telehealth systems?

I congratulate Bill Butler on bringing the debate to the Parliament and I commend him for leading by example and taking his first 27,000 steps. I apologise for the absence of my colleague Bill Aitken. He was extremely keen to speak in the debate but he had another engagement and had to return to Glasgow, which is unfortunate. He asked me to convey his apologies to members. The final part of the motion asks that the Parliament "encourages other local authorities and health bodies to consider using Glas-goals as a blueprint for campaigns across Scotland." As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am much less familiar with Glas-goals than the other speakers are, so I welcomed that part of the motion and I hope that it helps to justify my presence in the debate. The campaign is excellent—if it can work in Glasgow, surely it can also work elsewhere in Scotland, with consensus and working together. It is unfortunate that Glasgow, which is a city of vibrant people, with many attractions, has become synonymous with ill health, as Bill Butler said. We should note that much that applies to Glasgow also applies to areas elsewhere in Scotland. Drug abuse, smoking, alcoholism and the growing problem of obesity take an enormous toll on Glaswegians' health; as we all know, in many cases it can cost them their lives. Accordingly, initiatives such as the Glas-goals campaign are to be warmly welcomed. Not many of us are destined to be Olympic runners, nor is it necessary to take strenuous exercise to achieve a level of fitness—a point that the Minister for Public Health has made constantly in the past few years. Any clinician will say that the beneficial effect of a brisk walk, done regularly, is enormous. From time to time, many people find it challenging to shed weight. We need look only at the queue every Thursday in the Parliament for WeightWatchers to see that not all of us are shining successes. In Glasgow, in particular, the problem of obesity has been exacerbated by poor diet. The traditional fish supper, sugary drinks and too much junk food generally have contributed to the problem. That is why it is so vital that all agencies, health boards, housing associations and local authorities work together to do everything that they can to promote better diets. As Bill Butler says in his motion, it is depressing that 190,000 Glaswegians still smoke. The  message is stark: smoking kills. It is disappointing that that message has still not got through to everyone. All agencies must continue in their efforts to persuade Glaswegians to kick that potentially fatal habit. The Glas-goals campaign deserves to succeed. It recognises that being healthy and taking measures to improve one's fitness can be fun. Although my colleague Bill Aitken was unable to attend the debate, I trust that in future he, along with other MSPs, will be persuaded to join in a tea dance, a run, a walk or some other activities.

Although Shetland became fully connected to pathfinder north in December 2009, there are still concerns across the islands, especially on Unst and Yell, that general access to high-quality broadband is at best patchy. What is the Scottish Government doing to improve the broadband service to all people in Shetland?

I will focus on John Lamont's amendment, which states "that more needs to be done in identifying models that work". Robert Brown shared that sentiment. There are more than 55,000 problem drug users in Scotland, and between 40,000 and 60,000 children are affected by the drug misuse of a parent. As the minister said, the social and economic cost is about £61,000 per drug user. Given that 34 per cent of individuals self-refer to specialist drug services and that a further 30 per cent are referred by a general practitioner, there is no doubt that many drug users acknowledge their problem and take action to seek help and support. A recent review stated that switching to a recovery model is likely to require "a fundamental change in culture and attitudes" by many professionals and communities. That is interesting, and I hope that the minister will clarify the point in summing up the debate. I would have hoped that professionals would already be signed up to the recovery model, rather than to the past approach of parking people on methadone, sometimes for decades. Against that background, I point out that, for every month in 2008-09, an extra 1,000 new individuals engaged with treatment services. In the same year, nearly 0.5 million prescriptions for methadone oral solution were given, at a cost of more than £16 million. That cost has increased by 24 per cent in the past four years. The number of daily methadone doses has more than doubled in NHS Highland and NHS Orkney over those four years, and in the same period it has increased almost threefold in Shetland. With the financial constraints that we face, it is critical that we identify models that work and that are effective in the long term in addressing drug addiction and—as Margo MacDonald said—the causes of addiction. Although we welcomed and continue to support Fergus Ewing's approach, which is based on recovery, it is disappointing that so little progress has been made on what treatment interventions work. That is highlighted in "Research For Recovery: A Review of the Drugs Evidence Base", which states that differences in the effectiveness of different forms of abstinence-oriented treatment have been less consistently researched and reported. It suggests that there is a need for research on and evaluation of drug treatment aftercare and that "a clear strategy is needed for developing"  a Scottish evidence base that will both inform the delivery of "The Road to Recovery" and assess its impact. Audit Scotland's report "Overview of mental health services" states not only that seven out of 10 prisoners have a mental health problem, but that 75 per cent of people who use drugs are estimated to have an underlying mental health problem. I would, therefore, like future research to examine the extent of self-medication. The report also states that barriers to recovery include psychological problems such as mental illness and the absence of strengths such as self-esteem. Therefore, any recovery model must have an evidential base and must include the factors that are critical to recovery, particularly given the cost of the services. I would go a step further and ask the minister to consider that, in future, funding be allocated on the basis of evidence of the effectiveness of services. Despite the financial constraints that we face now and will face in future years, I ask that we move from a crisis management-type of treatment to a more positive and appropriate approach that is based on the individual's needs as well as on prevention and early intervention, such as Dr Ian McKee outlined. I found his experience and his speech very interesting. I conclude by commending Narcotics Anonymous. We constantly talk about taxpayers' money funding voluntary organisations, but Narcotics Anonymous, like Alcoholics Anonymous, neither receives nor wishes to receive taxpayers' or Government money. However, every week, in towns and villages throughout Scotland, including Inverness, meetings are held by recovering drug addicts who are supporting each other to achieve long-term, drug-free lives.

Many drug addicts become very isolated. Will the minister acknowledge the wonderful contribution of Narcotics Anonymous, which acts as a support service to individuals through its weekly meetings across Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth or his officials last met representatives of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and what issues were discussed. (S3O-11278)

Has the topic of giving greater powers to local authorities to deal with unauthorised encampments by Travellers been raised at those discussions? Moray Council is currently consulting on proposals for authorised encampments near Buckie and Forres, where significant local concerns have been raised, but there seem to be differing views on what councils are required to provide at encampments for travelling families. Will the cabinet secretary provide further information and guidance on that issue?

These are difficult financial times, and I ask the member whether her party supports the fact that councils pay 80 per cent more to place a person in residential care in a council home than they do to place them in the independent and voluntary sector.

I congratulate Gil Paterson on securing tonight's debate, which rightly allows Parliament to thank the Scottish Cot Death Trust for the tremendous work that it has done over the past 25 years and, I hope, to raise awareness of this issue. Over the summer I spent considerable time with babies: a month ago my daughter gave birth to twins. When we look at newborn babies, we realise what a special gift they are. With only a small grant of £5,000 each year from the Scottish Executive, the majority of the trust's funds come from donations and fundraising efforts. Over the past 25 years, the trust has invested more than £3 million in research projects, in educating thousands of parents and professionals about cot death and informing them of how to reduce the risk of that tragedy happening to them, and in supporting families in Scotland who have had to endure the heartache of losing a baby or young child to sudden and unexpected death in infancy. The work of the Scottish Cot Death Trust has clearly had an impact. As Gil Paterson said, in 1985 there were 153 sudden infant deaths, but in 2009 the figure was 32. We should recognise and acknowledge the reduction in deaths that has taken place over the 25 years in which the trust has been in operation. It is also noticeable from the statistics that in 1985 the sudden infant death rate per 1,000 live births was 2.32, whereas last year it was 0.54—a considerable reduction. Cot death is not a new problem. It was mentioned in the first Book of Kings, in the Bible, which states: "and this woman's child died during the night because she overlaid it". Views and opinions have changed but, as other members have said, sudden death in an otherwise healthy infant can still happen to any baby or young child, regardless of their family background or social status. However, studies suggest that a teenage mum is six times more likely to have a child suffer cot death than is a mum over 20. As David Stewart said, male children are twice as likely as female children to suffer cot death. The chances of a child suffering cot death also increase if their parents smoke and take drugs. All that justifies the research that the Scottish Cot Death Trust has carried out and the resources that it has allocated to research. The Scottish Conservatives have long argued for a universal health visitor programme to improve the support that is offered to new parents and the advice and guidance that are given to them as they raise their child. Although it may not be possible to eradicate cot death completely,  provision of more health visitors to assist new parents and to warn them about some of the major risks that can cause cot death would surely assist in further reducing the number of deaths. The Scottish Cot Death Trust has published a report of some 50 pages on the pilot of a multidisciplinary case review of each sudden unexpected death in infancy. Throughout it, there is a sense of frustration at the many delays and problems that could have been overcome including, for example, the time that is taken for the Crown Office to issue guidance to procurators fiscal, the number of fiscals who frequently fail to follow instructions, the lack of meetings being organised by paediatricians a year and a half into the pilot, and the lack of a standardised policy inquiry form to allow information to be collated from the time of a child's death. The work of the Scottish Cot Death Trust cannot be overstated. I am delighted to have been able to take part in this debate.

I acknowledge everything that Aileen Campbell has said. I want to highlight the concerns of women in the Highlands who are imprisoned in Cornton Vale prison. Such women often do not see their children for months, if not years, and are therefore unable to build bonds with them. That is a particular issue.

Before Cathie Craigie leaves the chamber, I will mention the excellent work that she has done on the cross-party group on deafness over many years—in all three sessions of the Parliament so far, I think. I also congratulate Bill Kidd on securing the debate. As one in seven people in Scotland is affected by some form of hearing loss, it is only right that we recognise and acknowledge the needs of the deaf community. As the motion mentions, lip-reading is one way in which some people who are affected by hearing loss can communicate. Learning to lip-read has increasingly been shown to raise confidence among people who have difficulty in hearing, and it has made them more attractive to employers: 70 per cent of deaf people believe that they have failed to get a job because of their deafness, so extending their opportunities for communication allows many deaf people to enter into the previously uncharted territory of the workplace. The Royal National Institute for Deaf People surveyed a group of newly diagnosed deaf people and found that, without the experience of lip-reading classes, they would not have known what services were available to them at home, including the installation of domestic loop systems and visual smoke alarms and doorbells. RNID Scotland is aware that people with deafness and hearing loss continue to struggle to understand  and manage their condition because of a lack of deaf awareness, and that they struggle to access the services that are available to them. I was shocked to hear that there are currently only 34 lip-reading tutors in Scotland, providing 63 classes. Classes are unavailable in three health board areas and in 18 local authority areas, so I hope that the Minister for Housing and Communities will take action to ensure that lip-reading classes are offered to people who need them and that they will perhaps be included in future single outcome agreements. The benefits of learning BSL for both deaf and hearing people are well documented. In preparation for the debate, my researcher contacted Marsie Stuart of Sign and be 'Heard', which is an Ayrshire-based business that specialises in teaching BSL to staff in workplaces across Scotland. Marsie and her colleague aim to allow people who can hear fully to communicate with people who have hearing impairments. That not only benefits users of BSL, but opens up for people opportunities that they had overlooked in the past. Two good examples of that work can be found in the major supermarkets, Morrisons and Tesco. Both reported that more deaf people had applied for work there because staff had been trained and could now sign to them. Research shows that the biggest barrier to deaf people at work is the lack of understanding by employers and other employees. The courses are a huge step forward in integrating the deaf community into all work environments. Sign and be 'Heard' believes that BSL, which was recognised as an official language in 2003, should be taught as a second language at nursery school or primary school. Estimates show that more than 6,000 people in Scotland have BSL as their first or preferred language. I had not known this before, but I understand that only 30 per cent of our alphabet is lip-readable. If that is accurate, surely more emphasis could and should be placed on BSL. With only one qualified sign-language interpreter for every 200 BSL users in Scotland, there is undoubtedly a severe shortage. Perhaps that explains the absence of a signer from our public gallery. At present, deaf children are mainstreamed in Scottish schools and are, I understand, offered only 40 minutes per week with a BSL support worker. I have no doubt that provision varies throughout Scotland, but 40 minutes seems to be minimal. In the majority of cases, their peer group and teachers have no knowledge of BSL and so cannot communicate effectively with them at other times. BSL communication also benefits people with difficulties such as Down's syndrome, Asperger's syndrome and autism.  I hope that the debate will help to highlight the gap in services for people who are deaf or hard of hearing. There is no doubt that there remains a huge amount that can be done to improve the future of all deaf people in society through education.

Will the cabinet secretary ensure that any member of staff who raises concerns relating to patient care is protected from disciplinary procedures or any other form of reprisal from the NHS?

I, too, thank our friends the Lib Dems for using their time to debate free personal care and acknowledge the cross-party commitment to the policy.  During the passage of Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill, the Conservatives stated that a long-term approach to funding free personal care was essential. Indeed, that has been highlighted in the briefing that we have all received from Age Scotland. With the new coalition Government at Westminster, we have an opportunity to engage constructively in finding ways of funding long-term care for the elderly. In preparation for the debate, I looked back at my speech in the stage 3 debate on the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill, which had been taken through the committee stages under Margaret Smith's able convenership of the Health and Community Care Committee. I noted then that, instead of the "single body for budget holding and planning and commissioning community care services"— [ Official Report , 6 February 2002; c 6099.]  that the committee had recommended, we got "aligned and pooled budgets". I also remember that all witnesses bar one were in favour of a single budget, although there was no agreement on which organisation would hold it. That confirms the basis of Murdo Fraser's amendment in this debate. The Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 also introduced direct payments for the elderly, which were welcomed as bringing more accountability, freedom and choice into the provision of care. However, many carers have found councils less than willing to assist them with this service. As a result, the council becomes the monopoly provider of home care services, with no alternative available to people who feel that the service is not what has been promised. Secondly, the act promised that elderly people cared for at home or in care homes would receive regular six-monthly assessments, which are essential in ensuring that the care package is updated to address the individual's on-going needs. I know from many constituency cases that some people have been on the same care package for years, whether it is home care or residential care, with no further assessments being carried out, despite the fact that their general condition and mobility have deteriorated considerably. During committee proceedings at the time, we constantly discussed the issue of having one type of care home for the elderly, and were assured that that would be the case. There were to be integrated care homes that would take care of people's residential and nursing needs, with no need to move elderly people to another place for nursing care. However, that has not happened. Instead, we have three types of care homes for the elderly: residential, nursing and integrated. The result is that elderly people remain in  residential care homes when they really need nursing care, and the appropriate level of care is not given at the time of need. Further, many care homes provide nursing care but are paid for providing a lower level of care. In Inverness recently, a woman who is a nurse visited her mother in a residential care home and had to point out to staff that her mother had had a stroke. That was because there were no nursing staff there. That highlights the situation, which was not what the Parliament intended. I trust that the minister will examine that. As I said earlier in an intervention, in the current financial situation we must surely consider the cost of placements in care homes. From a freedom of information inquiry last year, I learned that Highland Council—which today will vote on care homes, as I am sure Jamie Stone will point out—pays 80 per cent more for a person in a council home than it does for someone in a home in the voluntary or the independent sector.

Let me finish. Argyll and Bute Council pays £357 for someone in the independent or the voluntary sector compared with £817 for a person in a council home. In Dundee, the figure is £454 for the independent sector and £826 for council homes. The fact is that all care homes must meet identical quality standards. Under the current funding arrangements, for every five people who are funded in the independent sector, only three can be cared for in council homes from the same budget. Given the demographics that we face, we must be honest and fair and consider that issue. Then we have the self-funders. Given that every person who is in a care service receives an identical level of care, should not the payments for their care be identical? Those who are self-funding can pay twice the amount that the council pays for care of another resident, which surely is not fair or reasonable. That has resulted in many families of people who are self-funding complaining that they are subsidising the care of others. As Jackie Baillie said, given the rising number of people who are in need of free personal care, more emphasis must be put on preventive care. That is a good point that we should not lose sight of. Access to chiropody services, shorter waiting lists for assessment and access to aids are all essential. I seek clarity from the minister, either in her winding-up speech or in a letter, on the issue of notional capital. What is the time period for disposing of the family home and the use of that financial asset to pay for care?  I support the motion and the amendment in the name of Murdo Fraser.

In terms of efficiency and the background of the financial challenges that we face, is it reasonable and fair that councils pay 80 per cent more for a placement in a council home than they do to place someone in the independent or voluntary sector?

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body how many of its employees earn more than the First Minister's combined salary. (S3O-11092)

Given the fact that four permanent employees in the core directorate of the Scottish Government have a base salary in excess of the First Minister's combined salary and the fact that 41 members of staff in the Parliament are paid more than the basic MSP salary, although they do not reach the salary of the First Minister, what form of job evaluation and appraisal is undertaken to ensure value for taxpayers' money?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I thank the Scottish Government and the business managers for agreeing to hold the debate—the first on domestic violence against men in 11 years of the Scottish Parliament. I also welcome to the public gallery the petitioner Alison Waugh. I thank Alex Neil for listening to those who have campaigned on the issue for a long time and for funding a helpline for male victims of domestic abuse. Like others, I would have preferred the helpline to be in Scotland, and I would have been even more pleased had there been any services for male victims in Scotland to which the helpline could refer callers. I also thank Mike Rumbles for his first-class, excellent speech, as well as John Wilson, with whom I have worked on the issue for some years. Finally, I thank Paul Martin for being the bravest man in the Labour ranks and coming along to the launch of the helpline on behalf of the Labour Party. To every male victim and associated child in Scotland, I say that Labour is not listening to you. According to Labour, men feel no pain.

No, sorry.  Although we constantly talk about violence against women—and now men—we should not forget the children who are often caught in the crossfire of exchanges. Where there is help for women, there is also, rightly, help and support for their children, as well as opportunities for the male perpetrators to address their anger management and other issues. However, when the perpetrator is female, there is no help with anger management, because in Scotland there is no recognition of the fact that women can be the perpetrators. Neither is there help for the male victims or their children. That cannot and should not continue. As I stated in the debate on violence against women, no one is claiming that the resources that are allocated to support female victims and their children should be challenged or, indeed, reduced; we are asking only for a level playing field and social justice for male victims. Data from the Scottish crime and justice survey from September 2009 highlighted in the Scotland on Sunday "Spectrum" magazine showed that, in the preceding 12 months, young men aged 16 to 24 experienced physical and/or psychological abuse more often than young women and more often than any other demographic group. The survey also revealed that 48 per cent of perpetrators of partner abuse are male and that 45 per cent are female. Police came to know about 35 per cent of incidents of partner abuse that women experienced in the preceding 12 months but about only 8 per cent of incidents in which the man was on the receiving end. Forty per cent of men told no one about incidents, compared with 21 per cent of women who told no one. As other members have said, it is a fact that 14 per cent of incidents that the police record are against men and that 85 per cent are against women. However, since 2001, the previous Executive and the Government have spent £100 million on services for women and their children and £28,000 on male victims. The evidence that male victims gave to the Public Petitions Committee was highly emotive and compelling. The petition from Alison Waugh and Jackie Walls is not unreasonable. They call only for fairness, justice and equality, to ensure that the needs of male victims and their children are met. In Scotland, they should expect no less. The abuse need not end when the man leaves the house. Abused fathers and their children are far more likely to experience attempts to end meaningful contact between them after a family break-up. That might not be considered abuse, but denying any parent the right to see their child is the height of abuse. I welcome the helpline, but questions still need to be asked. Why was no tender for the helpline issued? Instead, the Scottish Domestic Abuse  Helpline, which is for female victims, and the men's advice line in London were asked to submit proposals. The latter was awarded the contract. The children of male victims are still waiting to be acknowledged, let alone helped. Since the publication of "Boys allowed", the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children has counselled 58,311 boys. That figure has more than doubled in five years. That happened because the NSPCC overhauled its training for call handlers and advertised to win boys' confidence. As the minister acknowledged, more still has to be done to publicise the male helpline. A lack of publicity might result in few calls, which could be used as a reason to halt funding. I hope that today's long-awaited debate will ensure that all victims and all children who suffer through domestic violence are given the support and care that they need and deserve in a modern and compassionate Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

I have listened carefully to what the member has said. Given that she has listened to all victims since the Parliament started in 1999, why is it that the best support that a male victim in Scotland can get is a telephone helpline in Brighton?

Do men not feel pain?

We share all of the concerns that have been expressed about the high level of alcohol consumption in Scotland and our complex relationship with alcohol, to which other members have referred. I thank the Conveners Group for agreeing to fund the Health and Sport Committee's visit to Finland and France, which we found extremely helpful. We have examined the evidence base for the relationship between the minimum price of alcohol and reductions in overall consumption, and we do not think that minimum pricing will be effective in achieving its goal. However, we support many other measures in the bill, which will be effective in reducing alcohol consumption. The first and second versions of the Sheffield study on minimum pricing varied considerably: the new version predicted 35 per cent fewer deaths attributable to alcohol, 43 per cent fewer alcohol-related deaths in 10 years and 20 per cent fewer hospital admissions in year 1. Unfortunately, all of the discussion with witnesses at stage 1 and everything that is contained in the committee's stage 1 report was based on the previous Sheffield model, not the up-to-date, more accurate version, which contains Scottish rather than English data. Also missing from the Sheffield study is the effect of cross-border trading, which we know can be significant. There is no mention of internet  sales, in spite of the fact that Asda reports for alcohol "very high, double-digit, year-on-year growth in internet sales."—[ Official Report , Health and Sport Committee , 10 March 2010; c 2909.] The Sheffield study contains no analysis of binge drinking, which is one of our biggest problems. As other members have said, there is no mention of the effect on low-income families. There is also no examination of the substitution effect—for example, some younger people might use illegal drugs instead of alcohol. The model, which has been likened to the weather forecast, is based on an increase in price to the minimum price and an assumed fall in demand, but other ways of buying alcohol—over the internet and from across the border—will negate any such fall. When prices were raised in Finland, people continued to consume alcohol at the same level—they just bought more from Estonia. Professor Beath confirmed that, as the price falls, more will be consumed, but that, as the price rises, people will find ways of continuing to consume at the same level, at lower prices. The committee saw and heard that throughout its evidence. Given that minimum pricing will lead to increased revenues and potential profits for producers and retailers, the higher income will allow them to reduce the price of more expensive alcohol products, in order to sell a greater volume of alcohol while maintaining revenues and profits. As was stated in evidence, minimum pricing could result in an increase in overall sales of alcohol, not a reduction. The 2008 Scottish health survey was the basis for mark 2 of the Sheffield study. It confirms that weekly consumption for men and women has fallen significantly, yet there have been no corresponding reductions in health or justice harms, which the Sheffield study predicts for reduced alcohol consumption. The survey also states: "Levels of consumption were highest among women in managerial and professional households, in the highest income quintile and among those living in the least deprived areas." A minimum price is much less likely to reduce alcohol consumption by higher income earners, given that the price increase will be a smaller percentage of their income. There is no doubt that culture is a major issue in the consumption of alcohol in Scotland. Audit Scotland's "Overview of mental health services" states clearly: "up to one in two people with alcohol problems may have a mental health problem."  Paying more attention to early diagnosis and intervention for people with mental health issues might prevent them from resorting to alcohol as a form of self-medication. During the committee's visits to Finland and France, we were constantly asked why we were proposing to introduce a minimum price, which would increase profits for retailers and producers, rather than a tax, which would increase income to Government. People at the French Treasury found that incredible, as did many in Finland. That is clear from today's debate. Much has been said about whether the introduction of a minimum price is competent under EU law—an issue that is still to be resolved. The issue is not just whether the minimum price per unit will be 40p, 50p, 60p or 70p; the Parliament does not know how the approach can be compatible with EU law while we do not know whether it is the least intrusive method or whether the health benefits that are claimed for it are accurate. I was surprised that we did not receive further clarity in that regard. The social responsibility levy has not been thought through and Government officials have not met the industry in six months. There is no evidence for minimum pricing. We need clarity in promotional materials. The social responsibility levy has not been presented in a manner that gives confidence. On that basis, we will abstain in the vote on the motion.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Several Labour members mentioned the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition at Westminster. I remind them that the governor of the Bank of England confirmed the feasibility and advisability of tackling the deficit this year. He said: "The bigger risk at present ... would be for a new government not to put in place clear and credible measures to deal with the fiscal deficit." I thank Ross Finnie and Hugh Henry for concentrating on the outcomes of quality of care and ensuring the essential skills mix. I agree with what Rhoda Grant said about NHS Highland's rheumatology unit, for treatment at which there is no waiting list. All Highland members attended that unit, where we saw at first hand what could be done. The same quality and intensity of service could not be offered in a patient's home. I also thank my colleague Dr Nanette Milne, who always brings to debates the background of her own experience and her experience as the wife of a GP. We are grateful to the Labour Party for selecting health as the topic for this morning's debate. In the current dire financial circumstances, it is right and proper that we discuss our national health service. It is also right and proper that we set the standard for debate in Scotland by focusing on patient care and treatment, managing long-term conditions, prevention and public health. For too long, the NHS has been judged by how many beds it provides, how many wards it runs, how many hospitals it has and how many prescriptions it hands out. As Ian McKee said, such judgments are made against a background of modern day surgery, which allows patients to go home on the day of surgery rather than having to stay in hospital for up to two weeks, as used to be the case. Hip replacement patients used to be hospitalised for up to three weeks. They are now in hospital for as little as three days. Last night, at a round-table discussion on infant nutrition, the midwives and health visitors told us of mothers leaving hospital six hours after giving birth, without even returning to a ward. Mothers who have had a Caesarean section, who used to face a minimum stay of 10 days, can now go home after three days. Today's debate also takes place against a background of efficiency savings in Scotland's NHS. I do not think that I was the only member of the Health and Sport Committee to be shocked to find out about the waste that is being rooted out of the NHS, which begs the question why taxpayers' money was not spent more efficiently in the past. I will give some examples. NHS Ayrshire and Arran found energy savings of £230,000. NHS  Lanarkshire reduced its hospitality costs by 50 per cent and its postage costs by £120,000. Another health board cut its costs in half by sharing a store for aids and adaptations. A representative of NHS Borders told the committee that it had a "fair bit of duplication" because there were separate waiting lists for primary health care teams and community teams. Merging those two waiting lists enabled the board to make better use of resources and to streamline services for patients. None of those changes affected front-line patient care. In evidence to the committee, it emerged that NHS Lanarkshire could take £1 million out of its public health budget and could guarantee that that would not affect patient care or public health now or in the future. I asked the witness from NHS Lanarkshire about that three times and she stated firmly that that was the case. The same health board has cut 117 jobs, all in administration. The witness from NHS Lothian said: "although there has been significant investment across the NHS, there has not necessarily been huge activity gain, so there is an issue with productivity."—[ Official Report, Health and Sport Committee , 12 May 2010; c 3157.]

Before commenting on that, I would like to find out what is being done in community pharmacies, which I recognise play an excellent role in smoking cessation, and whether they could pick up more people. I would prefer to focus on more people stopping smoking, however that is achieved. We might be looking at only half the equation. The point that has been made by many Labour members and others is that how the efficiency savings that are sought are managed is the critical issue. I do not want the NHS to stifle innovation or not to adopt a modern approach to the delivery of high-quality services. There are many examples of spending to save in the NHS and, in that regard, I make no apologies for again mentioning mental health. Giving patients the appropriate early diagnosis, early intervention and early treatment, tailored to their individual needs, would prevent stress, anxiety and mild depression from becoming severe, chronic and enduring in the long term.

I will do, once I have finished my point.  The provision of good care and treatment at the right time would not only save money in the NHS, but allow people to continue to work rather than being destined for a life on benefits.

I apologise for not taking the intervention. Finally—

I thank Jackie Baillie and Murdo Fraser for their generous comments. Equally, I pay tribute to my colleague Jackson Carlaw for his commitment, passion and humour, which made it a pleasure to work with him on the health brief. In supporting Murdo Fraser's amendment, I will highlight some consequences—unintended or not—that occur as a result of the tick-box culture to meet waiting time targets in the NHS. We can all agree on the drive for patients to receive the best-quality treatment, but that has to be at the time that they need it. That is the first problem with the target. As 99 per cent of doctors who took part in the BMA survey confirmed, "Patient waiting times should be based on the individual patient's clinical needs—not political targets." I will give an example. A constituent in the Highlands was referred by his GP for a hip replacement some years ago, but that did not happen. He received cortisone injections, so he received treatment, although it may not have been the appropriate treatment, but a box was ticked and success was marked. Now, after three injections, he has only recently got on to the waiting list for surgery. He is in serious pain, he has had to give up work and he cannot walk. Would it not have been better to have given him the hip replacement when he needed it, based on his individual, unique clinical need? Instead, despite his immobility and his serious pain, he is likely to wait another 18 weeks to keep the NHS within its targets. How can that be in any way helpful to his recovery and, I hope, his return to work? The second point, which has been raised by other members, including Christine Grahame, is that waiting times are not the only or indeed the best indicator of health performance. Could patient outcomes, which Murdo Fraser mentioned, readmission rates and the millions of pounds paid out in clinical negligence not all be considered? That brings me to the many conditions that, as other members have mentioned, become subject to Cinderella services because they are not included in waiting time targets. I am with Karen Gillon on the issue of mental health. For far too long—for months, years or decades—people have been parked on anti-depressants because of the long waits for psychological and psychiatric support. I know that many GPs do not bother referring patients with  stress, anxiety and mild depression in the knowledge that there are long waits. The lack of early diagnosis and early intervention results in a mild condition becoming a chronic and enduring mental health problem. Jackie Baillie mentioned infertility. There is not only an age bar with respect to infertility; there are long waiting lists. That forces many people to find their own private treatment. Many people I know in the Highlands have remortgaged their homes to pay for treatment. Many people who can ill afford to do so are being forced to go private. I will give another example. I am being extremely consensual. Yesterday, Andy Kerr and I, as, respectively, the convener and the vice convener of the cross-party group on ME and chronic fatigue syndrome, listened to patients and clinicians who are working towards a Scottish good patient practice statement on ME, which Professor Lewis Ritchie described as "bringing the condition out of the shadows". The patients and clinicians talked about their aim of getting an accurate diagnosis, recognition of the condition by GPs, consistency of treatment and referral to specialists. That is taken for granted for pretty well all conditions in Scotland, but with ME, there are so few specialists that referrals do not even take place. I welcome the additional bariatric surgery at the Golden Jubilee national hospital, but, if my figures are correct, I understand that there are more than 2,000 people on the waiting list. With the number of operations that it is intended will take place each year, I think that we will find that it will be many years before the existing waiting list is got through, let alone any additions to it. Finally, the pursuit of targets means that health boards have little time for innovations, such as telehealth and other e-health opportunities, whose implementation can be much more in patients' interests. I am talking about modern, innovative, high-quality care. Like other members of the Health and Sport Committee, I have been shocked by the ease with which health boards can make efficiency savings. I think that it was asked in the previous debate why such savings have not been being made for years if making them is so easy. However, I hope that the greater emphasis on value for money, a quality strategy and better treatment will encourage much-needed innovation and help to put patients' needs back at the heart of the NHS.

I ask the minister to ensure that optometrists throughout Scotland will all be given the opportunity to monitor regularly the eyesight of patients with diabetes, to reduce travel times to hospitals and enhance partnerships within the NHS.

To ask the Scottish Executive what is being done to alleviate road traffic congestion in the Inverness area. (S3O-10678)

The main reasons for congestion in Inverness are the need for a bypass and long queues on the Kessock bridge. Could the minister give an update on progress on the Inverness bypass? How can congestion on the Kessock bridge be alleviated, given that Highland Council's plans do not include provision for a park-and-ride facility at Tore and the council cannot guarantee that such provision will be included in future plans?

Will the member give way?

Now that Margaret Curran also belongs to another house, and given the new respect agenda, does she regret on behalf of the Labour Party that in 11 years we had one visit from a Labour Prime Minister in which he gave a lecture to this Parliament? Does she welcome the respect agenda?

It was a quotation from Lord George Robertson.

I did not assert—at any time—that no improvements had been made on the NorthLink service. I would not want anyone to get the impression that I did so.

I had a members' business debate in 2002 on the northern isles ferries. Very little has changed since then. However, I welcome and commend the book "Pentland Hero" by Scottish National Party councillor in the Highland Council, Roy Pederson, who states clearly the David-and-Goliath battle that has been faced by Andrew Banks, who is a farmer's son from Orkney. To be politically balanced, I can do no better than quote from the foreword by Lord George Robertson, former Secretary of State for Defence and secretary-general of NATO and a Labour MP for 21 years, because I do not think that I could have put this better. He said: "This is the story of how the islands of Scotland, the subject of noisy and wholly justified championing over the years, have in fact been betrayed by the very authorities they trusted to protect their vital connectivity with the mainland. It is also a story, as yet unfinished, of how the taxpayer has for many years shored up inefficient, inappropriate, over-expensive ferry services where in many cases there have been cheaper, efficient, subsidy-free alternatives. The book chronicles a classic example of how one man had the tenacity, the resources, the persistence and public-minded spirit to provide a ferry service for his fellow citizens between his native Orkney Islands to the nearest part of the Scottish mainland. It is a tale of governmental skulduggery, unfair competition and elected authoritarianism—all designed to drive him from his dream of a better and cheaper service for the public—and all of it organised and orchestrated by the very people, in Edinburgh and Kirkwall, elected to look after the islanders' interests." Those are George Robertson's words, not mine. He compares the enterprising spirit and profitable  ferry crossing to the state-owned CalMac Ferries—and to NorthLink Ferries Ltd—which manages to make a loss on every single route it operates. Andrew Banks faced, and still faces, countless obstacles, hostility and a cash-rich competitor with limitless taxpayers' funds. According to Roy Pedersen's book, Orkney Islands Council has now publicly admitted that it refused Andrew Banks access to a council-owned pier in order to constrain his services. Nonetheless, Andrew Banks was recognised by his fellow Orcadians. When the local newspaper Orkney Today launched in 2004 an annual trophy to recognise individuals who had made outstanding contributions to their community, Orcadians chose Andrew Banks—the Pentland hero—as the outstanding ambassador for Orkney and a shining example to others. Unlike many elected politicians, civil servants and others of the day with responsibility for ferry services—as George Robertson said—Orcadians recognised the entrepreneur's invaluable contribution. I will compare Pentland Ferries' MV Pentalina with NorthLink Ferries' MV Hamnavoe. The Hamnavoe cost £30 million; the Pentalina cost £7 million. NorthLink's Hamnavoe needs a crew of 28, while Pentalina has a crew of 10. The Hamnavoe travels at 17 knots and the Pentalina travels at 16 knots. The Pentalina's fuel consumption rate is 620 litres per hour; the rate on NorthLink's Hamnavoe is three times greater, at 1,835 litres per hour. For all its cost, the Hamnavoe takes only 17 more cars than the Pentalina does. As interesting as those comparisons is the comparison of subsidy. Pentland Ferries services receive nothing—not a penny. In 2007, NorthLink received £31 million. A report that was published in 2006 drew attention to a subsidy for NorthLink of £78 million. In 2008-09, the subsidy for CalMac and NorthLink rose to £90 million. Their boats involved huge capital costs, which taxpayers funded, and the new piers cost more than £50 million. In comparison, Andrew Banks bought two second-hand CalMac ferries, built two piers and ran a ferry service at a profit. He had more than 11,621 passengers in July 2001, in his first year of operation. That was an excellent tourism year in Orkney. Andrew Banks's service gave local people the opportunity to travel to the mainland on a shorter and cheaper route than that of the subsidised NorthLink, whose subsidy rose from 22 per cent in 1991 to 62 per cent in 2007. An example of the skulduggery that Lord George Robertson mentioned comes from online advertising. A Google search for "Pentland Ferries" took people directly to a link to www.northlinkferries.co.uk.  I commend Pentland Ferries for maintaining the ferry link between Orkney and mainland Scotland when the Hamnavoe was diverted to Bergen to assist stranded air passengers during the initial volcanic ash disruption. The greatest trading company in the industrial world was the Hudson's Bay Company. Many Orcadians were at that company's helm. We should congratulate Andrew Banks and Pentland Ferries on battling the state, elected politicians and civil servants to provide a first-class service from Caithness to Orkney. We need entrepreneurs and we need to value them. I hope that the debate conveys the message that Scotland needs entrepreneurs such as Andrew Banks and that the state, the Government and all elected politicians will work to support them rather than be against them.

I welcome this members' business debate on lymphoedema, which has been secured by Malcolm Chisholm: once a health minister, always a health minister. I also congratulate Breakthrough Breast Cancer on the excellent work that it does.  I learned about lymphoedema during a meeting in the Parliament in which a lady from the Western Isles talked about her experience. I admit that I knew nothing about it until then. The debate is an excellent opportunity to address an issue that is related to breast cancer care, and which could affect more than 9,000 women in Scotland. The motion is about provision in NHS Lothian, but the issues that are raised in it apply equally to the rest of Scotland. There is no doubt that the service needs to be more equitable and of higher quality. Breakthrough Breast Cancer highlighted that, for some people, lymphoedema serves "as an unwanted, constant reminder of breast cancer." It is worth mentioning that point. In NHS Highland, the main problem is that there appears to be no specific service for lymphoedema management and no one department that provides the service. Although oncology units provide a service to some people, it is patchy. Some staff are trained in lymphoedema management, but they are also trained in the management of many other conditions and their time is split. We need the right guidelines and the right focus on lymphoedema. In the NHS Highland area, more than 200 women are registered as lymphoedema patients. That might or might not be an underestimate. As Malcolm Chisholm said, the symptoms can range from a small swelling in the hand to full-blown swelling of the arms or legs. Although lymphoedema services are available part time in Inverness, Caithness, Sutherland and Skye, at present no service operates in other areas, including Lochaber. Following treatment for breast cancer, patients are given a leaflet that offers advice and information on the disease and which details specific exercises to help with lymphoedema. There is also good advice on the National Cancer Institute website, but neither of those is a substitute for high-quality care and advice from an experienced professional who specialises in lymphoedema management. Although light exercise and maintaining a healthy weight are important factors, as stated on the National Cancer Institute website, they are not guaranteed to eradicate lymphoedema. There is no doubt about the condition's impact on individuals' quality of life. As well as the emotional distress, there is the impact of severe swelling of the arms and legs, and it continually prevents many people from doing simple tasks such as washing the dishes. I support the motion in the name of Malcolm Chisholm. I hope that the debate will raise  awareness and encourage the production of national guidelines for patients for management of lymphoedema. That is a part of good cancer care. We must get the cancer care right, but it is equally important to get the aftercare right.

I am grateful to Mr O'Donnell for raising that. I have to say to him that the questioning from the Health and Sport Committee was robust. The board said that there was duplication in the service and that the duplication had been streamlined. I would like to think that it gave an honest contribution in evidence to the committee. I do not think that I have any right to disbelieve it, despite my being a healthy sceptic. It assured us that there were no cuts to public health.

"The Healthcare Quality Strategy for NHSScotland" is interesting in that it sets out priorities, foundations and strategies. As Jackie Baillie said, no one doubts the need to focus on the quality of health care and—particularly in the current circumstances—on the best value for the public pound. I say before making positive and constructive points that I will probably come under the category of healthy sceptic. I must ask why it is necessary to state the three aims of "putting people at the heart of our NHS ... providing the best possible care and advice compassionately and reliably" and "making measurable improvement in the ... quality of care". As the cabinet secretary said, surely that is already happening. Do NHS staff really need to be told that? As for person-centred, safe and effective health care, is it really necessary to publish a document to state such key drivers and ambitions to staff who provide a first-class and excellent service day by day, as the cabinet secretary has said? Quality ambitions that the strategy has required to outline are that "There will be no avoidable injury or harm to people from healthcare they receive ... an appropriate, clean and safe environment" and "The most appropriate treatments, interventions, support and services ... provided at the right time to" all who will benefit. In all the time that I have taken an interest in the health service, particularly since 1999, I assumed that that was happening. It is incredible that any Government in any country should have to outline the fundamental ethos of health care, as the Scottish Government does in its new strategy for the NHS. For many people who have years of service in our NHS,  being told to be caring and compassionate, to avoid harm to patients and to provide patient-centred, safe and effective care is surely hurtful—to say the least. They have done that all their lives and that is why they gave their commitment and vocation to the NHS. The strategy lacks emphasis on joint working with partners, which could be the basis of a quality strategy in its own right. The recent Health and Sport Committee inquiry into out-of-hours NHS care in rural areas showed the lack of joint working and of communication between NHS 24, accident and emergency departments, general practitioners and the Scottish Ambulance Service. I say to the cabinet secretary that the patient experience can be enhanced only by the whole health service working seamlessly. Also absent from the document is mention of the fact that although the NHS is our caring profession, the way in which it treats its staff is not always too caring. Grievance and disciplinary procedures, along with staff suspensions and gardening leave, can last for months or years. That has a devastating impact on individuals and their families, represents a loss of skills to the health service and costs money in salaries, while not allowing NHS professionals to practice or patients to benefit. That takes me to the issue of whistleblowing. From many constituency cases in the Highlands, I know that there is no doubt that the NHS does not provide a positive and constructive environment for staff to suggest improvements. The British Medical Association report "Standing up For Doctors; Speaking Out For Patients", published today, found that only 5 per cent of doctors are aware of a whistleblowing policy, with junior doctors being significantly less likely to report concerns, stating that they were not confident that they would be listened to and were concerned that they might alienate themselves from their colleagues or that their career prospects could be harmed. Doctors' concerns relate to patient care—the behaviour of fellow staff members and NHS boards' targets and strategies—yet doctors do not work in an environment that allows issues of patient safety to be raised. Unless that changes, the patient cannot be at the heart of our health service. I am interested to know how the quality scorecard will address such issues.

I have always had a good working relationship with my Lib Dem colleagues in the Highlands. I am highlighting what is absent from the strategy, which is important. There could be more focus on partnership, based on NHS Scotland working with independent contractors. There is no doubt that one of the most improved and effective care partnerships is in optometry and pharmacy. As a result of previous Scottish Executive funding, people across Scotland can have their cataracts and other eye issues monitored in their local area. I trust that the SNP will continue its support for engaging health professionals across Scotland for patients' benefit. For example, more referrals to chiropractors would help to get people mobile, independent and back to work much sooner than if they have to wait for the target time to see a consultant. Despite the SNP manifesto pledge to increase access to alternative therapies to improve patients' quality of life, that does not appear to be happening. My final points relate to yesterday's meeting of the Health and Sport Committee, to which Jackie Baillie referred. When NHS Lanarkshire can cut £1 million from its public health budget, due to duplication, and give the committee a cast-iron assurance that that will not impact on the current or future health of its population, there is no doubt that a more efficient use of resources is necessary and possible. Indeed, Christine Grahame asked why the board has not been making such cuts for years, if it is so easy. We cannot support the Labour Party amendment, given that all members of the Health and Sport Committee, from all parties, robustly questioned witnesses from health boards about their budgets and were consistently told that they were reducing duplication, improving patient pathways, sharing premises and support services and collaborating on procurement and many other issues.

I do not have information on jobs in Glasgow. I did not mention Glasgow; I was talking about my line of questioning of the witness from NHS Lanarkshire at yesterday's meeting of the Health and Sport Committee, in relation to which I have access to the facts. I do not know what is happening in Glasgow. I am sure that Dr Simpson understands that I cannot comment on the matter. My party supports the policy of making 2 per cent efficiency savings, so we cannot support the amendment in my Liberal Democrat colleague's name, which is unfortunate.  I thank the cabinet secretary for her commitment to report back to the Parliament on the protection of front-line services. I move amendment S3M-6295.1, to insert at end: "and calls on the Scottish Government to report back to the Parliament by the end of summer recess on how it intends to respond to the needs highlighted in the report, The Healthcare Quality Strategy for NHSScotland, in order to protect NHS frontline services."

In March this year, 53 Highlands and Islands Enterprise employees were made redundant, with an average severance package of £63,600. According to Highlands and Islands Enterprise, the employees could be "removed without impacting significantly on HIE's ability to fulfil its remit." Given that HIE's budget has been decreased by the Government since 2007, can the finance secretary indicate whether further redundancies with large severance packages will take place and, if so, whether HIE will be able to maintain its current remit and responsibilities?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government is satisfied that national health service boards can sustain service provision based on the funding allocation received in this year's budget. (S3F-2376)

With regard to assisting health services that are under threat due to growing demands, will the First Minister join me—for the first time—in welcoming the commitment made by the Conservatives not to make any in-year adjustments to this year's Scottish budget and to maintain spending on the NHS down south in future years, which will enable the Scottish Government to do exactly the same here if the First Minister shares our commitments and  priorities? Will he confirm that his Government will sustain spending on the NHS in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what alternative means of funding are available to subsidise nurseries to grow bog myrtle plants or fund growers to purchase plants, given that funding towards the purchasing of such plants is not eligible under the rural priorities scheme. (S3O-10356)

As the minister knows, there remains a huge economic opportunity for the exploitation of bog myrtle. The route to commercialisation of the crop lies with subsidising plant costs to promote economies of scale. Will the Scottish Government consider treating the commercialisation of the plant as a pilot to explore the vast opportunities and the potential of the industry?

I thank my colleague Nanette Milne for securing tonight's debate. I commend Grampian Cardiac Rehabilitation Association's partnership with the local councils—including Aberdeen City Council—and with the Robert Gordon University, the sports centre that is mentioned in the motion, British Petroleum and the Aberdeen Petroleum Club. The association is a great example of how health is everyone's business and not just the domain of the national health service. The benefits of cardiac rehabilitation are undoubtedly significant, both for the patient and for NHS resources. For patients who have experienced cardiac events, cardiac rehab allows them to return to normal life and reduces by 26 per cent their chances of dying prematurely from heart disease. That is indeed significant. In 2008, less than 3 per cent of patients with angina and less than 1 per cent of patients who have suffered heart failure received cardiac rehabilitation, so much more needs to be done, obviously. As Nanette Milne said, the cost of cardiac rehab for one person is £600, whereas the cost for a heart bypass operation is £8,000, and a single day in a coronary care unit costs £1,400. Given that heart disease is the second most common cause of death in Scotland, cardiac rehabilitation not only saves lives but has a significant impact on NHS resources by cutting readmissions to hospital by 30 per cent. The success of the Grampian Cardiac Rehabilitation Association is an example of best practice that I hope will be examined and rolled out, where appropriate, to the rest of Scotland. On its website, the GCRA states: "In the Grampian Region area more than 16,000 people suffer from coronary heart disease. Fortunately with correct medical intervention and change of lifestyle many can and do live a normal life." Clearly, the voluntary sector plays an integral role in the association. With the support of the Government, more associations throughout Scotland could provide the level of support that is available in Grampian and more people who are affected even in a small way by cardiac events could benefit from such services. That brings me to the Highlands and Islands. The geography and remoteness of many communities, together with poor transport links and a lack of suitably qualified staff, are  undoubtedly challenging. Despite that, cardiac rehabilitation classes have been established, through funding from the Big Lottery Fund, the Highland News group, the British Heart Foundation and NHS Highland, and thanks to the dedication and commitment of many individuals. Through the Highland heartbeat centre, which is based at Raigmore hospital in Inverness, it has been ensured that the majority of people can access classes within 30 minutes of their homes. Classes run from Wick in the north to Kingussie in Strathspey, and from Fort William in the west to Nairn in the east. It can be done. That will ensure that individuals can get access to experts, and advice on diet, medication, exercise and stress management wherever they are. Coupled with the classes, that provides a comprehensive and cost-effective way to rehabilitate people who have faced cardiac problems. Community support in rural areas for people who have been newly diagnosed with cardiac conditions such as angina or heart failure remains underresourced. Brian Adam touched on that. I hope that the Scottish Government will allocate funds to support cardiac rehabilitation, particularly given the financial difficulties that face us over the next few years, which will undoubtedly impact on all public services. Support groups such as those that exist in Grampian, which utilise the various skills of people in the voluntary sector and elsewhere, can have a positive and life-changing impact on those who have been affected by cardiac events. It is an example of putting the patient in the driving seat. Too often, patients are talked at and handed prescriptions. Initiatives such as those that we have been discussing give patients more control over their condition—it is a great example of putting money towards health benefits and the prevention of ill health.

In the year up to March 2009, there was a reduction of 21,337 occupied bed days for patients with an alcohol-related condition. The new data from the University of Sheffield predict a fall in hospital admissions of 640 in the first year. Given that a significant reduction in hospital admissions is already taking place, how can future figures be attributed to a minimum unit price for alcohol?

I have closely scrutinised the evidence on this matter, and I remind the First Minister that the new data on minimum pricing from the University of Sheffield now predict almost half the number of alcohol deaths that the first estimate did, and 38 per cent fewer hospital admissions over 10 years  compared with previously. How can the Health and Sport Committee and the Parliament reflect an accurate account of the Sheffield modelling when there have been such significant changes in the predictions?

To ask the Scottish Executive how community councils and communities will be consulted regarding mitigation measures on the Beauly to Denny power line. (S3O-10003)

In view of the massive disruption and, indeed, damage likely to be caused by the construction of the overhead line and substation expansion, community councils around Beauly have asked whether there are any plans to compensate communities that will be affected, in a similar manner to the way in which communities that have been affected by the construction of wind farms have been awarded community benefit.

In the past 12 to 18 months, 127 beds have been removed across NHS Highland, many of which were used for respite care. How can appropriate respite care be met against that background of cuts?

To ask the Scottish Executive what importance in the planning system is given to using prime agricultural land for development. (S3O-9876)

Two recent housing developments on prime agricultural land in the Highlands have been approved—Ness Gap at Fortrose on the Black Isle is grade 1 agricultural land, which I understand is very limited in the Highlands, and the Tornagrain development on the A96 is also prime agricultural land, used previously to grow cereals. Given that food  security and self-sustainability remain important issues to future food production in Scotland, will the minister consider re-examining planning policies to ensure that our best agricultural land is safeguarded for agricultural use?

There are many people around Loch Ness who swear that they have indeed seen the monster on various occasions.

Will the member give way?

The member's party wishes to impose a minimum price for alcohol, on the basis that whisky and other products are bad for people's health. Is that beneficial to tourism?

If the debate is about comparing 2009 to 2010, I respectfully suggest that we should not just compare the rates between this year and last year but look at the devastating increase in the cost of licensing to the smallest businesses throughout Scotland and the new fire regulations. One small village store had to pay up to £4,000 to have a 1m-wide alcohol display. The shopkeeper could not recoup all of that by increasing the price of alcohol, so the cost of goods throughout his store increased. When we pass legislation in the Parliament, we should consider its effect on small businesses. As a result of the new licensing regime, 30 per cent of licence holders in Shetland, Orkney and Highland have decided not to renew their licences because they just cannot afford it. I understand that that is also the case in parts of the south-west of Scotland. As members have said, the tourism sector is second only to the retail sector in its importance to the Scottish economy, especially in the Highlands and Islands, where as many as one in eight people are employed in the tourism industry, making it the lifeblood of many communities and vital to the sustainability of small businesses. It is widely known that Scotland's attraction lies also in its exceptional hospitality, nowhere more so than in the Highlands. Fiona Buxton, the proprietor of the Heathmount hotel in Inverness, demonstrated that last year. On a night when Inverness was fully booked up, she offered a family who were stranded accommodation in her own home. It is  the small touches, the personal service and the friendly face at the end of a long drive that make visitors return to Scotland year on year. It is also the champions, such as Gavin Ellis of the Knockomie hotel in Forres, who further professionalise the industry and help to drive up the quality standards. Last year, many people found themselves having a staycation as a result of our weak currency and the strength of the euro. Inverness and its surrounding areas were fairly resilient and took full advantage of that. More people undoubtedly travelled in the Western Isles last year than in previous summers, mainly because of the wonderful weather but also because of the introduction of RET. Nevertheless, we must ensure that that increase in the number of visitors is reflected in an increase in spending per head, which is one of the key objectives in seeking to achieve the target of 50 per cent growth by 2015. Alasdair Allan will not be surprised by the comments that appeared recently in the Stornoway Gazette concerning how little many people in mobile homes spent during their stay while travelling between Stornoway and Barra. We have not fully adjusted to the huge increase in mobile home tourism.

That is exactly my point. There should not necessarily be huge campsites, but there should be more hard-standing areas beside people's homes. I hope that the councils and VisitScotland will reconsider the existing facilities for mobile homes, especially given the increase in such tourism. I commend the art trails in Skye and the Uists, which are an excellent way to get people off the beaten track to see more far-flung parts of the islands. They also give people the opportunity to take back a wonderful memento of their holidays in Scotland. Other artistic products that we can offer include jewellery and Harris tweed. We should continue to emphasise the incredible creative skills in Scotland to increase the visitor spend. I tried to intervene on Rob Gibson to say that one of the reasons for the huge increase in the number of people visiting Orkney is the wonderful Pentland Ferries, which does not receive a penny from the public purse. It also tends to be cheaper than NorthLink Ferries and the crossing is much smoother, in my experience. When we are talking about public money, we should consider the incredible entrepreneurs in Scotland who provide a fabulous service without receiving a penny from  the public purse. It is sad that it is often possible to cross the Atlantic more cheaply than the Pentland Firth. I agree with the point that Jeremy Purvis made about transport infrastructure. We should not forget that issue when we think about tourism. I cannot speak in a debate on this subject without mentioning winter tourism. Many people seem to think that we take holidays only in the summer, but this year has been the best year ever for the Cairngorm Mountain skiing range, which welcomed its 100,000th visitor of the season last week. The company is hopeful that the snow will continue for a few more weeks. As Gavin Brown said, the same standards should be assumed to apply to accommodation whether it is in Edinburgh or the outer Hebrides. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am always shocked at the difference between three-star establishments across the country. A two-star establishment in some places can be far better than some four-star places elsewhere. Last year, when I wanted to complain to VisitScotland about an establishment, I discovered that I had to supply my name, address and phone number and that the complaint had to be public, so I did not follow that through. However, I ask the minister to ensure that the star ratings are regularly revised by, for example, mystery shoppers, because there are excellent facilities that are underrated and pretty non-excellent facilities that are grossly overrated. In response to Marilyn Livingstone, I point out that Shirley Spear, of the Three Chimneys restaurant in Dunvegan, has said that she has never been contacted by schools, colleges or higher education establishments. The minister might talk about connectivity, but it is not happening in Skye. I support the amendment in Gavin Brown's name.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what commitment it has to increase access to outdoor education facilities for all school pupils. (S3O-9763)

I thank the minister for that positive response, and I will put a positive suggestion to him. Loch Insh water sports and outdoor activity centre, which is based near Kincraig in the Cairngorms national park, has been owned and run for 40 years by the Freshwater family. The centre has trained or instructed three Olympic skiers and holds awards for the best on-the-water facility in Scotland and the best small business in the Highlands. Currently, the Scottish Government contributes £2.5 million per annum to sportscotland to fund sporting centres of excellence. The minister might want to bring the Loch Insh centre into the new opportunities for outdoor learning. Does he consider it fair and reasonable that such an exceptional centre receives no funding towards providing a nationally recognised facility and a world-class level of training and instruction?

There has been a lot of interest in retirement flats this morning. I remind the member that the issue is not only management and maintenance costs; home owners are also subject to an insurance provider monopoly—they cannot even shop around for buildings and contents insurance.

I have listened carefully to what the member has said, but although I appreciate that there is a problem with factoring in flatted properties and tenements, there is an enormous and serious problem in new housing estates the length and breadth of Scotland and in the islands. I have no experience of flatted properties, but I have been inundated with people telling me of problems with all the new housing developments around Inverness. The issue is about land management and ground maintenance, as well as flats.

I thank Patricia Ferguson for giving us the opportunity to debate this issue, given that it appears that little action has been taken since Trish Godman's members' business debate in September 2007, when the minister responding was Fergus Ewing. Today we have a change of portfolio and a change of face; hopefully, much more action will be taken. The Scottish Conservatives agree that factoring is a major problem for householders. There is widespread dissatisfaction, and many individuals and residents associations are unable to resolve  the issues. Companies such as Greenbelt Group have got away with their practices for so long because no one has challenged their position and/or the conditions and burdens that developers impose on homes and properties. Although trading standards has been sympathetic, it appears totally powerless to bring pressure to bear on factors to meet their obligations of maintenance and land management. I sent a copy of my speech to one of the main campaigners on the issue in Scotland, who will, I am sure, be known to members. Whatever we do today will not go far enough to achieve what many people seek but, out of courtesy, I will read out a couple of lines from an e-mail that I received from him. He states: "Scottish and UK Government have done everything possible to avoid bringing developers and maintenance companies within the framework of existing consumer protection legislation whilst promoting the benefit of the Greenbelt Group Management scheme to Local Authority Planning officials." He continues: "They operate in a completely uncontrolled market with impunity and laugh at any attempt by hard pressed consumers to attempt to obtain a contracted level of service!" Many home owners in Scotland have a monopoly contract that they contend is illegal under the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. The issue is being pursued in Perth sheriff court, with a ruling against Greenbelt Group due on 4 May. Hopefully, that will set a benchmark for other, similar companies that are operating in Scotland. People seem to have an unfair contract, with no redress, and are faced with constant threats and bullying from factoring and management companies. That cannot be acceptable. The motion notes "that the Office of Fair Trading market study into the property management market found that the market is not working well for consumers". I make it clear to Patricia Ferguson that all my experience—both personal and with constituents—is with land management and maintenance issues.

One problem that we face is that the situation becomes much more difficult where property factoring companies own the land. Whatever provisions the bill contains, I hope that  the ministerial team and the bill team will address that serious issue. We very much favour an accreditation scheme, rather than a register and we would prefer a voluntary approach, at least in the first instance, prior to considering legislation. The establishment of a voluntary accreditation scheme is supported by Consumer Focus Scotland, which I understand is represented on the Scottish Government's working group. I appreciate that many residents associations believe that a voluntary approach will not work—and I do not blame them given their experiences over the years—but, nonetheless, we feel that a voluntary approach ought to be tried. An accreditation scheme would, I hope, establish good practice standards and provide an advantage to those firms that can prove that they can meet those standards. We are aware that the consumer will ultimately foot the bill for either an accreditation scheme, a register or any further legislation, so we owe it to householders to act in their best financial interests as well as the other interests that we are considering today. Improved information and advice to consumers is another important issue on which we need a commitment from the Government. When I see properties for sale in the estate in which I live, I see no mention anywhere on the schedule that the property owner will be required to pay up to £200 a year in ground-maintenance charges. That cannot be right. When I bought my property 15 years ago—a detached house in Inverness—the deed of conditions and the title deed made no mention of the need to pay the annual charge. That led me to establish a residents association and to set up Inverness south community council. The issue pitched neighbour against neighbour, because those who paid the charge found that they were paying for all the non-payers. One can imagine how heated some discussions became when pensioners on a fixed income and people on low incomes found themselves paying for the charges of others. At one point, I received a sheriff's letter demanding that I pay the charge despite the fact that I had not even received a bill. Many residents worried about their personal credit rating. However, we now get an annual statement that tells us who pays and who does not—it seems that we are into naming and shaming. Therefore, although I welcome the "Consumer Code for Home Builders" that Homes for Scotland has promoted, I can confirm that house purchasers are still not being given enough of the pre-purchase information to which the code refers, such as "a description of any management services and organisations to which the Home Buyer will be committed and an estimate of their cost." We may now have a consumer code for developers, but we do not have a consumer code that is beneficial to purchasers.  All members should take a look at the websites of the campaign groups Greenbelt Group action and Peverel action, which are very interesting. I quote one example: "My father lives in a complex (7 flats) in Kilmarnock ... For seven months I have been trying to get an explanation for an electricity rise from approx. £200 to £1800 for lighting and heating". Peverel also traps home owners into monopoly insurance for homes for elderly people. Another message on the website was from a home owner in Kemnay in Aberdeenshire who stated that the grass in their estate had been cut only once in 20 years. Where such land and properties are not maintained, that can undoubtedly lead to a fall in the value of the properties. Indeed, I understand that Aberdeenshire Council has written to all major developers in the region to ask them to consider not transferring ownership or management of open space to Greenbelt. As Patricia Ferguson said, it seems to be difficult to switch factor when the land has been sold to a company such as Greenbelt. That company has not covered itself in glory over this sorry saga, but it is not the only company that has failed to fulfil its obligations to home owners. I think that I know the developer to which Kenneth Macintosh referred, but I will not mention its name as I have said enough. I am aware that new developments for elderly people have caused serious anxiety and worry for people who are looking for a stress-free existence at the end of their lives. Residents can find themselves facing ever higher bills for fewer services with no consultation, reason or redress. Finally—I am coming to a close, Presiding Officer—I thank all those who have campaigned on the issue for taking the time to bring information to the attention of members of the Parliament. The issue is complex, but I firmly believe that the Government must do more. In the previous debate in September 2007, I said that we must "protect consumers from such unfair contracts of sale, enable consumers to change to an alternative provider, and force maintenance providers to comply with the terms and conditions of their agreements with individual property owners" and ensure that "the contracted company must be fit for purpose or competent to undertake its obligations."— [ Official Report , 6 September 2007; c 1571.]  Two and a half years later, we have still not achieved those aims, but I hope that today's debate on Patricia Ferguson's motion will help to move us in that direction. I move amendment S3M-5872.3, to leave out from "for proposals" to end and insert:  "to debate proposals to require property factors to register and to make provision for an accessible form of dispute resolution between homeowners and property factors, and considers that an accreditation scheme should be given time to work before further legislation is considered."

I am listening carefully to the member's speech and I support her approach. She talks about property development and property maintenance, but, living in Inverness, my main concern is the maintenance of grounds and open spaces. Will the member confirm that, when she talks about maintenance, she includes the maintenance of land and open spaces?

About a minute ago, the minister mentioned a consistent approach. Does he agree that a central factor in that is whether alternative public transport systems are available, such as those in Inverness that I outlined, and that a critical factor is the airport's sustainability, given a potential reduction in demand?

I have been reminded that I did not sign the motion. I have not signed many motions, but that does not mean that I disagree with them. Many members do not sign motions that I lodge, not because they disagree, but because so many motions are lodged. I certainly agree with everything that has been said. However, as I have been named and shamed by Liam McArthur—which was unnecessary and not in the tone of the debate—I will certainly sign the motion.

The member has said enough. I very much welcome the debate, and acknowledge the commitment and persistence of Liam McArthur in vigorously opposing the introduction of car parking charges at Kirkwall airport. The consultation process—which is, I hope, under way—will bring transparency and fairness to the options surrounding the introduction or otherwise of charges. However, rather than just having a narrow remit, the consultation should emphasise the impact on tourism and the effect that reduced travel numbers could have on the sustainability of HIAL airports in the longer term. As the motion states, air travel is a lifeline service to and from the mainland for people who live on remote islands, although it costs more to cross the Pentland Firth than it does to cross the Atlantic. Whether it is to access health care, to work, to study, to visit family or simply to get off the island, there is no doubt about the importance of air links to island communities. If car parking charges at airports such as Kirkwall, Sumburgh and Stornoway were put in place, my worry is that many island residents would be discouraged from using the service, which could pose a risk to the viability of those and other smaller and more remote airports. The impact on tourism is another issue that should be taken into account in the consultation. If  passengers were discouraged from using air travel, it would reduce tourism and have an impact on business, and it could affect the sustainability of the air links. There is no doubt that parking charges could have an effect on the number of people who use air travel and could, ultimately, have a financial impact on businesses in island communities. Although additional revenues are generated from the car parking charges that exist in all major airports throughout Scotland, such charges can discourage thousands of air passengers from taking their cars and contributing to the carbon footprint. However, as Alasdair Allan said, there are other means of transport from cities to airports. Inverness has a regular shuttle-bus transfer and taxis at competitive prices. All being well—our transport minister is here to hear me say this—a train station at Dalcross will open in 2016. There are alternative ways of getting to Inverness airport. Another issue is the price of petrol and diesel, which has been steadily increasing on the islands in recent years. I am sure that many islanders would welcome a more reliable public transport system but, unfortunately, that does not exist. As Liam McArthur said, car parking charges have always existed at Inverness airport. Since 2003, the car park has been managed by HIAL. Prior to that, it was managed by National Car Parks. The upgrading of the facilities and the introduction of a long-stay car park have expanded the opportunities for Inverness and the long-term plans for the business park. Inverness airport operates a significantly greater number of flights than airports on Shetland, on Orkney and on the Western Isles, and pulls a huge volume of people from across the Highlands from places as far flung as Ullapool, Fort William, Durness and Wick. However, with the shuttle bus in operation between the city centre and the retail park, and buses to Nairn, Forres and Elgin, the public transport connections are much better at Inverness airport. I acknowledge that, as Liam McArthur mentioned, HIAL faces financial difficulty. There is no doubt that the Government's reduction in its budget of £1.1 million has exacerbated that financial difficulty, but car parking charges or, indeed, higher taxes on air travel, might mean that fewer people will be able to afford to travel by air, which means that services will be lost and the sustainability of fragile communities will be adversely affected. For all those reasons, I support the motion. I should scroll through all the motions because there may be many more that I should support. I am pleased that Liam McArthur has raised this issue, and I am happy to support the motion in his name.

The 1996 diet action plan, which Susan Deacon complimented when she was Minister for Health and Community Care, made a link with the agriculture sector. I have not heard much about that today. Can the minister confirm that the Government will work with that sector?

I thank Richard Simpson for securing the debate during general practice week in Scotland. I thank him, too, for organising the briefing last night at which I had the opportunity to meet two GPs from the Highlands, Dr Miles Mack and Dr Susan Hussey. My starting point in preparation for the debate was my members' business debate in national general practice week in September 2002, when we were meeting up the road. The motion recognised "the importance of primary care", appreciated "the vital role GPs play", and supported Malcolm Chisholm's statement that "if it can be done in primary care, it should be done in primary care". In that debate, I stressed the nine years of training that GPs had and the fact that over 90 per cent of NHS contact was in primary care. I stated: "There is no doubt that general practice and the primary health care team is the heart and the cornerstone of the NHS in Scotland." That was eight years ago, before the introduction of the new general medical services contract, about which Malcolm Chisholm, who was then Minister for Health and Community Care, said: "The contract gives renewed focus to quality and outcomes".— [ Official Report , 25 September 2002; c 14090, 14104.]  There is no doubt of the benefits of QOFs to patients, but there is also no doubt that the contract can be reviewed and improved. There is also no doubting the excellent service in general practice, including that provided by nurses, health visitors and podiatrists. However, it is a bit difficult to relate the benefits of the new contract to the out-of-hours service, from which 95 per cent of our GPs have opted out.  In this context, I place on record my thanks to the good people of Kinloch Rannoch whose petition to Parliament prompted an inquiry by the Health and Sport Committee into the provision of out-of-hours care in Scotland. Although the committee has not concluded its report and recommendations, there is no doubt that the inquiry has highlighted many issues in out-of-hours services that need to be addressed. Audit Scotland has confirmed that there is "a lack of clear quality standards" for out-of-hours services, and NHS Quality Improvement Scotland gave the committee an assurance that it will look at that issue. The committee was told during the inquiry that, since the introduction of the new contract, calls to the Scottish Ambulance Service have increased by 35 per cent during GP working hours and by 42 per cent out of hours; that presentations to accident and emergency departments have increased; and that there is greater utilisation of NHS 24. I look forward to NHS 24 making more use of telehealth and working with GPs on that issue throughout Scotland. We now have a very good emergency response service, but many people in Scotland are rightly concerned about the corresponding loss of clinical care and the previous excellent access to the diagnostic skills of the GP. We must thank the folk of Kinloch Rannoch for raising their concerns about the difference between emergency response and quality clinical care. One thing is certain: the Ambulance Service, NHS 24, A and E, minor injuries units and GPs must work in much closer partnership, although I appreciate that that is already happening in many areas. On this day of celebrating general practice, I highlight some points that have been made by GPs who are still providing out-of-hours care, and who made written submissions to the Health and Sport Committee—and these are in the public domain. Dr Helen Stewart of Torridon in Wester Ross states: "My only conclusion can be that a GP is the most sustainable and cost-effective way to provide that service."

I will just give members one more example, from Shetland, which I think is an important one, and I will finish there: "I live amongst my patients and am part of their community. The retained fire service and coastguard services turn out to emergencies and therefore why not the doctor who lives in the community."

To assist children and young people with eating disorders, will the minister tell us how many schools or local authorities in Scotland have introduced annual health and fitness checks to identify health problems at an early stage, to be delivered by "a doubling of the number of school nurses"— all as promised in the SNP manifesto?

I have been working closely with the petitioners. I say to the minister that all the organisations that he mentioned refer male victims to a telephone helpline in the south of England. However, I thank him for his sensible response to date.

Does the minister agree that it is shameful that, in 10 years of the Parliament, there has not been recognition of male victims of domestic abuse and their children?

Given that more than 7,000 people in Scotland are  treated in hospital each year following episodes of non-fatal deliberate self-harm, does the First Minister agree that access to a universal health-visiting service with regular health and development checks for young children will help to ensure that, where possible, mental health and wellbeing issues are identified in the early years?

Like others, I thank the clerks, witnesses and all those who contributed to the bill. The Health and Sport Committee, under the able convenership of Christine Grahame, ploughed through the evidence, and I believe that we gave everyone a fair hearing, whether we agreed or disagreed with them. When I lodged my amendments to delete part 2 at stage 2, the committee had an excellent debate, as the cabinet secretary said, with contributions from members from all parties including our two doctors in residence. I thank my fellow committee members for the measured and considered way in which they debated the provision of general practitioner services. I regret that, due to time constraints, this afternoon's debate was not quite as wide ranging. I think that this Government and indeed future Governments will regret the monopoly provision of GP services in Scotland. The Health and Sport Committee is still in the early stages of its inquiry into out-of-hours health care, but there is no doubt that as we progress more concerns about access to GPs are coming to light. The responsibility for out-of-hours GPs moved to health boards in 2004, but it is already clear that, as Richard Simpson pointed out and as Helen Eadie mentioned with reference to Kinloch Rannoch, individuals simply do not know what to expect from out-of-hours provision. I say this constructively but I find it unfortunate that the Scottish Government's approach to the bill focused almost entirely on the banning of visual displays. The assumption was that anyone who questioned the evidence base for the policy must be in favour of smoking. Nothing could be further from the truth; I have seen members of my family and my in-laws die as a direct result of smoking.  However, I want to vote for measures that are known to be successful and which have an evidence base to prove it. I hope that the approach to the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill does not focus entirely on minimum pricing—

I am just finishing. The fact is that minimum pricing is just one of many measures in the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill. Although we do not support the bill itself, we support the measures on better enforcement, a register of retailers and proxy purchasing. I thank the Scottish Grocers Federation and the Scottish Retail Consortium for suggesting the law on proxy purchasing, which is likely to have the greatest effect on attempts by young smokers to access cigarettes.

In 2003, Labour, the Scottish National Party and the Liberal Democrats not only supported the inclusion of measures for commercial providers in the Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Act 2004, but robustly defended those proposals against Scottish Socialist Party amendments. Amendment 11 seeks to retain the commonsense approach of the bill that was agreed by all parties but the SSP only six years ago. Despite commercial providers being able to set up shop, so to speak, in Scotland, none has chosen to do so, to date. Our ageing population, the increased availability of treatments and increased public expectations all result in increasing demand for general practitioner services, year on year. Despite the acknowledged increased need, the BMA and the Scottish Government propose a measure that is designed to prevent the possibility of alternative sources of provision. Community Pharmacy Scotland—open all hours in every high street and village in Scotland—stated in its written submission: "There is no guarantee that the existing practice model will survive for another 10, let alone 60 years and without  the possibility of alternative methods of provision the situation could arise where medical services could not be provided for people living in 'hard to doctor' areas such as remote and rural regions or in areas of deprivation within our cities." The increase in calls to the Scottish Ambulance Service and in accident and emergency presentations are undoubtedly a result of the new GP contract, which has resulted in many, and increasing, numbers of GPs opting out of providing out-of-hours care. If part 2 of the bill were to be deleted and existing legislation to remain, GPs could hold surgeries in pharmacies, for example. A vote against the amendments would guarantee monopoly provision by one provider that is represented by one trade union negotiating with Scotland. The European states that have the most successful health care systems have developed successful partnerships with the private and voluntary sectors not only to provide general medical services but to tackle public health issues. Scotland has no commercial providers, so Helen Eadie and I visited a walk-in centre at Canary Wharf and a health centre in Tower Hamlets that are both run by the independent company Atos Origin. The walk-in centre is open from 7 am to 7 pm and serves 80,000 employees at Canary Wharf, local people and tourists. It has reduced the amount and financial cost of work absenteeism by reducing preventable ill health, and it allows accessible attendance at GP appointments during the working day. The number of people who present to local accident and emergency units has also reduced significantly. Surveys show that 97 per cent of patients have found the care to be good or excellent, and the primary care trust has a member on the Atos board to ensure good partnerships and working relations. In Tower Hamlets, which is the second-most deprived area in London, the primary care trust discontinued the previous contract for the health centre GPs because they did not meet key performance indicators and did not serve the needs of the community, more than 30 per cent of whom are Bengali. If Atos failed to achieve the required standards for patients, it would simply lose its contract. The primary care trust confirmed that Atos has better software and better attention to detail. It gives monthly reports to NHS London and has better data management. The health centre regularly meets key performance indicators on issues such as complaint response and generic prescribing. More focus is placed on addressing health inequalities, marketing is better, staff turnover is lower and continuity of care is better, because the provision of doctors and staff is more  stable. The centre meets all its targets for health checks, immunisation and screening and the management of chronic disease has improved considerably.

People often do not present early for diagnosis because taking time off work to see a GP can be difficult, if people commute to work, for example. A walk-in centre allows for early presentation. I fully support the current independent contracting of GP services in Scotland and commend the excellent work that is done day and daily. Finally, one regret from the London visit was that we could not see the Atos mobile units in rural areas, because of time constraints. I move amendment 11.

Community pharmacies have stated that, for example, high street chemists or Boots the Chemist could not employ GPs to hold surgeries on their premises. Are they right or wrong?

I say to the Liberal Democrats that there is nothing to reflect on. There has been no change over the six years since the passing of the Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Act 2004; we have no commercial providers. Helen Eadie and I had to get on to a train to London to find one, because they do not exist in Scotland. I did not refer only to private providers. In recent years, Community Pharmacy Scotland has offered enormous benefits, providing minor ailments services and surgeries on our high streets. It was one of the main opponents of the approach that is proposed, because there cannot be a GP surgery on the high street unless the doctor owns the pharmacy.  The debate at stage 2 was excellent; I thank the cabinet secretary and other members of the Health and Sport Committee for their contribution to it. We should all be proud of that. Should the opportunities for different types of provision not remain, and should the Parliament ban commercial providers of GP services, we will be denying patients throughout Scotland access to modern health services that are accessible during the working day. I will press amendment 11.

We support Rhoda Grant's amendments. Tobacco vending machine sales account for less than 1 per cent of tobacco sales in Scotland. The ban will particularly affect remote and rural areas, where many filling stations, village shops and post offices have closed in recent years. In Orkney and Shetland, there has been a 30 per cent reduction in the number of licensed premises. Staff training on the sale of alcohol is the best that it has ever been. The explanatory notes say that "The Scottish Government is aware of only one company operating in Scotland",  but the truth is that 14 companies will go out of business, with the loss of 60 jobs, not 14. On average, cigarettes purchased from a vending machine are 36 per cent more expensive than those that are bought from a shop, so it is unlikely that young people will use those machines. A vote against amendment 1 will mean that, as secure stockholding units, vending machines will be removed, and the landlord will sell tobacco from behind the counter. It is a proven fact that cigarettes that are sold from behind the counter are readily accessible. In truth, banning remote or radio-controlled vending machines from licensed premises such as pubs, social clubs, golf and bowling clubs, where the clientele is generally aged over 18, makes tobacco more readily accessible. I trust that those who are speaking against remote and radio-controlled vending machines are speaking from the experience of having seen them in operation in the Parliament. They are successfully and effectively used in many European countries, including Spain and Portugal. We support the amendments.

Will the minister confirm that the explanatory notes were wrong in stating that "The Scottish Government is aware of only one company operating in Scotland that would be affected by the ban", and in claiming that a total of 14 staff would have to be made redundant? Does she accept that that was inaccurate?

We oppose section 2, but given the previous vote I will not move amendment 5.  Amendment 5 not moved.

I was sympathetic to Richard Simpson's amendments but, when I read what the  briefings said about overly complicating the bill, I decided that it would be a more commonsense approach to get the Government to work with retailers. Having spoken with a Government adviser, I think that it is for the Government and the retailers to come to an accommodation about what is right for them, and it should be done through regulation and guidance. Ross Finnie summed up the situation when he said that there is no single solution to smoking. However, unfortunately, the focus of the bill has been the display ban. As parliamentarians, we should be seeking solutions that work and have been proven to work, which is not the case in relation to the banning of visual displays. I wish to press amendment 4.

We all agree on the link between smoking and poor health, and we all agree on the fact that the younger that people start smoking, the more acute their health problems in later life will be. Our opposition to the ban on tobacco displays is not an opposition to smoking cessation programmes. The fact is that the evidence base does not exist to support a ban. The Health and Sport Committee's stage 1 report states: "The Committee notes that strong views were advanced on both sides of the debate. The Committee also recognises that the evidence base for this proposal is at an early stage and that the international evidence to date is inconclusive." The Government proposes to ban visual displays in the hope that doing so will produce an evidence base in support of its argument that such a measure will reduce smoking. There is not yet conclusive evidence that the ban will achieve what it sets out to achieve. The claim in the policy  memorandum that banning visual displays of cigarettes will "protect children and young people from the impact of tobacco smoking" is, therefore, not true. Although a ban on visual displays will put cigarette packets out of sight, there is no doubt that the Government needs to consider many other measures to make the policy successful. I can think of nothing less attractive than a product that states "Smoking kills". As the Scottish Retail Consortium, the Scottish Grocers Federation and the National Federation of Retail Newsagents said in their briefing note detailing their joint positions: "We believe that this will be a disproportionate measure for all affected retailers, large and small, and will add an undue burden on retail staff. It has no strong evidence base and there is doubt that it will have a significant impact on the number of young people taking up smoking." In Iceland, smoking rates have declined, but academics have identified the in-depth work that has been done at community level as the crucial aspect in the successful decline in the number of people who smoke. In Canada, states such as Saskatchewan and Manitoba that have had tobacco display bans for the longest time have seen increases in youth smoking. In Ontario, the greatest reduction in smoking was achieved before a ban was introduced. In New Zealand, a proposal to introduce a ban was rejected by the Prime Minister, whose Government, like this Parliament's Health and Sport Committee, did not find conclusive evidence that a ban was the most effective strategy for combating youth smoking. Finally, on the cost of the ban to businesses, there is also much dubiety. The Minister for Public Health and Sport told the Health and Sport Committee that the cost could be as little as £20 per gantry. However, that is just the cost of materials per shelf, not per gantry, and there can be up to seven or eight shelves on a gantry, as well as other fittings. The Scottish Government's regulatory impact assessment estimated that implementing the ban would cost Scotland's 11,000 tobacco outlets an average of £1,200 for small retailers, £6,000 for medium-sized retailers and £17,500 for large retailers. I ask MSPs whether, in these difficult times, they are content to force on small businesses throughout Scotland additional costs and a measure on which there is a lack of any evidence to show its effectiveness in reducing youth smoking. I move amendment 4.

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for allowing me to speak second. Due to a derailment on the train track at Carrbridge, if I do not catch the 5.40 train, I get home well after midnight. After all the points of order, I think that it might still be well after midnight before I get home, but I thank you for your co-operation. I apologise to the other members in the chamber, as I will leave after my speech. I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing this debate on childhood cancer. She has a tremendous commitment not only to the issue but, in particular, to the cross-party group on cancer. She is very passionate about it and has made a tremendous contribution over the years. There is a commonly used statistic that one in three people will suffer from cancer at some point in their life. We all acknowledge that treatments are improving—the advances in medical science truly have to be commended—but, although  treatments can save lives, or at least prolong them, they often come with considerable side effects. Those can be daunting for adults but even more so for children, and they can be very confusing for young children. As Nanette Milne said, CLIC Sargent does tremendous work assisting young patients, their parents and their brothers and sisters. Although the cancer directly affects the child, there are obviously knock-on effects for the rest of the family. In November last year, one of the newspapers in the Highlands ran a story about a three-year-old girl who had amazed many by getting the all-clear after treatment for a particularly aggressive form of cancer, neuroblastoma, of which there were only 90 cases throughout the UK. The young girl and her family live with the concern that there is a 50 per cent chance of the cancer returning, but—as Nanette Milne said with reference to the facilities in Aberdeen—they are also greatly indebted to CLIC Sargent for the support that they received at its treatment centre in Yorkhill. While the girl was undergoing several courses of chemotherapy and almost 70 blood transfusions, the charity housed the family at Cruachan house, which is a short walk from Yorkhilll hospital where the medical team was defying the odds to clear the cancer. Her brother and sister still talk about how enjoyable, helpful and supportive their time at Cruachan house was. Such a facility is very important for all families but, as Liam McArthur and others have said, it is even more important for families in remote and rural areas. Although the incidence of cancer among adolescents and young adults between the ages of 15 and 24 is low in percentage terms—it accounts for approximately 0.7 per cent of all cancers in Scotland—the impact on the 160 young people affected, and their families, is considerable. Although the opportunity to have accommodation close to where treatment is delivered is important and appreciated, as Nanette Milne's motion points out, 97 per cent of the children who were surveyed by CLIC Sargent said that it was also important for them to be able to return home during treatment. If we combine that with the high number of parents who stated that they do not get the support that they need to allow that to happen, it is clear that we must do more for young cancer patients. Of the young people surveyed, 93 per cent said that their diagnosis had affected their employment and 94 per cent said that it was important to maintain their social life and contact with friends, family and colleagues during treatment. The issue is of huge importance. Some of the stories that we hear about young people and their  treatment are harrowing. I commend CLIC Sargent and congratulate it on its wonderful work, and I encourage patients and their families to speak out about how much they appreciate those services.

In order to reduce the long-term cost to the taxpayer of alcohol abuse, will the First Minister ensure that those who seek help to address their alcohol consumption get that help when they need it, rather than being placed on a waiting list? Will he ensure that more priority is given to underlying mental health conditions, given that some people resort to alcohol as a form of self-medication?

After my granddaughter received her MMR jab at 15 months, her mother and father were told to bring her back when she starts school. Is it acceptable that for three and three-quarter years a child does not see a health visitor for all the developmental and health checks that are needed?

Does the member disagree that the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government face a decreasing budget, and with the cross-party view of the Health and Sport Committee that it is vitally important that every child has a health check and a developmental check? Those are premises of today's debate that illustrate that we are in touch.

I have met many patients in Inverness and the Highlands who are constantly being given prescriptions for antidepressants, which can be difficult to come off. Many people are on them for 20, 30 or 40 years. Does the member  agree that it is not all about prescription charges and that we should be giving more consideration to the talking therapies?

When I raised the issue of prescription charges in the Health and Sport Committee last year, the result was an excellent debate with fellow committee members, in particular—from reading the Official Report of that meeting—with Dr Richard Simpson. I trust that today's debate will be no different, but I am not holding my breath. We need only look at the Auditor General for Scotland's recent report on the Scottish health budget to know that, no matter which party wins this year's general election, Scotland's budget faces serious cuts—as many speakers outlined in yesterday's budget debate. Ministers consistently talk of the impending cuts from Westminster. Yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth used the phrase "deterioration in the public finances."— [ Official Report , 20 January 2010; c 22922.]  That seems quite an understatement, given that the United Kingdom will have a debt of £1.5 trillion by 2014-15 as a result of Labour's recession. Against that background, it would be dishonest for any party—let alone the Scottish Government—to make spending promises that it cannot keep. The Conservatives have pledged to protect the NHS budget, both at Westminster and here in Scotland. The fact is that the only time that NHS spending has been cut was when the Labour Government in the 1970s did so when it was ordered by the International Monetary Fund to reduce the national debt. Against that background, we must cut our cloth so that we do not, we hope, have to face that sort of cut in future. Cutting the NHS budget is not the intention of a Conservative Government.  Within the Scottish budget, we have supported the need for efficiency savings. Yesterday's report from the Nuffield Trust for Research and Policy Studies in Health Services compares Scotland with the north-east of England and highlights that we have 70 per cent more managers and support staff in Scotland. In my opinion, that potentially lays the ground for even more efficiency savings. The question is whether, against a dire economic background that will undoubtedly require cuts, the Scottish Government should be reducing the cost of prescriptions for those who can afford to pay, or whether that money should be used to provide, for example, a much-needed universal health visiting service for every child in Scotland. In preparing for today's debate, I discovered that the health of our nation now seems to be based on the amount of drugs that we take. The Scottish Government records the increased use of prescription drugs as a success, whereas I think that the opposite is the case. Surely the healthier we are, the fewer drugs we need to take. Even the Government cannot argue that making more antibiotics and antidepressants available is a benefit, particularly given the link between the use of antibiotics and hospital-acquired infections—I see Jackie Baillie acknowledging that point due to the experience with HAIs in her constituency. With 10 per cent of our population already on antidepressants because mental health services are not a priority—there is a shortage of cognitive behavioural therapists and of counselling, psychotherapy, psychology and psychiatry services—the prescriptions budget is potentially another area where early diagnosis and early investment could save money as well as improve health in the long term, especially if we focused those resources on health visitors, as we suggest in our motion. We supported the extension of prescription charge exemptions to those with long-term conditions. We acknowledge the difficulties of that issue, with which I think every party has wrestled. When free prescriptions were given to those with diabetes but not to those with asthma, there was undoubtedly an anomaly in the system. Similarly, people with epilepsy got free prescriptions but people with Parkinson's did not. We recognise that there were anomalies in the previous system.

Not at the moment. We also supported the reduction in the charge for prepayment certificates in order to ensure compliance with medication. It is worth pointing out that the abolition of prescription charges would not rid the NHS of the whole bureaucracy of collection, as a Scottish  National Party minister previously stated. The only difference would be that the entire contribution would come from the Government. The only bureaucracy saved would be the collection of the fee and the checking of eligibility for exemptions. The number of prescriptions that are exempt from charges increased from 66 million in 2004 to more than 74 million in 2008. Even with prescription charges still in place, the cost to the NHS of prescribed items rose from £598 million at the start of this Parliament to more than £1 billion last year. We believe that that money could be better spent on health visitors, given the increasingly patchy nature of the health visiting service throughout Scotland. I acknowledge the point that Malcolm Chisholm made in the 7 January debate about the pilot visiting service in Lothian. There is no doubt that good work is being done but, unfortunately, there is not universal access to such services throughout Scotland. Expanding the role of health visitors has been our policy for some time in Scotland and it is the policy of the Conservative party at Westminster. A universal health visiting service was also a recommendation of the Health and Sport Committee in its recent report on child and adolescent mental health and wellbeing. Unfortunately, the recommendation received little sympathy from the Minister for Public Health and Sport, but it is appropriate to point out that there was cross-party agreement on the urgent need for a universal health visiting service in Scotland. I quote from the report: "it is vitally important that there are standard health checks and developmental checks on every child at crucial stages of the early years." Unfortunately, the minister chose not to address that point in the 7 January debate, but she will have another opportunity to do so today. There was no doubting the compelling evidence that the Health and Sport Committee heard about the window of opportunity that is available at an early age to put things right when children are subject to neglect. If that window of opportunity is missed, neglect can lead to a lifetime of major mental health and other problems. No parliamentarian can ignore that. In fact, children with attachment disorders or difficulties with attachment can be identified by about 10 months to a year. However, they will be identified only if they are seen by a health visitor. My colleagues Nanette Milne and Jackson Carlaw will go into much more detail about the role that health visitors play and emphasise the urgent need for a universal service. The Liberal Democrat amendment, in the name of Ross Finnie, raises the issue of distinction awards. I appreciate that that fits in with our budget deliberations, given the proposed increase  of £2 million for such awards that is included in the budget for next year, but there is no doubt that the decision on whether there should be a distinction award scheme for consultants should, despite what we might feel about the issue, be taken on a UK-wide basis. I understand that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has written to the Secretary of State for Health at Westminster making the points that she and the Health and Sport Committee have made about that issue. The British Medical Association acknowledges the serious discord among general practitioners about the current changes to the health visiting profession. In Glasgow, some GPs were so concerned about those changes that they submitted a petition to the Parliament, in support of which they collected more than 22,000 signatures from parents and family members, all of whom were concerned about the fact that under-fives do not get the health checks that they get in other countries, with the result that problems are not picked up early on.

I would be delighted to do that. I have made a few visits to the health centre in Tain, the member's home town. The health visitors there made it clear to me that they are health visitors, not social workers. They want to retain their training so that they can carry out health and development checks on every child. Of course I hope that they work closely with social workers, but the system in Tain and in the rest of Scotland, whereby health visitors are closely aligned with GP surgeries, GP health centres and doctors such as Dr Brian Fitzsimons—Jamie Stone's doctor, who is fully committed to retaining the health visitor service—works very well. I would be happy to go on, but perhaps Jamie Stone could ask for an extended consultation next time; I think that Dr Fitzsimons would be happy to tell him about his commitment to retaining health visitors as part of the practice. I am grateful for being given the opportunity to mention that—I thought that I would be too short of time to do so. The Health and Sport Committee also uncovered evidence that the under-fives were neglected by our services. Professor Law told the committee that the chances of children with needs being picked up without their parents coming forward were "non-existent". In recommending that the standard health and development checks be  carried out on every child in the early years, the committee recognised "the tension between universal and targeted screening, caused by inevitable limitations on resources." The allocation of resources to the health visiting profession would right that wrong and give all children in Scotland the opportunities in life that they deserve. I move, That the Parliament calls on the Scottish Government to withdraw its proposals for further reductions in prescription charges and, having regard to current pressures on public spending, believes that the money saved would be better spent on other NHS and care priorities, such as the health visitor service.

I want to ask about implementation, which I raised in my speech. In paragraph 123 of its report, the committee asked the Government to ensure that "there are standard health checks and developmental checks on every child at crucial stages of the early years." Will that be done?

I am sorry to start the year on a negative note but, having listened carefully to the minister, I must say that I was disappointed in what she said. If there was one point that I wanted her to address, it was the one that Richard Simpson raised in his final minute and which is dealt with in paragraph 123 of the committee's report, which says: "it is vitally important that there are standard health checks and developmental checks on every child at crucial stages of the early years." Access and more money are all very good, but unless we identify those who need that service, I am afraid that they are pretty worthless. We all knew that addressing mental health and development issues in childhood was a problem, but I for one was shocked at what the Health and Sport Committee uncovered. The report paints a harrowing picture of how poorly we understand and nurture young people in Scotland today. The concluding remarks in paragraph 149 state: "Despite the commitment of ... Government" since 1999, and "the existence of an agreed framework and the devotion, good work and admirable efforts of many individuals ... mental health and well-being" of young people "seems not to have been a priority amongst those responsible for delivering the policy." The starting point for the report is the four-tier model that is used for CAMHS. Unless those who are not mental health specialists—including  general practitioners, health visitors, school nurses, teachers, social workers, nursery staff and parents—identify problems early in a child's development, there will be no referral to tiers 2, 3 or 4. The committee was told that if the window of opportunity when a child is aged two or three is missed, "the consequence can be life-long poor mental health." The British Psychological Society Scottish division of educational psychologists confirmed that "CAMHS are not geared up to deliver early intervention", and Dr Philip Wilson stated: "We either pay for a service for young children or pay 10 times over later in life". The British Psychological Society stated: "There is considerable confusion at times about how to respond to self harm, aggressive or acting-out behaviours. It is also evident that young people who are withdrawn, depressed or struggling socially can often be missed." The society went on to say that "primary care health and education staff can be unclear and disconnected from the integrated children's services processes". Just as worrying, the Scottish division of the Royal College of Psychiatrists stated that some professionals "still deny the existence of disabling mental health disorders in children". The SNAP report has been mentioned several times. In 2003, it stated that CAHMS were "patchy", the teams were under "heavy pressure", links were "limited" and there were "delays in referrals and access." It also stated that specialist services were "difficult to access", and that there were "long waiting times" and a "lack of training" in the wider non-specialist tier 1 network. Seven years on, what has changed? The Scottish Executive report in 2005 credited the SNAP report with providing a "strategic vision for the mental health of children" —and yet Dr Graham Bryce confirmed that "we have not found a mechanism to drive the implementation of the policy". We have the policy, but we seem not to have moved any further towards implementing it. We are more than three years into the 10-year implementation plan, yet not one witness was able to give any indication of progress or interim goals achieved. Just as worrying, as Christine Grahame mentioned, was the lack of clarity on priority and  responsibility between local authorities and the NHS. The low priority that is given to child psychiatry in Scotland is reflected in the years-long—nearly 10 years, I believe—vacancy for the post of professor in Edinburgh. More teacher training is desperately needed, but, equally, far greater emphasis is needed on development issues for under-fives, on the health visitor role and on training for nursery staff. There has also been confusion with regard to in loco parentis, and the fact that what a teacher understood to be an accurate definition in fact meant the exact opposite. As Christine Grahame said, the most compelling evidence was on the critical need for health visitors: not to give parents access and a number on a nursery wall, but to address before the age of two the early neglect and the lack of early relationships and secure attachments of a child, which we heard are "powerful predictors of mental ill health." We heard that it is possible to predict at the age of three as many as 70 per cent of those who will end up as in-patients in psychiatric hospitals or in prison. Professor Law stated that the majority of those with attachment disorders can be identified in the first five years of life. I realise that I am running a bit short of time, Presiding Officer. I know from my family—

I have only 10 seconds left. My granddaughter received the measles, mumps and rubella jab at 15 months and her parents were told to bring her back at the age of five. In conclusion, despite the estimate that 10 per cent of children have mental health issues and all the evidence that we heard about the lack of commitment, the lack of priority and the lack of funding—

The Governments of Wales and Northern Ireland have in place national strategies for school counselling and its implementation, backed by ring-fenced funding in every school.

The four major parties that are represented in the Parliament are now seriously concerned about possible cuts to the Highland rheumatology unit. The unit provides an excellent service and is facing serious cuts. Care nearer to home would not be the care that is co-ordinated at the unit. Does the cabinet secretary think that the proposed cuts are acceptable, even in these financially challenging times?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that rehabilitation services for stroke  patients are adequate throughout Scotland. (S3O-8761)

I agree, and I support that. Stroke patients in Highland acknowledge the excellent care and treatment at Raigmore hospital. Unfortunately, however, access to aftercare and rehabilitation is more difficult. In particular, access to physiotherapy, which is known to be hugely beneficial to stroke patients, appears to be limited to an initial number of sessions following discharge. Will the health secretary look into aftercare and rehabilitation services for stroke patients and ensure that adequate and appropriate physiotherapy services are provided?

The point about health visitors is included in the Health and Sport Committee's report on its inquiry into child and adolescent mental health services, during which we were given evidence that no health visitors at all were being recruited in Highland.

Does Jamie Stone share my concern about the demise of health visiting, especially in his home town of Tain? Health visitors have provided an excellent service there for many decades, but their jobs are threatened and there is no recruitment, so they will not be able to help other people, including young carers.

I am pleased to speak in this afternoon's debate and welcome the Highland GIRFEC report's measuring of outcomes, putting the child's needs at the heart of decision making and ensuring that there is less bureaucracy and improved communication between agencies, which my colleague Liz Smith referred to. On the back of this morning's education debate, it is also worth acknowledging the improvement in the educational attainment of the weakest children. In these financially challenging times, all that can be achieved with potential reductions in cost—as Margaret Smith referred to—and, I hope, the earlier detection of problems. I particularly commend the action taken in Highland given the tragic death of Danielle Reid in Inverness some years ago. The death of that child highlighted many failings in interagency working and communication. Although we welcome the excellent progress that Highland has made, we cannot ignore the issue that the Labour amendment raises today, acknowledging that the HMIE report said that half of Scotland's councils "were assessed as weak or unsatisfactory in relation to the assessment of risks and needs". This week, the Health and Sport Committee held a discussion on information technology, clinical portals, patient confidentiality, telehealth and telemedicine. Although I note that the SNP motion "notes progress under the eCare framework", there is no doubt that we have a long way to go to embrace, share and utilise the new technologies that will undoubtedly enhance the care and support of people across Scotland. Leadership is sadly lacking on that project, and for too long children and others have suffered as agencies work in their silos, refusing to share information that would lead to a holistic approach to addressing a child's needs. I commend the work done in Highland to address that issue, but  everything that we welcome and commend today can work only when the agencies are aware of the needs of the child or young person. The Health and Sport Committee recently conducted an inquiry into child and adult mental health services. The report has not yet been scheduled for debate in the Parliament, but it is appropriate to raise some of the issues on the back of some of the points that Ian McKee made. A particular point is the lack of health visitors in Scotland to advise and support parents with young children. In Inverness, after their 15-month immunisation, a child will next see a health visitor at the age of five, when they start school. Without the standard health checks and support, there can be no doubt that many children slip through the net. An Audit Scotland report from July 2008 stated that 40 per cent of children in Highland waited for more than eight weeks for a first assessment by the community mental health team. Some waited for more than a year. For very young children, we were told, there is a window of opportunity for addressing mental health issues at a certain age. If that opportunity is missed, the consequences are lifelong poor mental health and many other issues. In committee, Dr Phil Wilson pointed out that there is a "big increase in the evidence base on what works to stop the bad things happening" and that early neglect, before the age of two, is the strongest predictor for later childhood mental health problems. There is strong evidence that children with problematic behaviour at two-and-a-half years of age are highly likely to end up with major problems later in life. Dr Wilson also told the committee that "it is possible to predict at the age of three as many as 70 per cent of the children who will end up as in-patients"—[ Official Report, Health and Sport Committee , 25 March 2009; c 1728, 1734.] in psychiatric hospitals or in prisons. For all those reasons, I welcome the GIRFEC approach. However, as Dr Wilson stated, children had been completely forgotten and, as a result, no health visitors are being trained in NHS Highland. Elsewhere in Scotland, the service is patchy, to say the least. Although we can all congratulate and commend GIRFEC, it works only when the children who are in need are identified. Unfortunately, the demise of the health visiting profession means that many more children will not be identified at the early stages and will not get the help that they need. I am pleased that Adam Ingram is the minister in charge of the programme. He has a proven record of commitment to mental health, given that he chaired the cross-party group in the Scottish  Parliament on mental health in the first two sessions of the Parliament. I am aware of that, because I was his vice-convener for all those years. I place on record my congratulations to Highland Council, but I highlight the many failings in the system in identifying children in need. I have no doubt that those issues will be given greater prominence when the Health and Sport Committee debate on child and adult mental health services is scheduled in the Parliament.

The Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care's quality of care services report states that voluntary sector services are consistently graded higher on quality of staffing, care, support, management and leadership than those provided by local authorities. How will the Scottish Government assist the sector to ensure that mental health services are retained and are not cut due to financial constraints?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action has been taken to address problems with the patient transport service in remote and rural areas. (S3O-8664)

Sunart community council has raised concern—to put it mildly—about the poor quality of the patient transport service that is available in its community and throughout Lochaber, which has resulted in missed hospital appointments and stress and anxiety for patients. An urgent meeting that was agreed in February with the Ambulance Service took place in June and the patient transport service representative could not even attend the most recent meeting, in November. I ask the health secretary to investigate and intervene on behalf of the patients in Lochaber and throughout the Highlands who are dependent on patient transport.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate. Our 10-year-old Parliament has prided itself—rightly—on addressing equality and social justice issues. Today's debate presents us with another equality challenge that will be addressed by the planned future debate. I hope that that debate will deal not just with violence against men but with violence in same-sex relationships and, in particular, the situation of children in those relationships, who are currently denied support. I put on record my appreciation and thanks to the Minister for Housing and Communities, Alex Neil, for agreeing to meet John Wilson, me and members from other parties, who were, however, unable to attend. His commitment to consider the situation of all domestic abuse victims and their children is welcome. It is only right and just that the Parliament and the Scottish Government continue to support the women's aid movement, shelters and refuges, the provision of counselling and support for women and children, and programmes for males to address their abusive behaviour. In a modern, compassionate Scotland, we should expect no less.  As other members have said, in the past nine years, the number of domestic abuse incidents with a male perpetrator and female victim has increased by 39 per cent, the number of incidents with a female perpetrator and male victim has increased by 172 per cent, and the number of incidents with a male perpetrator and male victim has increased by 215 per cent. The biggest increase of all has been in the number of incidents with a female perpetrator and female victim, at 427 per cent. That is more than 10 times greater than the increase in the incidence of violence by males against females. I agree that, undoubtedly, the majority of cases involve violence by males against females, but that is no excuse for ignoring other cases and the children in those relationships.

Not just now. In the same nine-year period, recorded female abuse of males doubled from 7 to 14 per cent of all incidents. I refer members to page 13 of "Safer Lives: Changed Lives", which indicates that the only existing evidence on male victims is from 2002. The report states: "there is a need to have robust evidence and greater understanding of what if any specific needs men might have."

I will do so when I have finished making this point. In Scotland, there are no services for male victims, except for a telephone helpline in Somerset—that is what men in Scotland are offered. Although today's debate is about domestic violence against women—I will come on to the issue of female-female relationships—it is the situation of the children who are involved in domestic abuse and violent incidents that gets me so passionate about the issue. I mentioned that there is a telephone helpline in Somerset; the Scottish Government's website also provides information on a telephone helpline in Surrey.

I will do so when I am ready. There is nothing in the report or elsewhere in Scotland that will enable women to address their abusive behaviour, whether that behaviour is directed against men or against other women. There is no recognition in Scotland of the fact that women can perpetrate domestic abuse.  It is the children who I am mainly concerned about.

I will come to Marlyn Glen in a second. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child gives children and young people the right to special protection measures from all forms of physical and mental violence—but that does not apply in Scotland. The amount of money that is committed to violence against women is £44 million, but there is not one penny for violence against men. I realise that I am running out of time. There is no other service for victims of crime that the Scottish Government would leave to another organisation in another jurisdiction. The three publicly funded CEDAR—children experiencing domestic abuse recovery—pilot projects that are under way in different parts of Scotland have a remit to support women and their children. There is nothing for men. There is nothing for the children of same-sex relationships or the children of men who are being abused. My final point—sorry, Marlyn—is to welcome the future debate on victims of domestic abuse and domestic violence. I very much welcome the future debate on supporting the needs of all children in relation to all domestic violence.

Does the minister acknowledge that the greatest increase in incidents of domestic abuse over the past nine years has been in cases of women committing violence against women?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that patients are not interested in whether cleaning contracts are in-house or private and that they just want high standards of infection control? The question is pertinent because Aberdeen royal infirmary had an  in-house contract that did not meet the quality mark. Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge the disappointment in the report findings and the need for Government to instruct NHS boards to look at internal communication, practices, plans and implementation of existing guidance, all of which they should have been doing already? Are NHS targets and financial challenges potentially compromising infection control? After every infection outbreak and report, we are given assurances that action will be taken. How can we be assured that the action outlined today will be sustained in the long term?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the implications for Scotland are of the ratification of the Lisbon treaty. (S3O-8556)

There are many concerns in Scotland over reform of the common fisheries policy and the new regulations on aquaculture that are currently before the EU Committee on Fisheries. Will those matters fall under the new rules of the Lisbon treaty or will they be dealt with by consultative powers that were in force when the proposals were introduced earlier this year?

I, too, thank Jack McConnell for highlighting the challenges and consequences of the HIV epidemic  not only in Scotland but worldwide, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. He is to be commended for his commitment not only on HIV but on other issues, including the maternity issues that he spoke about so eloquently in a previous debate. To prepare for the debate I, like Jackie Baillie, trawled a few websites. I want to put it on record that I commend the Terrence Higgins Trust for its excellent website. I hope that the Government and others who work in the field will encourage those at risk to access and use such information. I will focus my comments on the "HIV Action Plan in Scotland". The fact that the action plan runs from next month until March 2014 is welcome, as it will help us to address the issues that we face. Although there has been a substantial rise in HIV cases in Scotland, that could be attributable to better testing as well as to a rise in transmission. I welcome the block purchasing of antiretroviral therapy to reduce costs—that is not only welcome but common sense—and I hope that the national health service will use bulk buying for a range of drugs and therapies. In particular, I welcome the fact that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland will develop and implement standards for HIV prevention, diagnosis, treatment and care. I am slightly concerned about the timing of some of the measures. I want things to be done properly and thoroughly, but the implementation still seems to be a bit down the line. The action plan's summary of actions gives action 6 as "An investigation into the reasons why some people living with HIV do not attend specialist clinical services will be undertaken." I do not mean to sound negative, but it might have been helpful if that investigation had been done prior to the action plan's publication; it would have helped and encouraged more people to come along. Nonetheless, the fact that that issue will be addressed is welcome, particularly if it examines fear, attitude and stigma. The action plan gives action 11 as "An exploration of the educational and training needs of the HIV related workforce will be undertaken. Priorities will be identified and educational solutions developed and implemented." Again, I had hoped that the action plan would address the education and training gaps rather than just explore and look for theme, but the action is welcome nonetheless. I commend the Government on the publication of the action plan. I hope that GPs will be given the necessary support and advice not only to deal with those who have been diagnosed with HIV but to prevent HIV. The fact that an estimated 40 per cent of gay and bisexual men with HIV are unaware that they have the virus is very worrying. More information on  prevention, early diagnosis and treatment would help to alleviate the fear, destigmatise the testing and, I hope, promote a more confident approach to those who present for testing. Another issue that we heard about at a recent briefing in the Parliament is that, despite a letter from the chief medical officer, a recent report suggests that GPs do not always make the connections between the potential signs and symptoms that patients present and the concept of HIV testing. I think that the regional HIV facilitation teams will help enormously with that. Like others, I commend the amazing Annie Lennox for her commitment to do as much as she can to bring attention to HIV/AIDS. Ted Brocklebank, who is a member of the executive committee of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Scotland branch, shares my view that Annie Lennox has done remarkable work on behalf of the emerging nations in Africa. I know that the agenda for the CPA's next meeting before Christmas includes an item about considering how Annie Lennox's talents and concerns for Africa might be best used by this Parliament and Scotland. Ambassadorial status is reserved to the Court of St James and the diplomatic service, but I know that Ted Brocklebank and the representatives from other parties in the CPA Scotland branch have discussed whether there might be a relevant role for Annie Lennox. Like others, I hope that that can be carried forward.

I, too, thank my colleague, Margaret Mitchell, for securing the debate. I also thank her for her continued commitment to supporting Deafblind Scotland. The figure of 2,683 that was cited by Cathie Craigie appears to be an underestimate. I am sure that, given the minister's ability with figures, he will be able to give us a more accurate figure. As Jim Tolson and others have said, Margaret Mitchell has raised a real issue for debate in focusing on the need to give deafblind people independence and dignity by enabling them to travel accompanied, when appropriate, in order to address the social exclusion that they face. There is no doubt that enabling deafblind people to travel to visit friends and family, to attend social and sporting events or to go shopping—which Cathie Craigie mentioned—would also help to promote good mental health. The excellent guide/communicator service aims to ensure equal access, promote independence and encourage integration into the community. That is not really much to ask. In preparing for the debate, I, like Jim Tolson, came across the European Parliament declaration on the rights of deafblind people, which was published in 2004. Interestingly, the document highlights "the right to receive one-to-one support ... from communicatorguides ... interpreters, or intervenors" when appropriate and also "the right to participate in ... democratic life; the right to work and access training ...; the right to person-centred health and social care" and "the right to lifelong learning." Obviously, all those rights depend on access to transport. The difference highlighted today is that a deafblind person can travel free on the bus and the train but their companion can do so only on the bus; when travelling by train, the companion has to be paid for. I understand that in four of Scotland's transport areas a discounted train fare is available for companions, but I am sure that the minister will clarify that. I realise that I am asking the wrong minister for a response to this issue, but I also want to highlight the lack of mental health facilities in Scotland for deafblind people, which was raised at both the Public Petitions Committee and the Health and  Sport Committee. The Health and Sport Committee is still awaiting the outcome of a proposal for specialist in-patient services in Scotland that was to be submitted to the Scottish Government in autumn 2008. However, I will raise the matter with the appropriate minister. Deafblind people have the right to be accompanied by a guide/communicator, and we must ensure that people in Scotland are neither isolated nor excluded. Surely we will all agree that the deafblind community deserves to enjoy the independence that the rest of us have and often take for granted. I look forward to hearing about the Government's commitment to tackling these issues.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has had with the Association  of British Insurers regarding insurance policies for properties at risk of flooding. (S3O-8461)

The joint statement between the Association of British Insurers and the Scottish Government that was published in December last year is subject to annual review. I take on board what the cabinet secretary said about on-going discussions. During that annual review, will he reflect on the experience of the past few months, including the flooding problems in Moray, where 85 families were forced out of their homes? Will he consider how properties will be covered in the future, and ensure that the small-print details—such as a requirement that a house is not situated within 400m of a burn or river—are made clear when someone purchases a policy?

I ask the member to acknowledge that, from 2001 to 2006, there was a code of voluntary reporting, so, although the figure is exceptional, it might have been grossly underreported.

On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I join others in extending our sympathies to all those who have lost family members to Clostridium difficile outbreaks in Scotland. I acknowledge the tone of Ross Finnie's speech, which stressed that we have a constant battle against C diff and other health care associated infections. Let me start by addressing the issues that are contained in the Labour motion. First, the motion calls on the Scottish Government  "to establish a more robust inspection regime that provides for ... immediate inspection". However, I understand that the six-month-old health care environment inspectorate, which issued its first report into Forth Valley NHS shortly before the Ninewells outbreak, already has the power to make an immediate inspection if that is felt to be necessary. Secondly, as Ross Finnie referred to, the motion states that "inspectors should have the power to close wards". The Labour Party's adviser, Professor Hugh Pennington, commended NHS Tayside for closing the ward immediately on 19 October when an outbreak was determined. The call for inspectors to take the necessary action to close wards illustrates little trust in the competence of NHS staff to deal with the outbreaks. We think that NHS staff need support and guidance, but equally we think that they are trained and competent, and committed to tackling infections. I do not think that I can make my next point as sensitively as it needs to be made against the background of the tragic circumstances that we are talking about. Mandatory surveillance of C diff in England commenced in 2004, but the Liberal-Labour Executive in Scotland introduced it only in the last quarter of 2006, or two years after it was introduced in England. Why did the Labour Party take two years longer to commence mandatory surveillance in Scotland? C diff cases in England have fallen by more than 60 per cent, compared with 44 per cent in Scotland. That is undoubtedly the result of reporting measures having been put in place in England to ensure that outbreaks are known about, and of outbreaks having been recorded and appropriate action having been taken there. I say as sensitively as I can against the background of tragic circumstances that Labour was in charge of the health service for 10 years prior to the outbreak at the Vale of Leven hospital. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I have met campaigners in Argyll who were very worried about the running down of services at that hospital. If Argyll patients came to me and to Jamie McGrigor to express their serious concerns about that hospital, surely Jackie Baillie was aware of the problems there, given that the hospital is in the heart of her constituency. I had hoped that the Labour Party would apologise to families and patients today.

To be honest, if I had Jackie Baillie's pride in what went on there, I think that I would be hiding behind my desk rather than jumping up to make an intervention. The findings of the independent review into the C diff outbreak at the Vale of Leven hospital confirmed that there had been underinvestment in upgrading and maintenance for a decade, and ineffective isolation and infection control. Facilities were described as inadequate for effective patient isolation. The findings confirmed that there had been a lack of leadership and no clear line of professional responsibility, which led to the inadequate management of outbreak cases, poor hand-washing facilities, insufficient toilets, inappropriate spacing between beds, poor information on hand washing and laundry, a failure to monitor antibiotic levels, and very low staff morale due to the uncertainty surrounding the hospital. I could continue, but the picture is clear. I am sorry to say that all that happened on Labour's watch. Jackie Baillie can have as many debates on C diff as are necessary, but she cannot shirk from her party's responsibility in government when it was in charge of the NHS in Scotland. I raise again the issue of electronic bed management and infection tracking, particularly given the C diff case in Ninewells hospital in August, two months before the outbreak. Such a system records each patient journey by bed space and ward, and gives a history of bed space, including patient occupancy and cleaning information. It also allows the easy and quick identification of contact trace adjacent patients. That would undoubtedly have been helpful in the Vale of Leven hospital and in the recent outbreak at Ninewells hospital. An audit trail is essential in such situations. The benefits of such a system are that it reduces infections, the antibiotics that are used and lengths of stay in hospital, and it leads to the more effective use of resources, the safer management of beds and the integration of infection control into daily staff routines. That is why we promote it and are committed to it. I was not going to say what I am about to say until I heard Jackie Baillie talking about patients in Dundee and in the Vale of Leven hospital. My mother died in a hospital in Dundee in 2001. An in-house tender had been used, and the hospital was anything but clean. I complained and raised the issue then, but nothing was done. I am sorry to raise that matter; I would not normally bring a family member into such debates. I thank the Labour Party for lodging the motion on the basis that, although considerable action has been taken, we can never be complacent in our efforts to tackle Clostridium difficile. The Royal  College of Nursing made an important point about the existing initiatives, which my colleague Nanette Milne will expand on in her speech. We will not support Labour's motion, but we will support the Government's amendment.

I confirm that the Public Petitions Committee visited Alness and apologise for saying Invergordon. Given that Rob Gibson mentioned university, can I confirm that the pupils made the point that they did not have money to visit universities, whether from the academic point of view or from the competitive leisure and physical activity point of view?

I congratulate the member on raising the issues for Caithness and Sutherland. When the Public Petitions Committee was in Invergordon, the issue was raised that, for people who wish to be competitive swimmers, the nearest 50m pool to Caithness is in Stirling.

With regard to recruiting and retaining medical staff in remote and rural areas, does the minister agree that innovative training and the implementation of new technologies such as telehealth would make that work even more attractive?

I also express my condolences to the families. Ninewells is a first-class teaching hospital, which is highly valued by patients and people in Tayside, Perthshire and Fife. Has prompt action been taken on a new dress code and on dealing with patients' personal laundry at home, as was promised? Given that the case on 5 August might have been the index case, does the cabinet secretary agree that an electronic bed management and infection control system would have captured the alert more effectively?

Given previous concerns over ambulance provision in remote and rural areas, how will the Scottish Government encourage ambulance workers into the Highlands—for example, to north-west Sutherland—when the posts that are available are mainly part-time posts? Secondly, is it acceptable that ambulance workers in Highland do not get paid for standby shifts?

The cabinet secretary said that she has acres of quotations. We are looking not for acres of legal advice but just for some legal advice. I quote what the First Minister said last week in response to Jackie Baillie: "I hope and believe that such information can be made available to members to enable us to discuss and address the issue in a serious way."— [ Official Report , 29 October 2009; c 20682.]

Indeed. The Sheffield study is an academic study; it cannot be called evidence. As Richard Simpson said, the modelling for the report is questionable, and it certainly does not prove the case for minimum pricing. Despite being short, the debate has been interesting, informative and useful. We have heard wide-ranging views from all sides. I particularly endorse Hugh Henry's speech, which was  excellent. It was thoughtful, considered and exceptionally well balanced. It was first class. Nigel Don needs to read the general agreement on tariffs and trade; every country has to abide by the GATT articles as well as by EU rules. I thank Rhoda Grant for highlighting the fact that, in the Highlands and elsewhere, the issue is not just what the Government does to address the problem. Many people who have an alcohol problem want to address it themselves but, as she said, when they seek help it is not available. That is a major point and I thank her for making it. James Kelly made an honest and sensitive speech, as did Mike Pringle and others. We can agree that there is a problem with alcohol—as we state in our motion—and we can surely also agree that we need the right proposals to tackle it. As Robert Brown said, the purpose of the most recent legislation on alcohol, the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, was to address excessive or illegal alcohol consumption and to protect and improve public health, but there have been unintended consequences: in Shetland, Orkney and Moray, one third of alcohol licensees have not renewed; in the Highland Council area, there have been 345 fewer applications. Who has not renewed? Village halls, small shops, guest houses, tearooms, National Trust for Scotland and Historic Scotland properties, famous jewellery companies, visitor centres, distilleries and breweries. We can hardly agree that those are likely places of excessive or illegal alcohol consumption. As our motion states, Scotland has a complex relationship with alcohol and minimum pricing would penalise responsible drinkers. Surely the correct principle is that any policy on alcohol misuse should address those who have the problem, not the majority who do not. A good start would be to ask a question that Robert Brown and others asked: why do young people in southern Europe go out to socialise whereas so many young people in Scotland go out to get drunk. Also, why do we not have enough brief interventions, which have proved to be successful when someone is picked up drunk and incapable from the street? I also compliment Bill Wilson, who had an excellent members' business debate on the social norms around the issue. International findings as well as research by the University of Paisley demonstrate that most people overestimate the alcohol intake of their peers and that that misperception of social norms leads to increased consumption. The Government has not addressed that issue, which was raised in Bill Wilson's first- class debate.  As Murdo Fraser said, the Conservative team at Westminster has proposed significant tax increases on problem drinks, a ban on selling alcohol at below cost price and a tougher licensing regime. That approach tackles the problems of drinking and antisocial behaviour while leaving responsible drinking unaffected. We can compare that with the Government's proposed blanket minimum price of 40p per unit, which equates to about one glass of wine or a pint of lager a month. Under the Sheffield calculations, an 18 to 24-year-old binge drinker would have to pay an extra 46p a week. That is hardly likely to deter them from alcohol consumption. As our new ally Gordon Brown stated, it is important "to take action that is properly targeted and effective ... We do not want the responsible, sensible majority of moderate drinkers to ... pay more or suffer as a result of the excesses of a small minority" That was his rejection of blanket minimum pricing. I also compliment the wisdom and experience of our former First Minister, Jack McConnell, who said: "the strategy of making alcohol more expensive for the decent majority of people rather than concentrating on enforcement and stopping the lawbreaking and abuse of alcohol is a flawed strategy." I appreciate that I am getting close to the end of my time, but I have a couple of final points. When we consider someone who is alcohol dependent, we are facing an inelastic demand.

I am young enough to remember when the SNP's call for separation was based on revenues from whisky. No one expected the SNP to deliver such a crucial and critical blow to our iconic industry.

Will the minister give way?

I welcome measures to address nutrition in hospitals, but I put it on record that I feel sad that the Government needs to tell hospitals how to support patients to get food, fluid and nutrition. My questions are short and sharp. Is the training that was rolled out in 2008 to all carers and those who manage carers sufficient and extensive enough to help them to identify elder abuse? Will the merger of the care commission with other agencies, as proposed in the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill, help to raise standards and address elder abuse? My final question refers to page 9 of the statement. Is it enough for the minister to say that the Government is encouraging service users and their families to find out about care standards? Should not that encouragement be strengthened, so that the Government gives all people who receive care and their families the right to know what to expect and what the care standards are, so that they know what to do if they feel that the standards are not being met?

I thank the minister for making her statement. It is appropriate that she has done so. I also thank her for the advance copies of both of this morning's statements, which were received 35 minutes prior to the start of this morning's business. I also congratulate Jackie Baillie on her new post and look forward to working with her. It is important to acknowledge the excellent working relationship that has been developed with UK ministers to double the ECMO capacity in Leicester, and their commitment to train NHS staff in Aberdeen. I commend all NHS staff, but I particularly commend those in NHS 24, who have risen to the challenge of swine flu. Does the cabinet secretary appreciate why so many people are calling and pressuring their doctors? They are doing so against a background of increased hospitalisation of flu patients and the fact that more than 19,000 people were diagnosed with swine flu last week, as well as the fact that, tragically, 25 people have died. There is no doubt that all that is leading to increased anxiety to get the vaccine. Can the cabinet secretary give pregnant women the advice that they need to reassure them about the safety of the vaccine for their own health and that of their unborn babies? Will she also give advice about the potential age immunity for swine flu, given that many reports are stating that a similar strain of flu was around in the 1950s, which might mean that people over 60 or 65 might be immune? That clarity is critical if we are to ensure that all those who would benefit from the vaccine come forward to get it.

We all want home carers to be paid as much as necessary, and according to the value of the job, which is huge. However, it is a concern that the wages for Highland Council home carers are not the same as the wages that organisations such as the Crossroads Association pay. The council loses very good staff because it is unable to match those wages.

Will the member give way?

Given the tight budgets, does the member think that it is wrong that councils pay twice as much for care in a council home as in an independent home?

I welcome the debate on future services for the elderly. We recently had an excellent debate on the charter of rights for people with dementia, which was led by Irene Oldfather, whom Johann Lamont mentioned. It is the responsibility of each and every one of us to do as much as we can to get that charter out to older people and their carers. The debate is on future care, but I make no apology for repeating some points that I have raised previously. Currently, more than 800,000 people in Scotland are aged 65 or over, and 66,000 of them have dementia. Throughout the UK, one in four people over 65 has depression that impairs their quality of life. The over-65 population in Scotland is set to rise by 21 per cent by 2016 and the over-85 population is set to rise by 38 per cent in the same period. It is clear that the UK and Scottish Governments need to prepare for that. As the minister said, last year health and social care expenditure for over-65s was £4.5 billion. A third of that expenditure went on emergency admissions. Surely, the first thing for a future policy is to provide support and care that will empower older people to be as mobile and independent as possible and to live in their homes for as long as possible. We should not assume that everyone over 65 needs care. Of that population, 89.5 per cent are not in the care system at all. As I said in a previous debate, the over-65s represent more than 20 per cent of the population, but receive only 5 per cent of the input from national health service psychology services  and the psychology profession in Scotland. That cannot be right. As well as their direct input, psychologists can train and support staff who work specifically with older people. That is very much needed. If we wish to enhance independence and the quality of life of elderly people, we could stop rationing chiropody—or podiatry as it is now called. We could consider having a system in which elderly people can self-refer when their mobility is threatened, and we could stop the stupid argument about whether podiatrists should cut toenails. Podiatrists are highly qualified and provide high-quality foot care. If there is to be investment in any service to keep people mobile, it should be in podiatry. The same applies to physiotherapy. It is a nonsense that a person can wait 18 weeks between general practitioner referral and surgery and yet can wait months or even years to see a physiotherapist. After such a long wait, the damage for an older person is probably much more difficult to repair—if it is possible to repair it—and it is almost impossible to restore the person to good health. I thank the Royal National Institute for Deaf People in Scotland for providing an excellent briefing on hearing issues among older people. According to the RNID, 17 per cent of its respondents waited months to receive equipment, and it estimates that about 350,000 people in Scotland who could benefit from hearing aids are not using them. It can take 15 years before people seek help after first noticing that their hearing is deteriorating. In Inverness last week, I was delighted to get a little leaflet through the door—when the posties were not on strike—to say that Specsavers is now doing hearing checks. One can just walk in and get one's eyes and ears tested at the same time and, within a week, one can get a digital hearing aid for around £400. I hope that the Government will be as supportive of high street hearing tests as it is of optometrists and opticians, and that it does not allow its anti-private-sector bias to affect patient care. More use of telehealth could greatly assist independence at home. Let us not assume that everyone who is over 65 does not know how to switch on a CardioPod. Let us not treat them all as if they did not live in the age of technology. It is time to reconsider the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002. When it was passed, the intention was that every care home for the elderly would be an integrated care home, so that when nursing care was needed it would be provided. Somewhere between passage of the bill and implementation of the act, something happened, and instead of one type of care home we have three: residential care homes, nursing  homes and some integrated care homes. The result is that people who need nursing care in a residential care home do not get it. In fact, quite often the carers and managers of the home do not diagnose the problems. Still on care homes—and bearing in mind the current budget scrutiny—I ask the Scottish National Party to consider another issue. I use the example of Dundee, given that it is the minister's constituency. Why does the SNP allow councils, for example Dundee City Council, to pay £454 a week for care of a person in an independent care home but £826 a week for people in council homes? We have a tight budget, and a growing elderly population, and twice as many elderly people can be cared for in the independent sector, with the same quality and standards as the council sector. Finally, we need to consider the removal of ring fencing and what that has done for care of the elderly. Dr McKee is familiar with Kilchoan in the Highlands. Those who go to the lunch club there to be cared for are now serving soup and caring for themselves because there is no money in Highland Council's budget for their care. People in the Highlands are being told that the budget is spent and that they must wait until next year. The removal of ring fencing was to allow councils to ensure that all single outcome agreements were achieved, and that what was assessed as a need was provided for. If the budget to promote mobility, health and independence at home runs out in a few months, either care of the elderly is not a priority in the councils in Scotland or the single outcome agreements are not robust enough to ensure that the money is invested for older people. If we are serious about this issue, we must consider that.

Constituents have raised with me the fact that Highland Council's budget for aids and adaptations ran out months ago, which means, for  example, that it will be next April before those aged over 90 get a shower instead of a bath. How can that help or empower people to live at home?

In looking at future standards, will the minister also look at the role of psychologists, who are highly trained to do direct clinical work, train and support staff and carry out supervision and consultancy, in supporting older people with dementia?

As the vice-convener of the cross-party group on Alzheimer's, I thank Irene Oldfather for her tremendous commitment to dementia, and I commend all those who have been involved in producing the charter of rights for people with dementia and their carers. I can certainly confirm that there is nowhere in this Parliament for members to hide when Irene Oldfather is looking for them, particularly if she wants them to sign her charter. In a previous debate, Cathy Jamieson compared the human rights of a person with dementia with the human rights of prisoners. The difference that she highlighted was stark, and I trust that the charter will go some way towards bridging the gap. As Irene Oldfather pointed out, the report "Remember, I'm still me" highlighted very serious failings in care of the elderly, including care of people with dementia. Dementia services are often poorly resourced, patchy and inappropriate and are often provided by staff who have little or no knowledge of the illness. The charter provides a clear list of what individuals can expect and demand and, as the cross-party group has stated, "aims to empower people with dementia, those who support them and the community as a whole, to ensure their rights are recognised and respected." I hope and trust that the charter will push dementia care further up the political agenda, particularly given the projected increase by 2029 of 65 per cent in people with dementia. On the basis of current care patterns, an additional 16,800 hospital and care home places will be required to deal with that increase. We must all be aware of that. Although I welcome everything in the charter, it would be naive of me to think that it will resolve all the issues related to dementia care in Scotland. However, one solution that was highlighted at a briefing that was given this week in Parliament by psychologists from across Scotland will undoubtedly help to deal with some of the issues that it identifies. In her presentation on the key role of psychologists in services for older people, Dr Jennifer Borthwick, who is a consultant clinical psychologist from NHS Lanarkshire, highlighted the fact that for people aged under 20 there are eight psychologists per 100,000; for those aged 20 to 64, there are 6.7 per 100,000; and for the over-60s, there are 0.6 per 100,000. In other words, although they make up 20 per cent of the population, the over-65s get only 5 per cent of the psychology workforce. Many reasons were suggested for that lack of psychological support,  including stigma, the stiff upper lip and people saying, "Well of course you're depressed. You're 75, you've got arthritis and your husband died five years ago." However, the sad fact is that the patients are as likely to think that way as the referrers. Dr Borthwick also pointed out that older people are not what they once were. We have heard that 60 is the new 40; well, perhaps 80 is the new 60 and perhaps older people's expectations of services and how they want to be treated have changed. As Dr Borthwick made clear, over-65s no longer expect to go to a day centre or care home to listen to Jimmy Shand for six hours. We have also moved on from the stiff-upper-lip stereotype to a cohort that is more used to expressing emotions, making demands, expecting more than is being provided at the moment with regard to individual need and looking for services to reflect the lifestyles that they enjoy and expect to enjoy. We need only look at the two ladies on the charter's front cover to realise that.

I had been looking forward to another 10-minute speech. I am delighted to speak in the debate, having started teaching evening classes at Dundee College of Commerce in 1973. After gaining a degree at the University of Dundee, I spent 20 years lecturing on economics and business studies in further and higher education. From my first-hand experience I can commend the work of our colleges, which have constantly adapted over three decades to meet the needs of industry and individuals during times of economic change. Scotland's colleges are highly innovative and can set up new courses with a flexibility that is not always seen in our university sector. As a lecturer, I was always concerned at the start of each term to find out whether there were sufficient enrolments for the courses that I had taught and what new courses and subjects I would be faced with. I welcome Murdo Fraser's amendment with regard to rural colleges. The millions of pounds that were targeted at communities most in need were fully allocated to colleges in the central belt, yet North Highland College is probably one of the most enterprising and innovative colleges in Scotland. It is working with the decommissioning authorities for Dounreay and towards the future of marine energy in the Pentland Firth. It is poised and ready, with a first-class principal at the helm, to meet the challenges for training, education and research that are required for energy production in the Pentland Firth. North Highland College also faces retraining the 1,800 employees at Dounreay—all of whom face redundancy in the short or longer term—yet it got  nothing in the recent payout. I hope that in raising the issues relating to the college, I have put down a marker for future resource allocation.

When I was a lecturer, there were constant restructurings, redundancies and so on. It is always a challenge not only to have full-time lecturers, but to get people from industry to teach at evening class.

I appreciate that, but 1,800 redundancies in Caithness represent a huge blow and a great challenge to the local economy. Colleges have always welcomed mature students, whether they are returning to education after years of low-paid work, because of family breakdown, following redundancy or simply because it is time for a change. Students can leave with a higher national certificate after one year of study; they can leave with a higher national diploma after two years of study; and after three years they can leave with a degree. In fact, they can now leave after the first year with an HNC and continue to degree level part time or by distance learning. Colleges also help to train and educate prisoners prior to release and from our open prisons. I know, because I have taught them, that some prisoners are excellent students in enterprising activity—although not always of the legal kind. This morning I spoke to the head of construction at Inverness College to get an update on what it is doing to assist the economic recovery. Inverness College piloted the one-day-a-week skills for work course for pupils over the age of 14, which is now available across Scotland. School pupils are given taster sessions across the skills sector, in sectors ranging from hairdressing to construction and engineering. The feedback from schools is that the pupils are not only gaining insight and skills, but working better during the four days that they are at school. Inverness College also does taster days across the various craft areas for primary and secondary school pupils around Inverness. Against a background of a 50 per cent reduction in construction apprentices in Highland this year, Inverness College has taken on 150 pre-apprentices to the access to construction course, which gives them a range of construction skills,  helps them to learn the trade that they prefer and helps them to find out what they are good at. It is hoped that by next year many of those students will be employed as apprentices with local firms. However, the outlook does not look good as not one bricklaying apprentice has been taken on in the city of Inverness this year. However, even if the students do not get apprenticeships next year, they will have gained construction skills that will last a lifetime. Such courses are resource heavy and current funding needs to be looked at if they are to continue in the future. As members have said, we should also look at the number of bursaries. It is one thing to talk about what the colleges are doing to cope with the economic recession, but we should be placing more emphasis on what the colleges could be doing to ensure that Scotland has the skills, training and education to meet our needs following the recession. Like Margaret Smith, Claire Baker and Murdo Fraser, I wish to highlight the issue of child care. It is a fact that students can pay up to £180 a week for child care. In fact, many colleges—I will not name them—allow students only one free week a year. They have to pay for 51 weeks of child care at £180 a week, even though they attend for only 33 weeks of the year.

In answer to David Stewart's point, mature students choose further education not just for the skills, education and training that colleges provide; they often choose it so that they can spend time with their children as they are growing up.

I do not wish to see them penalised by being asked to pay for child care during summer holidays.

Will the member give way?

Does the member acknowledge that Cumbernauld College would not have the independence that it has if it were not for the Conservatives incorporating all colleges in the early 1990s, allowing them the independence to pursue enterprising initiatives?

Does the member acknowledge that it is not for Highlands and Islands Enterprise, Highland Council and UHI to tell Inverness College what to do? Is it not time that all organisations respect the board of management decision at Inverness College?

As a former further and higher education college lecturer, I point out that many mature people ought to be given those opportunities, particularly in this time of recession.

I join the minister in commending Moray Council for the actions that it has taken. The council is looking to make savings of £16 million in the next few years and now needs an estimated additional £3 million to assist with clear-up costs in Rothes, Fochabers and Elgin. As the minister said, many families face a wait of six months in temporary accommodation before they can return to their homes. Further to her response to Rhoda Grant's question, how will the Scottish Government help Moray Council to cover the additional costs arising from the third major flood in 12 years?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many people are known to be on a waiting list for physiotherapy treatment in the NHS. (S3O-7964)

I am aware that that information is not collected centrally. That is why I sent a request under the Freedom of Information  (Scotland) Act 2002 to all health boards in Scotland. I can confirm that the number of patients known to be on a waiting list for physiotherapy in Scotland is currently well in excess of 20,000. The Scottish National Party manifesto promised to reduce waiting times for physiotherapy by increasing the number of national health service physiotherapists. Is that another broken promise?

I take the point that the minister made on waiting times. We are talking about the waiting time from referral to treatment. Will she confirm that treatment will include reconstructive surgery when the patient requests that and the clinician deems it to be appropriate?

I thank and commend Rhona Brankin for securing the debate. It has, after all, been six years since Parliament last debated the issue. I also join the tributes to Margaret Ewing, who is very fondly remembered not only here, but in Moray. This year, with a number of colleagues I took part in the Edinburgh moonwalk, helping to raise funds for, and awareness of, breast cancer. The enthusiasm and dedication of the 10,000 walkers are testament to the commitment of Scottish women to combating breast cancer. I also commend the Maggie's centres. Rhona Brankin talked about how difficult it is to sit down with the family—sometimes it is easier to talk to strangers than to the family. Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women. In 2006, more than 4,000 women were diagnosed, which accounted for almost 30 per cent of all cancers affecting women in that year. When we talk about referral to treatment, we should ensure that all women who request reconstructive surgery are given it. Referral to treatment must include all treatment, when requested and when appropriate. Under a female Prime Minister, the United Kingdom was one of the first countries in the world to establish a national breast screening programme, with the first screening centres being operational in England and Scotland in 1988. Since national coverage was attained in 1991, there have been more than 2.1 million screening episodes and in excess of 15,000 breast cancers have been diagnosed. The national screening programme has been an invaluable tool in reducing the number of deaths from breast cancer. I am pleased that the Highland NHS Board mobile unit was in Inveraray car park on Friday, which shows that the programme goes to every town and village in Scotland. As Rhona Brankin said, 39 per cent of the 4,079  women who were diagnosed with breast cancer in 2006 could have prevented the diagnosis if they had maintained healthy weight, increased their physical activity and limited their alcohol intake. Unfortunately, only between 5 and 9 per cent of women are aware of those preventive measures. As with breast screening, women must be encouraged to go to their general practitioner as a preventive measure. It is disconcerting that, in deprived areas, the presentation rates for breast screening are much lower than the average and women present later and with more advanced conditions, which helps to explain why survival rates are higher in more affluent areas. The Government must address that. I turn to treatment. The latest figures on waiting times after urgent referral to treatment in NHS Highland range from a minimum of 22 days—they can be long days, as Christine Grahame said—to a maximum of 92 days. The maximum wait in Lothian NHS Board is 101 days. In NHS Highland, there has been a 70 per cent increase in treatment for breast cancer in the past six years, so there is no doubt that staff are working hard to meet the targets. I welcome the review of staffing groups in the north of Scotland, which is addressing the resource and staffing needs for breast cancer patients. At present, only four health boards in Scotland exceed the maximum wait of 62 days. However, all health boards currently exceed the new target of 31 days that the Government has set for 2011. That highlights that many more resources are needed urgently.

Scotland does not fare well on survival rates for breast cancer. We have lower rates than England, Wales, Northern Ireland and almost every other country that is mentioned in "Better Cancer Care, An Action Plan", apart from Slovenia.

I will start by addressing part 2 and primary medical services. The Health and Sport Committee's stage 1 report confirms that all members of the committee considered that "there is no guarantee that the existing model of general practice will survive in the long term." Against that background, it would be wise for all MSPs to maintain as much flexibility and as many  options for the future as possible rather than create and sustain a monopoly. In 2003, the SNP supported the proposals that it seeks to abolish today. Shona Robison stated: "I do not subscribe to the conspiracy theory that the SSP promotes that somehow the entire bill has been engineered to open the door to a mass influx of the private sector into the health service". She accused the Scottish Socialist Party of paranoia. I agree with Ms Robison that the bill has not opened the door to a mass influx of the private sector—the bill never opened the door to a single private provider. Even the wise Stewart Stevenson confirmed: "The key thing is that we have private contractors in primary medical services ... We are now in crisis".— [ Official Report , 18 December 2003; c 4390, 4392.]  As there are no commercial providers in Scotland, Helen Eadie and I visited a GP practice in Tower Hamlets and a walk-in centre at Canary Wharf. Both are run by Atos Healthcare and neither could operate in Scotland if the bill were passed. NHS London holds the contract for the walk-in centre at Canary Wharf, which gives 80,000 workers in the area—as well as locals and visitors—simple access to primary medical services without disruption to their working life. There are now plans for seven walk-in centres in London, reflecting local needs and reducing the pressure on accident and emergency departments.

No, sorry. Similar services do not exist in Scotland. The local primary care trust discontinued the GP contract at Tower Hamlets, as it did not achieve the key performance indicators. The five-year contract was given to Atos, which now employs five GPs and staff. They told us of the better information that they receive from Atos in detailed monthly reports. The patient experience indicator was also linked to incentives in that practice in what is a deprived area of London, where more than 80 per cent of the population are Bengali. That health centre, which is run by a commercial provider, now has lower staff turnover, better continuity of care, more stability, better compliance with chronic disease management and an immunisation catch-up campaign. It takes patients from other practices and is now meeting all its targets for screening and health checks. It also runs seven clinics a week and is open from 8 am to 8 pm during the week, and 9 to 5 on Saturdays.

No, I have only a short time.  If that company does not deliver for the population, the primary care trust will not renew its contract. That is an example of a first class, groundbreaking service, which could be available in future in a modern NHS in Scotland, whether in community pharmacies, walk-in centres or GP practices. For those reasons, and the examples that I have given and that my colleagues will give, we will not support part 2 of the bill. We can all agree on the destructive effects of smoking on the health and lives of smokers—the premature deaths, the lung cancer and the coronary heart disease. However, the decision that we face today is whether the proposed measures will reduce the number of youth smokers. We support the strengthening of enforcement measures and the register for retailers. We also fully support the Health and Sport Committee's recommendation that the legal position on the proxy purchasing of tobacco be brought into line with the legal position on the proxy purchasing of alcohol. However, that measure was not only supported by small and large retailers, it was proposed by them. If the Government had listened to the evidence from Scotland's retailers prior to producing the bill, that measure would have been in the bill instead of having to be introduced at stage 2. The measure is evidence based. It is a fact that 87 per cent of young smokers obtain cigarettes from family and friends. However, an evidential base like the one for proxy purchasing is not available for the proposed ban on the display of tobacco products. From all the evidence that has been given, it is clear that there is no conclusive causal relationship between the banning of tobacco displays and the prevalence of youth smoking. The Health and Sport Committee recognised in its report "that the evidence base for this proposal is at an early stage and that the international evidence to date is inconclusive" and noted that the minister said that the ban would lead to more evidence—in other words, "We have no evidence to say that the ban will stop young smokers, but we will give it a try in an attempt to find the evidence." That is hardly an empirical base for legislation.

I am in my last seconds. Much of the evidence that is used to justify the display ban comes from before the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act 2002, the restrictions on point-of-sale advertising that were introduced in 2004 and the ban on brand sharing and sponsorship in 2005, which Richard Simpson mentioned.  The Canadian province of Saskatchewan has had a tobacco display ban since 2002. Youth smoking has declined there by 18 per cent. The trouble is that the rate of decline for the rest of Canada, which had no display ban, was 32 per cent. The New Zealand Prime Minister, a sensible man, recently rejected the introduction of a display ban for cigarettes because his Government did not find conclusive evidence that that is the most effective strategy for tackling youth smoking. The display ban would also undoubtedly place a huge financial burden on small shops, estimated by the Scottish Grocers Federation as £5,000 per store. As we all know, many of those stores are already struggling to cope with the imposition of thousands of pounds-worth of alcohol licensing. Scottish Conservatives will support a modern, flexible health service in Scotland that is focused on patient needs. We will not support a display ban on cigarettes, given that there is no credible evidence that it will reduce the number of young people smoking. For those reasons, we will not support the general principles of the bill.

In response to Helen Eadie's recent members' business debate on infertility treatment, the minister stated: "We would like those who are eligible for NHS infertility treatment, wherever they are in Scotland, to receive timely NHS treatment."— [ Official Report , 28 May 2009; c 18058.]  At the moment, many people are forced to pay privately for this treatment due to age or time bar. How long is a wait that is deemed to be "timely"?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the provision and cost of child care for students in further education. (S3O-7796)

I thank the minister for explaining the postcode lottery for students who receive child care support. The Scottish Conservatives responded to the Government's consultation on student support stating that more resources should be allocated to child care. What is she doing to respond to that submission? What is she doing to tackle the fact that further education colleges take a range of approaches to funding child care, which results in some students paying all the fees up front all year and hoping and praying that they might get some money refunded, whereas other colleges accept full financial responsibility for child care at the start of term?

Will the minister give way?

I remind the member of something that I clearly remember, which is that the SNP manifesto stated: "we will ensure that every pupil has 2 hours of quality PE each week". Today, that pledge has become an undertaking to try to make some progress towards that.

I commend the feisty and politically incorrect convener of the Health and Sport Committee for steering and managing us through the inquiry. I also want to put on record the fact that excellent witnesses appeared before the committee. Liz McColgan, Shirley Robertson and John Beattie stood out for me, but everyone was first class. The inquiry into pathways into sport for children and sport facilities was the first on such a topic in the Parliament since 2000, when the Education, Culture and Sport Committee conducted an inquiry into sport in schools. It is fair to say that we spread the net wider. Given the extensive groundwork for the report, I hope that the issue will be revisited at regular intervals in future to achieve a consistent approach to quality facilities throughout Scotland and opportunities for all children to participate in sport. Committee inquiries are always interesting in informing MSPs on specific issues. We were told about the differences between physical literacy—I know that Elizabeth Smith has her own interpretation of that—physical activity and physical education. My understanding is that more emphasis on and investment in physical literacy in the early years, including the pre-school years, would undoubtedly improve physical activity and physical education.  Evidence was given that cited particular schools as wonderful beacons of best practice in respect of access to sport. However, when I turned up at one such school in the Highlands to learn about that, the headmaster had no idea what I was talking about. The debate is not just about the committee's report; it is also about the Government's response to that report. Unlike other responses from the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, the response in this case is weak, defensive and fudged. The committee mentioned quite a few times that there had been "lamentable progress". The Government's response is lamentable. The SNP has been in government for two years and five months. Its manifesto said: "we will ensure that every pupil has 2 hours of quality PE each week delivered by specialist PE teachers."

Not at the moment. That commitment has become: "The Government expects schools to continue to work towards ... two hours of ... physical education". That sounds a bit like the commitment on class sizes. The manifesto said that all children in Scotland "will be given free, year-round access to council swimming pools." That is certainly not happening throughout Scotland. The manifesto said: "We will establish an innovative sport volunteer programme with schools and after school clubs". We never heard about that. The manifesto said: "we will expand the number of centres of sporting excellence in Scotland, based on the model of the Bellahouston School of Sport in Glasgow." I missed them too. Perhaps other members can tell us that those centres have sprung up in their constituencies. I could not find any evidence of them. As Christine Grahame said, HMIE said that if PE is not mentioned in an inspection report, it can be assumed that everything is okay. The committee's report is clear. It says: "this highlights a serious and unacceptable discrimination in the importance that HMIE has attached to physical education compared to other disciplines." The Government has accepted that PE should appear in every school inspection report, but it says that it is looking only for  "comment on the school's progress towards the target." That is hardly a commitment. To say that local authorities that do not have a local sports strategy should produce a strategy is a step in the right direction. However, on the use of and access to outdoor pitches, the Government states that it will "encourage Local Authorities to consider the importance of the availability of ... playing and training surfaces". The use of the words "encourage" and "consider" means that that is hardly a firm commitment. The Government's response to the committee's recommendations on positive coaching is: "Extensive discussions have taken place and are ongoing". Maybe, and maybe not. As we have a historic concordat, I thought that all the commitment would be in the single outcome agreements. However, only six out of 32 councils even mentioned the matter. I was also left somewhat confused about the role of active schools co-ordinators. I appreciate that they work well in some schools, but their role seems to be blurred, to say the least, with the role of PE teachers. The committee recommended that the Government host a conference involving all relevant parties on the way forward to reach agreement and understanding about the relationship between active schools co-ordinators, PE staff, headteachers and community sports clubs. The Government says that it is already doing that but, if so, why are there so many problems? What I took from the inquiry—Christine Grahame and Richard Simpson have put it well—is that, where there is a will and a can-do attitude, children can be guaranteed two hours of PE a week. The test for physical literacy works in primary 6 and 7 in East Renfrewshire. If it works there, why does it not work elsewhere? Why is it instantly dismissed? As Richard Simpson said, some witnesses found many excuses not to make it happen. They blamed a crowded curriculum, lack of facilities and lack of transport. The committee received plenty of evidence of the need for new facilities. However, equally, we received plenty of evidence of expensive facilities that were very poorly maintained. I hope that the report will not be allowed to gather dust but will be used for work to make considerable progress in the future, not lamentable progress.

Will the minister give way?

The member talks about more money going to more complex cases, which we all support, but does that raise a concern that not enough preventive work is being done?

As a member of the cross-party group on Alzheimer's, I, too, commend Irene Oldfather for the excellent work that she has done on the issue. Cathy Jamieson's speech also prompts me to mention that I visited an old friend in Montrose during the recess who said that she feels very guilty about the carers' coming in. She was made to feel guilty because she needed care. That is not where we want to be. I have a little list of concerns for the minister. A good starting point for the debate is the Government's health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment target that states:  "Each NHS Board will achieve agreed improvements in the early diagnosis and management of patients with a dementia by March 2011." In response to that, Audit Scotland wrote in its "Overview of mental health services": "It is not possible to comment on whether the target will be achieved as it is not clear how earlier diagnosis and management of people with dementia will be recorded or how improvement will be measured. The target is vague and clearer definitions and guidance are required". I hope that the dementia strategy that is to be published in April will be more focused and clearer, and that in the long term it will be more effective.

I am stating the concerns of Audit Scotland, which I think are legitimate concerns in the long run. Of course, a service for patients can be improved only if it is fully staffed. Audit Scotland highlighted the number of long-term vacancies for consultants in old-age psychiatry in Highland and Lanarkshire. Its report also told us once again that services need to be joined up. How often have we heard that? One of my main concerns today is that that position comes against a background of serious cuts in social work services. In Highland—the area with which I am most familiar—social work has to find more than £17 million of cuts in the next three years as part of an overall budget cut of £80 million. That has affected the charge for home help call systems, which has increased from £28 a quarter to £65. One independent care home in the Highlands has increased its charges to those who are self-funding by 33 per cent in order to make up the shortfall in council funding. I have problems with the continuing situation in which two people in the same care home can be charged different amounts for the same level of care. One elderly service user has gone through £35,000 of savings in the four years for which she has been in the home, and her home is now on the market to pay for future care. Yesterday, Highland Council decided to fill up its own homes and, in the interim, is refusing to refer to the independent sector, which is cheaper but of the same quality. In the midst of the recession and the quest for efficiency savings and high-quality services, why is it acceptable for councils to pay £350 to £450 more per person per week for  people to be placed in council homes rather than in the independent sector, given that both reach the same quality standards? For example, Highland Council pays £464 for an independent home but £819 for a council home. Argyll and Bute Council pays £357 for the independent sector but £817 for a person in a council home. In the minister's area, Dundee, the figures are £454 for the independent sector but £826 if the person is in a council home. I would have thought that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth would wish to discuss that issue alongside quality services and value for taxpayers' money, given that a person in a council-run home is funded about twice as much as a person in the independent or voluntary sector. We need more preventive care to reduce the demand on accident and emergency services. We should also do more to offer families direct payments to ensure that they have the freedom to choose their care and ensure that they get the required time allocation. I move on to the issue of elder abuse. As the "Panorama" programme showed us, there is no doubt that elder abuse is a concern, particularly at a time when more elderly people are dependent on carers and visitors rather than on the support of their family and friends. The problems include physical or verbal abuse and carers who do not always follow the standards and guidelines, particularly in relation to nutritional and personal care. Such things can be difficult to prove when a person becomes very dependent and is unable to make judgments and remember incidents clearly. The minister mentioned covert medication—on the path to improving care and treatment, much more work needs to be done in that area, as "Remember, I'm still me" highlights. I hope that the minister will consider having one GP practice per care home, given that people are placed in care homes from a wide geographic area and are unlikely to see their own doctor following admission. That should help to reduce remote prescribing—sometimes of covert medicines—by GPs. The Scottish Conservatives support the Government's motion and the Liberal amendment—to ensure that spring is in April. The Labour amendment is very specific about dementia advisers and specialist staff; we do not wish to be too prescriptive, and we would prefer to concentrate on better dementia training for all appropriate staff.

It is daffodils.

I, too, congratulate David Stewart on securing the debate. It is appropriate that we discuss insulin pump therapy again, given the commitment that  the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing made in the debate 15 months ago: "I will ensure that I and the Scottish diabetes group continue to monitor closely insulin pump programme availability throughout Scotland".— [ Official Report , 21 May 2008; c 8840.]  Despite that monitoring, we still have pitifully low numbers of people on the therapy in Scotland—only 1.6 per cent of those with type 1 diabetes have access to insulin pump therapy. There are many benefits to using the treatment, which has been with us since the 1970s. The large uptake of pumps in Europe and the USA is testament to the progress that has been made. The benefits of the therapy have been stated, so I will not repeat them. My colleague Nanette Milne made a good point in the previous debate when she described it as "a spend-to-save provision that concurrently leads to improved quality of life for successful users of the technology."— [ Official Report , 21 May 2008; c 8833.]  The National Institute for Clinical Excellence's technology appraisal 151 also fully endorses the value-for-money argument. It is recognised that not everybody is suitable for an insulin pump. As the motion states, only 4 to 15 per cent of people with type 1 diabetes meet the current criteria for the therapy. It also needs a commitment from the patient, backed up with support from the health care team. However, the benefits are evident. As Karen Whitefield said, only 57 children in Scotland currently use pump therapy, but according to NICE's estimates, it should be at least three times that. In the Highlands, as David Stewart mentioned, the figure is embarrassing—a word that Kenneth Gibson used—to say the least and probably pitifully low. I understand that no patients under the age of 18 use insulin pump therapy in the Highlands, despite its being available in many other health board areas in Scotland. The other health board that I will mention is the one that is covered by my colleague John Lamont, who would have liked to attend the debate but has another commitment. He has been contacted by a constituent whose 11-year-old son needs, and is appropriate for, an insulin pump, but has been told by NHS Borders that there is no money for it. I know from parliamentary answers that one person under 15 in the Borders is on the therapy. As other members have done, I ask the minister to comment on what appears to be a rationing policy, if not postcode prescribing. Given the fact that all health boards should have an insulin strategy that covers the full range of insulin use, I also ask the minister to look into the situation in NHS Highland.  I have also been made aware of patients in the west of Scotland who have been described as being "neurotic" for urging consultants to consider the insulin pump therapy option. As David Stewart said, a treatment that can end daily injections and the embarrassment that they can bring, and which can reduce worry, allow more flexible eating and improve care quality and sleep patterns for patients must be encouraged. In my opinion, the main benefit must be the long-term improvements to health. Diabetes increases the incidence of many life-threatening conditions, but I am told that insulin pump therapy can protect the vital vascular system from that future deterioration.

I will leave it there.

It is always a pleasure to participate in a debate with Alex Neil, and he is certainly on good form today. When this Government came to power in 2007, it spoke of doing less, better. I took that to mean that the Government would be doing less and doing it better, not doing less better. I would like to reflect on that theme in my contribution—if members are still following this. It is appropriate to reflect on this Parliament's experience of passing bills, which the First Minister mentioned this morning in relation to the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, which came into effect this week. There needs to be much greater awareness of the unintended consequences of the bills that we pass. We also need to be sure that the proposals that are contained in bills address the problems that we face in our communities, that existing laws and guidelines are rigorously enforced and that sufficient time is given to scrutinising legislation. The proposals for the minimum pricing of alcohol have coincided with the 2005 licensing legislation coming into force, and it is appropriate to consider the intentions of that act and the effects of its implementation. This was the first overhaul in licensing legislation in 30 years, and it has caused serious problems not to binge or underage drinkers but to small businesses and our tourism industry. Licence renewal costs have soared from £130 for three years to more than £7,000, and it is claimed that 800 fewer licences have been applied for in Highland region alone. As Ramsay McGhee, the spokesman for the Scottish Licensed Trade Association, said: "You can't treat a nightclub that holds 800 people in the centre of Edinburgh the same way as a wee hotel in Wester Ross." I have information that a specialist fruit wine supplier in Scotland has gone from having 51 customers last year to having 18 this year. Further, the Edinburgh Woollen Mill, which sells whisky miniatures alongside shortbread, is not renewing its licence in nine outlets. A letter to Mr Salmond from a small shop in Wester Ross states:  "My wife and I make and sell gift products and offer a range of food and basic provisions, including quality wines ... our business cannot meet the proposed charges which would add 8% to our overhead costs ... these proposals place far too heavy a financial burden on small business ... and will hasten the demise of small Highland shops, causing inconvenience to locals and visitors alike." Problems associated with alcohol are a blight on our communities, but the policy that was designed to rid Scotland of underage and binge drinkers is instead putting small shops out of business—small retailers who never contributed in any way to the binge-drinking culture in Scotland. That is what I mean when I talk about unintended consequences. On existing powers, there is no doubt that more should be done to ensure that people who are already intoxicated are not served more alcohol. Further, stopping underage people purchasing alcohol would be a start. The unintended consequences of minimum pricing could lead to more cross-border shopping, as happened in Finland. We have to look at the evidence base for the proposal—or, indeed, the lack of it. The Scottish Parliament information centre briefing on minimum pricing states that, as the policy has not been used to any great extent worldwide, there is little evidence about its effect. The closest example to what the SNP is proposing is in Canada, but there only beer has a price that is linked explicitly to alcohol content. If minimum pricing was the answer, Nordic countries would have no alcohol problems. Further, it is a fact that in southern EU countries, where drink is cheaper, the problems emanating from alcohol are less.

No—I want to cover the last two points. An increase in price reduces demand only when demand is elastic, and it is well documented that alcohol—and cigarettes—face a relatively inelastic demand. There is also an effect from cross-inelasticity of demand, which happens when the increase in the price of certain goods leads to a higher demand for other goods. The example that has been raised with me in the Highlands—and with other MSPs, I am sure—is that for young people drugs will become relatively cheaper and may become a substitute. I am not saying that that will happen, but it is a cause for concern and we must be aware of it. We will positively and constructively support any measure that is known to reduce problem alcohol consumption and the undoubted problems that it brings, alongside the wider and undoubtedly more complex social and cultural issues. I note from the  Government's programme, which I read this morning, that it recommends a 125ml measure of wine. Will that be for wine with an alcohol content of 4 per cent, 9 per cent, 12 per cent, 16 per cent or 17 per cent? The issue is surely the alcohol content rather than the size of the glass. We need to be much more aware of the wider issues in the debate.

In commending her Government on dealing with patients' rights, will Linda Fabiani also commend the Conservatives, who were the first to bring in a patients charter in Scotland that gave patients rights and responsibilities?

I thank Nicola Sturgeon for the updates over the recess and I acknowledge the excellent work of the NHS to date. How will the cabinet secretary ensure that patients with pneumococcal meningitis, the symptoms of which are similar to those of swine flu, are not overlooked during this period, given that swine flu patients should stay at home and meningitis patients should get to hospital as quickly as possible? Someone asked me this question, so I ask the cabinet secretary to forgive me for asking her it. I have been asked whether the thousands of patients in Scotland who have already had swine flu will still have to get the vaccine when it comes out in October. Given the recent media coverage on people's fears about the safety of the vaccine, the BMA has reported that many health professionals are  reluctant to be vaccinated. What advice would the health secretary give in that situation and will she give us an assurance about the safety of the vaccine?

Against the background of the work that is being done and, indeed, of Helen Eadie's members' business debate last month, will the minister examine the varying age limits and body mass index levels that are used to exclude women from IVF treatment to ensure that there is a consistent approach across Scotland?

What is being done to reduce the number of emergency admissions to hospital among elderly people, for whom time delays can often lead to a loss of confidence and independence?

How will the First Minister's Government protect our whisky industry within the proposals on minimum pricing?

Local weekly papers have a high readership in all towns, villages and remote and rural parts, especially in the Highlands, and are an excellent medium for public information messages. The Northern Scot , the Strathspey & Badenoch Herald  and the Inverness Courier are studied and often revisited throughout the week. That is not always the case for national daily papers. Recently, extensive advertising has been undertaken for information campaigns on matters such as swine flu. In such instances, why is so little use made of local papers?

I, too, thank John Lamont for securing this debate and for the excellent points that he has made on an issue that affects constituents not only in the Borders but, as Liam McArthur said, in communities across the Highlands and Islands, including Appin, Lismore and Glensanda in Argyll, Dounby in Orkney, Lochaline and many others. Although the minister has stated that the extra remuneration that GPs receive to cover the dispensing service is not intended to be used to cross-subsidise general medical services and should have no impact on the GP services that are provided, the fact is that additional income from dispensing makes some rural GP practices viable and helps them to exist. One doctor from Argyll stated:  "I can confidently say that 40% of rural practices in remote and rural Scotland would disappear if dispensing income was taken from them". He continued: "the reality is that the dispensing income is essential to maintain General Medical Services in many practices in rural Scotland." I hope that I am not repeating what Liam McArthur has said, but a letter from Dounby states: "The granting of an application to open a pharmacy would have devastating consequences on the level of service the GP practice provides". Concerns have also been expressed in Drymen and various other parts of Scotland. The BMA confirms that one dispensing GP has a part-time partner, a half-time nurse and an extra receptionist as a result of dispensing. For the reasons that I have outlined, I support Richard Simpson's call for the process to include "independent evaluation on the effects upon the stability and service provisions by that practice", as well as the other points in his amendment. Like Christine Grahame, I would like to raise some topical issues relating to the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill that is currently at stage 1 in the Health and Sport Committee. In its written evidence, Community Pharmacy Scotland expresses concerns about whether the current model of GP practices will even be in existence in 10 years' time. It would appear from the organisation's evidence that community pharmacies would be willing to employ doctors to provide general medical services. In some cases, in particular areas, that might be the best and preferred approach, but I am aware that staff in some newly built and existing health centres who have been working towards providing a one-stop shop for patients to see the doctor, nurse, allied health professionals or mental health staff have found that when they propose the inclusion of a pharmacy the local pharmacist is first in the queue to complain. Like Christine Grahame, I do not want the debate to be a pitch against GPs or pharmacists. Instead of considering only the loss of the dispensing facility to GP practices, the Government might wish to consider the inclusion of dispensing in larger, as well as smaller, health centres and GP practices. There is no doubt that GP practices in some remote and rural areas are sustainable only as a result of their dispensing facility. Let us look more widely, in this changing environment, to different models that put patients first and foremost and at the heart of the health service rather than have a turf war between pharmacists and GPs.

The investigation into Highlands and Islands Enterprise's procurement of contracts from its chairman's own company has resulted in 10 recommended courses of action to address the admitted weaknesses in HIE's systems. Will the First Minister ensure that all quangos in Scotland  follow fair, open and accountable procurement procedures?

I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for keeping the Opposition health teams informed of all the issues relating to swine flu, and acknowledge the excellent work that has been done by all the staff who are addressing the outbreak. First, given that Scotland has 9 per cent of the UK's population and 30 per cent of the confirmed cases of swine flu and that we are likely to move from containing the spread to mitigating its impact, what additional resources are being allocated to NHS 24 to help it to cope with the increased calls? Secondly, will the clinical diagnosis be done only by GPs, or is there any other source that will act as assistance to GPs in carrying that out? Finally, given that we are moving to level 6, can I have an assurance that the distribution system in the Highlands is in place?

I thank Sarah Boyack for securing this debate and Cathy Peattie for her excellent speech. Conservative members join them in recognising the vital role that unpaid carers play across Scotland and the tremendous contribution that carers make to those for whom they care and to the wider Scottish economy. I will highlight some issues relating to carers that were made known to me just this week—which is not much different from many other weeks—at a surgery on Friday and again by three carers who are fighting the system and battling bureaucracy. At the reception that Christopher Harvie hosted today, we heard from young men with Duchenne muscular dystrophy and from Eileen McCallum, the grandmother of two young boys with DMD. It is important to remember that often there is more than one carer in the family, for example where grandparents and siblings are involved. The postcode lottery of care is highlighted in a booklet produced by Action Duchenne. Two young boys requested that care packages be the same no matter where people stay and regardless of age. They also asked for equal hospital tests and treatment, wherever people are in Scotland. Obviously, carers' ability to cope depends very much on the care provision and support that are in place. We heard from Eileen McCallum about the year that her daughter in Edinburgh spent dealing with form filling, social work visits, meetings and changes of staff—all to apply for assistance at  home for her two sons with DMD. At the end of the process, she was awarded four hours a week. If emphasis were placed on addressing needs rather than the bureaucracy that Sarah Boyack highlighted, the situation would be much better. This week, I met the Huntington's disease support group in Inverness. I learned of the group's existence through Hugh Henry's members' business debate on Huntington's. At the meeting, I heard about the excellent, dedicated work of carers in the Highlands. However, it is shocking that only about 6 per cent of Scotland's 660,000 known carers receive the carers allowance. It appears that there are obstacles to accessing the funds. The 10,000 extra weeks of respite care that are due to be delivered by 2011 are welcome, but I can confirm Cathy Peattie's point that some councils, including Highland Council, have not been increasing the number of weeks of respite care that are available at the rate that is expected in the run-up to 2011. I am not saying that the target will not be met, but the expected year-on-year increases are not happening. In 2007, new national guidance was issued to improve take-up of direct payments. However, it is not just difficult for carers to get direct payments, it is almost impossible. Councils tell carers that they have all sorts of responsibilities and it would be far better and would make their lives easier if the council continued to deal with the issue, but often carers find that they are short-changed on the level of care. All the issues that I have highlighted are to be set against the care 21 summary guide for carers that was published in September 2005, which undoubtedly made excellent recommendations for addressing the issues that we are considering today. Four years following the publication of that guide, a briefing on unpaid carers produced by the Scottish Parliament information centre in February confirms that "The recommendations of the Care 21 report were encouraging, but there has been no shift with regard to additional funding ... to create an infrastructure to support carers ... There is unclear guidance about charging for carer services." I hope that the debate not only raises awareness of carer issues but leads to an audit or review of existing services and support for carers, as the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 and the recommendations that have been made over the years by the Parliament are not being implemented where they should be.

To ask the First Minister when tackling drug addiction will become a health efficiency access and treatment target. (S3F-1752)

Thank you, Presiding Officer. According to recent newspaper reports, a 21-day referral-to-treatment target is to be introduced. Will the First Minister confirm that that is the timescale? Given the revolving-door experiences of people who are treated for addiction, will he also give an assurance that equal emphasis will be given to people's underlying mental health conditions and need for long-term recovery support, as is given to treatment for addiction?

I, too, thank Helen Eadie for securing this debate. I had a members' debate on infertility services and treatment on 27 January 2005. It has been interesting to look back at what motivated me to seek that debate and at my expectations for action following it. My motivation was based on the same issues that Helen Eadie and Angela Constance raised in their speeches. For example, couples now seeking fertility treatment can wait for 18 months in Grampian, 20 months in Glasgow and two years in Fife and Forth Valley. An even more disturbing fact is that people in Lothian who can afford to self-fund their treatment will get it in six months, whereas those who cannot must wait for three years. That hardly fits into the equality of access agenda—it is a clear example of a postcode lottery. Another issue that was raised in the debate four and half years ago was the profoundly important role of male factors as a cause of infertility, with the average sperm count continuing to fall. Although many people assume that infertility is a female issue, male factors are responsible for 40 per cent of infertility cases; female factors are responsible for 60 per cent of cases. Another serious issue is the continuing use by many health boards of a range of body mass index levels, either to ration treatment or for safety—who knows? Clarity is needed on the issue. Some health boards do not fund the treatment of anyone with a BMI of more than 30. Others set a BMI of 35 and channel patients to weight reduction before treatment is considered. However, being overweight and being very low weight enormously affect ovulation and mean that more people are presenting for treatment. Infertility is now acknowledged as a medical problem. Previously, it was not given the same priority, because it was classified as a lifestyle choice. Women are still deferring childbirth, with clinics seeing a doubling of the number of women over 35 attending in the past 10 years while, over the same period, the proportion of women under 35 attending has halved. I imagine that that trend  is likely to continue in the current economic situation. The removal of the anonymity of sperm donors has drastically reduced the availability of sperm in Scotland, with many clinics purchasing from London at a cost to the NHS or the patient of £2,500 per course of treatment. I understand that all fertility clinics in Scotland are struggling to maintain a donor insemination service, with many waits of up to and over a year. Still, more than 5,000 couples present for infertility treatment each year. The final point that I will mention, which arose in the previous debate and is as pertinent today, is the range of emotions that couples go through—fear, guilt, anger, shock, shame, isolation and inadequacy. That was highlighted previously by Infertility Network Scotland. What has changed in four and a half years? The Westminster Government introduced an 18-week referral-to-treatment target in mid-2008, which has, understandably, had a dramatic effect on waiting times. In Scotland, we had a consultation and then a report on the review of infertility services, which was published in March 2007. On its back page, the review promised "to consult with service providers and other stakeholders in developing the recommendations on waiting list management, which will be published in the summer of 2007." We are now in the summer of 2009 and we are still waiting for those recommendations. As Helen Eadie said, there needs to be greater clarity on fertility issues such as the definition of IVF—whether fresh or frozen—a consistent age bar to treatment and an urgent look at donor insemination services, whether on a Scotland or UK-wide basis. I welcome the debate and look forward to hearing the minister break the silence on infertility issues so that couples throughout Scotland who face such problems can be given some hope of parenting a child.

Although I appreciate that the cabinet secretary wishes to take into account the views of local people, I can honestly say that that consultation has got off to the worst possible start. The local community in Skye is losing trust and confidence, and the people believe that the result is a fait accompli. Will the health secretary discuss the issue with NHS Highland and do all that she can to ensure that the voice of local people is heard at each stage of the process?

I commend the work that has been done, particularly by the NHS staff who have assisted in the cases to date. It is difficult to assess whether a debate is needed on the Government's preparations for the current H1N1 outbreak and the potential threat of pandemic influenza. The Royal Society of Edinburgh summed up the issue well in its briefing, which makes the point that "the only thing certain about influenza is that nothing is certain". Recent news from Birmingham confirms that. The RSE said: "With the benefit of hindsight it is clear that greater attention should be paid to influenza viruses in pigs and from a diverse series of sources, and their transmission to humans." I hope that current efforts and energy are focused not only on addressing H1N1 but on developing a more preventive approach for the future, given that there is no doubt that we have learned a huge amount from the current situation. There is an emergence of zoonotic diseases of viral origin that can be passed to humans from wild and domesticated animals, so the issue is important and should not be lost in the Government's collaboration with other parts of the UK. The RSE recommends that "Scotland must have access to rapid diagnostic testing to inform an effective surveillance programme so that individuals with flu symptoms can be investigated at an early stage". Richard Simpson made that point. Such an approach might not have been justified in the past, and I would welcome the Government's response to the suggestion in the context of future planning. The RSE highlighted that H1N1 can be passed from humans to pigs. I think that that issue has been lost in the debate. What discussions have taken place with the Scottish farming industry, and particularly with pig farmers, about the current  circumstances? Has agreement been reached in that regard? The final point that I took from the RSE's paper was that the society is concerned that the UK has chosen to stockpile only Tamiflu, given that there is always the possibility that the virus will mutate and become resistant to the drug. Richard Simpson mentioned that issue, too. Further clarity on that issue would be welcome. I am grateful to the RSE for helping me with this speech and raising those excellent points. As I have said before, I commend the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for her competent and professional handling of the issue. I attended one of the briefing sessions in the St Andrew's house bunker room and was impressed by how positively the range of representatives from the public and private sectors throughout Scotland worked together. Although that level of the system is undoubtedly efficient, the British Medical Association has raised concerns that health boards need to do more planning with front-line clinical input. It also seeks greater clarity on distribution protocols—which it says must be communicated to the public effectively to avoid confusion about patients obtaining antivirals when they are ill—as well as how general practitioners and their staff can get immediate access to Tamiflu in case of infection by patients with flu. It is reassuring to know that national communications are good, and I commend that, but it is disappointing to hear the BMA state that there has been difficulty engaging some health boards in the planning process and that, in some areas, planning continues without GP input although the GP is probably the first port of call for the majority of patients.

That is helpful and I commend the approach that the health secretary has taken. In her opening speech, the cabinet secretary mentioned the financial issues. If the flu outbreak is contained and does not become a pandemic, who would pay for all the vaccines and antivirals that have been ordered but which may never be used—the Government or the pharmaceutical companies? I seek clarity on the storage of existing vaccines, which was covered in Scotland on Sunday . There  are concerns about unstable temperatures affecting vaccines' effectiveness, so will the cabinet secretary confirm that the storage facilities for existing and future vaccines comply with the manufacturer's guidelines? It is of serious concern that the Scottish Government's health department found that, during a three-month period, 503 out of 1,030 GP practices were not fully compliant with the regulations on storing vaccines. Of those 503, 148 were reported as not storing their vaccines in accordance with manufacturers' instructions. I noted Richard Simpson's comments in the newspaper—I hope that he will forgive me for quoting him: "The question is whether people who have been vaccinated are actually immune, or whether we have been given a false sense of security." When people are given a vaccine, they need to be secure in the knowledge that it is effective. As Richard Simpson said, in the previous major outbreaks in 1918 and 1957, the virus returned in a more virulent form in the autumn. Is there a point or date at which we will know whether the virus will mutate into something more serious? To put it another way, is there a safe date in the autumn when we will know that the current H1N1 strain will remain as it is? The cabinet secretary is shaking her head, so I think that the answer is no.

Does the minister acknowledge the importance to people in remote and rural areas of dispensing general practitioner practices? Does she take account of the effect on service provision when a practice loses its right to dispense? Can the dispensing doctor arrangements be amended to include the new services that community pharmacies provide? That would ensure that patients across Scotland have equal access to pharmacy and GP services.

I seek clarification on the pre-school check. I read so much about these things. I understood that it includes vision and hearing screening. Did I pick that up wrong?

Are those research findings based on a pilot study for a screening programme for over-55s? Has such a programme been run in Scotland?

I thank Cathy Jamieson for raising the subject for debate. I apologise for not signing the motion. When I saw the phrase: "the introduction of hearing screening on the NHS", I thought, "My goodness, how many millions of pounds will that cost?" I did not read, as I should have done, the last word of the motion, which said that the introduction of such screening should be "considered". I will sign the motion tomorrow, and I apologise again for not having done so already, but in these times we all find making financial commitments difficult. I very much welcome the debate. I am delighted to have come back from our conference in Perth today to debate an issue that is very worthy of debate. Listening to Nigel Don, I was reminded of Phil Gallie. In the first session of the Parliament, he used to ask me whether I could hear what people were saying, and I used to reply that I could. It took him quite a long time to realise that he needed to go for a check-up, and he got a hearing aid eventually. I am sure that he will not mind me mentioning his name. The point is that there was quite a long delay before he recognised his need. With life expectancy increasing, the problem commonly affects people we would consider to be middle-aged and about 10 years from retirement. However, as Cathy Jamieson said, only 6 to 7 per cent of people with difficulties actually wear a  hearing aid. My next point was about stigma, but Cathy Jamieson has covered it very well. There are one or two other points that I do not think have been covered yet. The first came up in a previous debate on the issue. Hearing loss can make people feel more depressed, excluded and isolated, for obvious reasons. As RNID research points out, arguments and incidences of frustration in the home decreased after the person concerned got a hearing aid. I have seen some research that suggests that 70 per cent of deaf people believe that they failed to get a job on the basis of their deafness. Deafness affects their lifestyle and their quality of life. It has also been noted that deafness can lead to mental health problems. If people feel isolated, excluded and depressed, that is not surprising. I was surprised to read in some research that the average length of stay for a hearing mental health patient in a psychiatric hospital is 148 days; a deaf mental health patient will spend, on average, 19 years in residential care. For so many reasons, investing in services to assist deaf people is definitely investing to help them and to save. I was surprised to note that the Scottish Government does not know—I might be proved wrong on this—how many deaf children there are in Scotland. Without that information, it must be very difficult to make informed policy and financial decisions about education. Further research confirms that deaf children are underperforming in comparison with their hearing peers, although we have spoken so much lately about "Health for All Children 4", the review of nursing in the community and so on. I ask the minister whether all children have their hearing checked when they start school and during earlier health checks. I also want to ask about referrals to Donaldson's school. The last time that I visited it, I saw that that wonderful resource is undoubtedly utilised. I will move to my final point now, as I am getting looks from the Presiding Officer. It is vital that deaf children are given every opportunity to succeed and to become confident individuals and responsible citizens who can make an effective contribution to society. They should not be neglected or stigmatised; they should be given the same opportunities as other children in Scotland.

I thank the cabinet secretary for keeping Parliament updated. Will the vaccination for swine flu be contained in the winter flu vaccination programme? If not, will those who regularly receive the winter flu vaccine be given two vaccines this year? The Westminster Secretary of State for Health has said that producing the vaccine would take six months to a year, whereas the cabinet secretary says that it will be available in months. Will she update us on that? Universal vaccination is recommended. What will be the approach to people who resist vaccination? The flu strain currently affects young adults. Could any conditions make some people more vulnerable to it?

I am delighted to secure this debate in the week of international midwives day, and I welcome the midwives who are in the public gallery. I think that this might be the first time the Parliament has debated midwifery, but it is nonetheless important, particularly as we have three expectant fathers here in the Tory ranks. [ Laughter. ] I just want to put the debate into context. I can see that members are all guessing now. Women are continually told that giving birth is the most natural thing in the world and an experience to be cherished, but for a huge proportion of the world's expectant mothers childbirth is a daunting experience filled with worry and fear. For women throughout the world, access to medical care and the services of a midwife are critical. In 2000, the eight millennium development goals were endorsed by 189 countries. Millennium development goal 5 aims to reduce the maternal mortality ratio by 75 per cent and to achieve universal access to reproductive health by 2015. That goal is critical because, every year, more than 1 million children are left motherless and vulnerable because of maternal death and 20 million women experience potentially fatal complications during childbirth. In eastern Africa, only 34 per cent of births are attended by skilled health attendants. The target of universal access to reproductive health is far from being achieved. Although the  use of contraception has improved impressively during the past two decades in many regions, the unmet need for family planning is still unacceptably high in, for example, sub-Saharan Africa, where 24 per cent of women who want to delay or stop childbearing have no access to family planning. Girls aged between 15 and 20 are twice as likely to die in childbirth as those in their 20s. Girls under the age of 15 are five times as likely to die in childbirth. Some 200 million women who would like to avoid childbearing are without access to safe and effective contraceptives. In the developing world, unsafe abortions result in 68,000 deaths each year. The facts are that, every year, more than 0.5 million women die from complications in pregnancy and childbirth and more than 300 million suffer from avoidable illness and disability. That means that one woman dies every minute of every day, including around 70,000 girls and young women aged between 15 and 19. Maternal deaths are the greatest indicator of inequality between rich and poor women. In the poorest parts of the world, the risk of a woman dying as a result of pregnancy or childbirth is about one in six. In northern Europe, the risk is about one in 30,000. Some 99 per cent of all maternal deaths occur in the developing world. Children who lose their mother are 10 times more likely to die prematurely than those who do not. Millennium development goal 5 will be achieved only through long-term investment in health services and health infrastructure. There is a need for skilled birth attendants who have supplies and equipment, improved access to family planning services and action to address unsafe abortion. Maternal mortality is currently decreasing by less than 1 per cent a year. That is far below the 5.5 per cent annual improvement that is needed to reach the millennium development goal target by 2015. We also need to be aware of the campaign to end fistula—a rupture in the birth canal that occurs during prolonged, obstructed labour and that leaves women incontinent, isolated and ashamed. Given that nine out of 10 fistulas can be successfully repaired, that is an issue that needs to be addressed. During 2008, significant steps were taken towards reducing maternal mortality and achieving the necessary improvements in health service provision in developing countries, but at the current rate of progress it is unlikely that the millennium development goal target will be achieved by 2015. I take this opportunity to commend Jack McConnell for his achievements, working with  many people and organisations—including, I read, the girls of Mary Erskine School—to raise £25,000 for the wellness centre for nurses and health workers in Malawi, and delighted that he has joined us for this evening's debate. In Scotland, we still have one of the lowest breastfeeding rates in Europe and we appear to have very serious issues of maternal obesity. Recent research by the World Health Organization found that 13 Scottish women die for every 100,000 live births. I do not know about other members, but I was shocked to realise that that is more than double the European average, which is six per 100,000. In fact, the number of women who die during childbirth in Scotland is similar to that of former Soviet countries such as Belarus and Latvia. Our teenage pregnancy rate is among the highest in Europe. Drugs and alcohol issues also present huge problems for pregnant women and children. Although the maternal mortality rate in the UK as a whole has not fallen in the past few years, I understand that many of those who died had poor general health and were more likely to smoke, that at least half were overweight and that some had chaotic lifestyles, so they did not always seek—and therefore were not given—the health care support they needed during pregnancy. In Scotland, the plan for midwives to take over antenatal care from general practitioners has recently been implemented without public debate. As far as I am aware, no strong evidence base has been produced to show that the quality of care of mother and child will be best served by that change. It might be that the quality of care of mother and child will be best served by it, but it would be a courtesy to allow parliamentarians to endorse it. That approach is being replicated in the move to take health visitors out of GP practices and away from the family doctor, who is often best placed to offer advice and discuss the pregnancy in the context of the woman's life and family situation. I place it on record that rather than read in the newspapers that GPs are to be excluded from that part of the care of mothers and families, I would like to see the evidence base that demonstrates that the proposal will bring health benefits. We should be proud of the fact that HIV testing is provided for all pregnant women in Scotland, which is undoubtedly enormously beneficial to mother and child. I am delighted to sponsor the debate and to acknowledge the excellent work of midwives in Scotland. I hope that their training and expertise can be used to assist in those African countries in which maternal death is devastating.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her statement and join her in commending all the staff who have been involved. I also thank her for working so closely with her Westminster partners and, indeed, for the very competent approach that she has taken to dealing with swine flu on behalf of Parliament.  First, on the distribution system for antiviral drugs, should they be required, will the cabinet secretary assure people who live in Scotland's remotest islands that they will not be disadvantaged with regard to delivery times? Secondly, is the cabinet secretary able to assure the many people in Scotland who received the flu vaccine last winter about their immunity to type A flu, at least, and to swine flu? Finally, has she begun to consider this winter's flu vaccine programme? Is it possible or likely that it will include a swine flu vaccine?

On that point, throughout Scotland councils pay higher fees to council-run homes—sometimes £200 to £300 per person per week—than they do to homes in the independent and voluntary sector. Is that acceptable, given that all homes must achieve the same care standards?

I congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing tonight's debate. I admit that I am not familiar with the specific case to which he refers, or with the local circumstances in the Borders; I am sure that the member will understand that. I am also unsure whether the problem that he highlights is a local one, limited to the Borders and East Lothian, or whether it is causing national concern. From the information that I have gleaned tonight, it is evident that the problem has not crossed my desk. For that reason, my comments will be general, rather than specific to the Borders.  There is no doubt but that financial mismanagement or irregularities must be taken seriously, but surely that is the task of the appropriate authority. If there is an indication of foul play, mismanagement or fraud, the police should be involved. I appreciate the responsibilities of the care commission, but I am not sure that we should ask it to employ accountants and auditors to scrutinise the finances of private care homes.

That is exactly my point; I want to concentrate on that aspect of the motion. However, we should not forget the role of the police and local authorities when allegations are made. The point of most serious concern in Jeremy Purvis's motion is the "worrying disruption in care" that has been caused. Although any financial problems must be addressed, the number 1 priority must, as Margo MacDonald said, be the standard of care for the residents of our care homes. As Christine Grahame said, in the first session, with Margaret Smith at the helm of the Health and Community Care Committee, the Parliament passed the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill, which brought about the national care standards that were revised in 2007. Today several issues relating to those standards and the regulation and inspection of care homes were raised in oral questions by John Farquhar Munro and Margo MacDonald. The questions related to palliative and end-of-life care, on which the findings are shocking. Fifty-four per cent of services have not trained their staff; 36 per cent of care homes have not assessed services to meet residents' palliative care needs; 43 per cent of care home providers and staff do not recognise that they should deliver palliative and end-of-life care; and 9 per cent of care homes do not even have a copy of the national practice statement. What has the care commission been doing for the past five years? How can care homes with shockingly poor standards—as a result of financial mismanagement or for other reasons—continue to provide care, at the expense of individuals and the taxpayer, with so little dignity and respect for the person? As Jeremy Purvis said, all care homes should meet the same standards, regardless of whether they are run by councils, voluntary sector organisations, the Church of Scotland, other faith- based charities or private companies. It is the care commission's responsibility to ensure that that happens. I am concerned that the commission is not rigorous enough in encouraging homes and other care providers to meet the standards. I acknowledge the recent Government and media campaign to raise awareness of the issues. The campaign was much needed, given that only 15 per cent of people were aware of the national care standards. Last year, the care commission published a review entitled "Pressure for change", which confirmed that the commission found serious failings in the standards of care of every care home that it reviewed. However, enforcement notices were served on only 11 of the 62 care homes that were involved in the review. Recommendations may have been made to the rest, but we know that recommendations, unlike requirements and enforcement notices, can be ignored.

The care commission regularly makes recommendations about services that do not meet the national care standards. In some cases, little is done to check that service providers act on those recommendations, which results in many care homes continuing to operate well below the care standards that they and all of us should expect. Will the cabinet secretary outline the care commission's auditing and monitoring process and confirm whether she is satisfied with the current system?

I, too, thank Dr Richard Simpson for securing this debate. I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak, and I would like to welcome Liz Pritchard from Wester Ross to the public gallery. Liz is an excellent health campaigner; she is also Rhoda Grant's ex-teacher, so I am sure that Rhoda will be paying attention tonight. I will definitely stray over the dividing lines between telecare, telehealth, e-health and plain old information technology. It is difficult not to do so, so I hope that Richard Simpson and the Deputy Presiding Officer will forgive me. Nanette Milne has prompted me to commend Grampian NHS Board on its excellent work and its links to local community hospitals. As others are, I am wholly supportive of more effective use of e-health in the NHS. However, I have to say that I get frustrated, to say the least, and just a little bit angry, at just how slow, confused and unco-ordinated the NHS and the Scottish Centre for Telehealth are when it comes to embracing innovations and technologies. The Government's "eHealth Strategy 2008-2011" sets out three categories of service or system. First, at a national level, there is to be "mandatory implementation across NHS Scotland". Secondly, "NHS Boards will adopt the software application if and when functionality is required, or when existing alternative licence expires". Thirdly, there is to be "full choice" locally. The strategy states that  "Certain programmes may be organised at a regional level rather than national, where this makes sense from both a clinical/ business need and to achieve best value for money". The strategy also states: "We aim to contribute eHealth expertise to existing collaboratives, so that benefit gained from existing and new IT systems can help with the overall improvement objectives. ... Local eHealth development projects will be supported from national funds where there is clear benefit to all of NHS Scotland", and that "An eHealth function has been established within the Scottish Government, the structure and staffing of which are intended to provide central governance, direction and support for the delivery of the eHealth Strategy." Then, we have the Scottish Centre for Telehealth, which Nanette Milne and I visited recently. It states that it "evaluates the impact of telehealth on service redesign". Added to that, we have the recent £700,000 telehealth personal health care system, which is to be evaluated by the University of Edinburgh in a randomised clinical trial. So, already we have three levels of the e-health strategy, two separate organisations evaluating, the Government providing governance directions and support, and the Scottish Centre for Telehealth providing practical and informed support to telehealth projects in their development phase, including interoperable standards, protocols and processes. It also facilitates evaluation of the impact of telehealth solutions on service redesign. I hope that other members agree that that is, undoubtedly, a cluttered landscape of confusion. I ask the minister where do the new innovators go when they have developed sometimes incredibly effective and wonderful solutions that will benefit patient care? In recent months, I have seen excellent products that have been developed by several companies, including Telehealth Solutions, and I had a well-attended reception in the Parliament. On my most recent visit to Orkney, I was told of a health visitor who took a full day to visit an island to take a patient's blood pressure. That and many other procedures could easily and effectively be carried out by Telehealth Solutions. As Rhoda Grant has, I have met DanMedical in Inverness, which has done incredible work with cardiac consultants in Raigmore hospital. It has proved that the number of hospital visits can be reduced by up to 80 per cent. There is also a bed management and hospital-acquired infection recording system. But how do those organisations get through a single door to have their products evaluated so that they can be utilised in the NHS? Jackson Carlaw and I attended an e-health meeting at Victoria Quay yesterday on hospital- acquired infection and bed management systems. It is obvious that all health boards are pursuing a variety of IT approaches for bed management and hospital-acquired infection recording. We were told that "the e-health road map varies for each health board". I was shocked to hear that it can take six weeks for a discharge letter from a hospital to get to a GP and to a care home. I commend NHS 24 for its excellent cognitive behavioural therapy helpline for mental health patients, which is an excellent example of the strategy.

I thank the health secretary for the advance copy of her statement; for keeping me and my party informed since the outbreak and for the previous briefing from the chief medical officer and Shona Robison on pandemic flu, which has been very helpful. Why is it likely to take between six months and a year to identify this strain and manufacture the vaccine, as was confirmed in Westminster on Monday? Does that length of time create any further problems for Scotland? What measures will be taken to ensure that NHS 24 can cope with the significant increase in demand for advice, particularly at peak times? Will there be a national distribution system for the delivery of Tamiflu and Relenza? Will that be planned, given that people are being told not to visit their general practitioners' surgeries? Given that many oil workers from Scotland are based around the Gulf of Mexico, what is the cabinet secretary doing to work with oil companies to give them advice and support on prevention and treatment?

The services to which the minister refers are welcome; I also endorse the excellent work of Project Linus UK. Does the minister agree that the identification of mental health problems in pre-school children and schoolchildren is the biggest issue and that we need to do more to identify children who are at risk of developing mental health problems, low self-esteem and a low sense of wellbeing?

How long is the public inquiry expected to last? Irrespective of whether proceedings or prosecutions will take place following the Crown Office and Health and Safety Executive inquiries and the public inquiry, is Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board taking any action that it deems necessary through disciplinary procedures against NHS personnel, in relation to gross misconduct, for example? What progress is being made to tackle infections in the care home sector, given that many elderly residents are admitted to hospital?

I thank Hugh Henry for securing tonight's debate. I think that this might be the first time that Huntington's disease has been debated in the Scottish Parliament. Members will correct me if I am wrong, but I was not able to find a previous debate.  I, too, would like to welcome the people who are in the public gallery. It is from such people that we learn what is happening in our own areas. Although Huntington's disease is more common than motor neurone disease, the facts relating to Huntington's are often less well known. In Scotland, 850 people live with Huntington's disease. As Hugh Henry said, it is estimated that between 4,000 and 6,000 people could have a high risk of inheriting this genetic disease. I apologise for the fact that I may use some figures that Hugh Henry has already used; I have tried to score out the parts of my speech that duplicate what he said. It is clear why Huntington's is considered by many to be one of the most devastating of diseases. As Hugh Henry said, in those afflicted by the disease, a crucial part of the brain is destroyed, leading to a loss of control of muscles, speech difficulties, involuntary movements and, perhaps worst of all, an inability to swallow. What makes Huntington's all the more disturbing is the genetic link and the pressure that is put on future generations. Effects such as those explain why the Scottish Huntington's Association was established two decades ago. The association does tremendous work, providing skilled nurses for sufferers. The nurses also help families, who are often under considerable pressure caring for loved ones. The decision that families living with the disease made two decades ago to set up the association highlighted the shortage of skilled staff to care for patients and their families. The association has worked hard ever since to raise the profile of Huntington's. It was distressing to read in some of the briefings for this debate that sufferers have to give up work early, that many spouses become carers and are unable to work, and that more than 80 per cent of families with a Huntington's sufferer live in poverty. However, we are here tonight to acknowledge and commend the work of the Scottish Huntington's Association and its national youth service, which supports youngsters in families with Huntington's sufferers. Some 70 per cent of those young people are also carers. They can experience problems with friendships and schoolwork, and they may live with the knowledge that they have a 50:50 chance of suffering from the same disease as those they are caring for. I believe that the Scottish Huntington's Association is right to seek to ensure that every family that lives with this disease has access to a specialist nurse and that there is no postcode lottery around that provision. No matter where someone lives, that vital support should be available to them.  I am pleased to say that, in the Highlands, a dedicated group works out of Raigmore hospital, with funding from Highland Council and NHS Highland. Thanks to this debate, I will get in touch with that group so that I can find out what is being done locally in the Highlands. We need to raise awareness of this disease so that people in society do not mistake sufferers for another drunk who is unable to walk properly or is exhibiting slurred speech. I was moved by the story of Sarah Winkless, an Olympic bronze medallist at the 2004 games and an HD gene carrier. Her story should prove to young people with a family history of this disease that their ambitions need not be limited by the disease or defeated by their worry about getting the disease. Her closing remarks about caring for her mother and living with the Huntington's gene sum up better than any politician could what the Scottish Huntington's Association does. She writes: "I can't pretend that I don't sometimes look at Mum and wonder if how she is now is what the future holds for me. What I do know is that as, when, if I am affected by the disease, those around me will be better equipped physically and emotionally to deal with it than I was with Mum, thanks to the work of organisations such as the Scottish Huntington's Association".

Yesterday, I received a written reply to say that the Government is "currently considering how best to ensure equity of access across Scotland"— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 1 April 2009; S3W-22040.]  for fertility treatment. Aside from the points that Helen Eadie raised, will that "equity" take account of the age bar and of the inability of some people to pay for private treatment?

If the waiting time is based on clinical need, does that apply to the waiting time for mental health services, physiotherapy and fertility treatment? As Jamie Stone will know,  many people in the Highlands have been unable to wait for a psychologist and—I am sorry to say—have taken their lives with their own hands due to the long wait.

With his extensive expertise, does the member agree that it is not only the treatment that is important for drug addicts but the support that is provided over time through the recovery services?

I remind the member that the most recent survey on the waiting list to see physiotherapists—of course, details are not held centrally—was carried out in 2005. At that time, 28,000 patients were on that waiting list.

Does the member share the concerns of many GPs in his home town, Tain in Ross-shire, and elsewhere in the Highlands, who have been told that the waiting list for GP referral to the chronic pain service is closed? Does he share my concern at that example of what can happen when resources are diverted so that targets can be met? I appreciate that the matter is being considered, but many of the member's constituents remain concerned, as do I.

In Highland, it is difficult for many people to access podiatry on the NHS. Will the member commend those podiatrists who treat patients privately in order to maintain their mobility?

On behalf of my party, I acknowledge the remarks of the two previous speakers about the tragedy in the North Sea last night. We welcome the Scottish Ambulance Service's improvement in reaching category A patients in eight minutes. My colleague Jackson Carlaw will speak further on that issue. We also welcome the earlier intervention for child and adolescent mental health services, but, as those of us on the Health and Sport Committee are finding out, not enough is being done to identify mental health problems at the earliest possible age. We welcome this morning's debate, which is about not only waiting times but the way in which the NHS allocates resources to meet the targets.  Scottish Conservatives want all patients to be seen as soon as possible, whether they are waiting to see their general practitioner, for accident and emergency services, for surgery, or for other treatment. We welcome the progress that has been made by both the previous Administration and the current Government, and we trust that the previous Administration will not vote against this week's accolade. However, the focus on waiting times undoubtedly has consequences for service delivery. Any condition that is not included in the waiting time targets becomes something of an afterthought in the priority list for resource allocation. Those conditions are often called Cinderella services, because conditions that are covered by the targets assume higher status. An example is mental health. In July last year, the longest wait to see a psychologist in Highland was four years and seven months. In Lanarkshire and Tayside, there were waits of up to a year. If a patient is referred to a psychologist on the basis of clear clinical judgment, it is difficult for any of us to imagine the effect of a four-and-a-half-year wait on that patient's mental health. The report that Audit Scotland published last week on drug and alcohol services in Scotland confirms that 75 per cent of problem drug users have a mental health problem. In some cases, drug taking could be a form of self-medication. Depression need not be a lifelong chronic condition with no hope of recovery and a level of service that does little to make people feel valued. I thank the Scottish Association for Mental Health for reminding us this week of the promise that was made to me in 2000 by the then Minister for Health and Community Care, Susan Deacon. In response to a parliamentary question, she stated: "the Mental Health and Well Being Support Group are working closely with the Health Service in Scotland on the development of national waiting times targets in the three national clinical priorities."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 6 November 2000; S1W-10476.]  Those priorities included, and they still include, mental health. Cathy Jamieson might be better to focus on her own record than to look back further than 12 years. Women in Scotland can wait for up to five years for infertility treatment despite its being age barred. The Government constantly states its opposition to the independent sector, yet its actions force many couples to pay privately for that service. When a drug addict or an alcoholic reaches the bottom of a chaotic existence, he or she may have lost touch with the world of work, their family and their friends. If they were to seek help at that point only to be told to come back a year later, none of us could accept that the system is working.  However, I appreciate the work that is being done on the issue. Another example is physiotherapy. I welcome the move by some health boards to self-referral, but GPs in many areas simply tell patients that there is no point in their being referred to the NHS because the waiting lists are so long. Instead, they recommend private treatment. I also want to mention chronic pain, given that, with Gil Paterson, I co-convene the cross-party group on the issue. Although there are excellent services in Glasgow, the services in other health board areas are very much less than excellent. Because of the long waiting list in the Highlands, only consultants can refer patients to the chronic pain service; referrals from GPs are no longer accepted. Of course, the situation is better than it was a few years ago, when there was no service at all. In fairness, I have received a response from the chairman of NHS Highland saying that the board intends to address the problem. That list is not exhaustive, but those are all examples of services that lose out as a result of the target-driven waiting times for other conditions. Moreover, the waiting time target is simply that—there is no measurement of the quality of patient care or patient outcome. As the British Medical Association states in its briefing paper for this debate, "Waiting times are not the only, or the most important indicator of performance—patient outcomes, readmission rates, HAI rates, etc. are also important indicators of the quality of care received."

I do not think that that is the case. We have constantly raised concerns in the Parliament about all the issues that I have mentioned. I have never, for example, seen a HEAT target anywhere near chronic pain services. The assumption behind the waiting time target culture is that every patient has the same clinical need and that despite the pain they might be in, or other conditions that they might have, they must all wait the same length of time. Surely we need to pursue a system that, in partnership with clinicians, delivers care on the basis of prioritised clinical need. I will be interested to see the legal right set out in the proposed patients' rights bill, particularly the level of redress and perhaps the compensation that might have to be paid out if targets are not met. I fully commend all those in the NHS and the independent sector for their commitment to patient  care throughout Scotland, but I must question whether, with the reduction of waiting time targets, the requirements of the working time directive, the further 2 per cent efficiency savings that have to be found and the NHS Scotland national resource allocation committee cuts to boards such as NHS Highland, the targets will be delivered with the quality that we all rightly expect. Unfortunately, the waiting time target does not focus on innovative ways of managing patient care such as the greater utilisation of telehealth and e-health opportunities that could undoubtedly lead to better outcomes and management of care. Sometimes boards are so busy pursuing and achieving targets that they have no time to consider such different systems and types of provision. I welcome the fact that Richard Simpson will be holding a meeting in the garden lobby to raise awareness of the issue—

Will do. That meeting will take place on 29 April. I trust that all MSPs will acknowledge the work of all health professionals who care for NHS patients and support my view that patient care and health outcomes should not be jeopardised to meet targets. I move amendment S3M-3848.1, to leave out from "staff" to end and insert: "and independent sector staff who have contributed to delivering these significant improvements for the people of Scotland; notes the progress made by the previous administration; acknowledges the substantial investment being made to increase NHSScotland capacity and the continuing work on integrating, modernising and redesigning services to speed access, diagnosis and treatment, but cautions that, while shorter waiting times are welcome, patient care and health outcomes should not be jeopardised by attempts to meet centrally determined targets."

Breakthrough Breast Cancer said that it welcomed the 31-day target for first treatment for breast cancer. However, it pointed out that there were no such targets for subsequent treatments such as chemotherapy. Can the cabinet secretary explain why that is?

I ask the minister whether treatment also means recovery. As he will know from the area that we represent, many people who are addicted to drugs and alcohol participate in a revolving door of services and treatment but do not get long-term support for recovery. That results in relapses. Given that 75 per cent of people who use drugs have mental health problems, I also ask the minister to ensure that underlying mental health issues are identified and treated at the same time as addiction.

They are not all coming back into the NHS. In fact, Northern Constabulary has just signed another contract with Medacs. I think that Atos, too, provides a good service. Helen Eadie and Ian McKee did not mention the fact that Netcare had to provide £112,000 of activity free of charge due to contracted waiting time breaches. The figures are not all one way.

It is important that I put on record the fact that I commented on the SNP's amendment, which "congratulates" NHS staff on their treatment of NHS patients but only "notes" the role of private sector staff in treating NHS patients. I made no reference to the Labour amendment in that context.

Will the member give way?

Where do we propose to extend the SRTC pilot to the NHS across Scotland? Can the member provide a reference for that?

They are your figures.

I welcome the undoubted success of the Scottish regional treatment centre at Stracathro and put on record our congratulations to the previous Liberal and Labour Scottish Executive on setting up that pilot and leading the way with a highly effective partnership between the NHS and the independent health care sector. It is not often that we congratulate, but there we are. As the motion states, the Stracathro pilot has been rated as excellent by its patients; has reduced waiting times; has had no reported cases of hospital-acquired infection; and has saved more than £2 million for the NHS. For people living in the area, the pilot helped to keep Stracathro hospital open, following a petition to the Parliament with 48,000 signatures. In the past, politicians and others have talked about the NHS and the private sector as two separate entities, which of course they are. However, the difference at Stracathro is that an independent company leases NHS facilities to treat NHS patients at times when the theatres are not being utilised, including outwith normal working hours, during the evenings and weekends, which suits many patients. The partnership brings money into the NHS through leasing. It has also helped several NHS boards to achieve waiting time targets, allowed better planning for service delivery and cut down on expensive last-minute ad hoc spot purchasing from the private sector. Of course, any failure to deliver surgery and treatments within the timescale results in the independent company, Netcare Healthcare UK, having to undertake the activity free of charge. In the two years from February 2007 to February 2009, almost 5,000 patients from the Forth Valley NHS Board, Grampian NHS Board, Fife NHS Board and Tayside NHS Board areas were treated by Netcare at Stracathro. The system is more efficient and is estimated to provide 11 per cent  more value for money than undertaking similar activity in the NHS. A contract variation was agreed with Netcare to reduce treat-by dates from 12 weeks to eight weeks for all activity groups by 28 February this year. We hear constantly that the NHS should not be in conflict or competition with the independent sector. However, the project illustrates conclusively how the independent sector can complement and work alongside the NHS to benefit NHS patients. No one pays for treatment at Stracathro—the facility is for NHS patients. Another criticism that is often made of the independent sector is that it takes resources from the NHS. However, it was a contractual requirement on Netcare not to recruit staff who had worked locally for the NHS in the previous three months. My colleague Murdo Fraser will expand on that issue of additionality. The contract addresses many of the criticisms that have been made of the independent sector. Our motion calls on the Scottish Government "to continue to work with the independent sector ... to deliver the best possible healthcare" in Scotland. The Scottish Conservatives want to put patients first. We want patients to receive the best-quality treatment in the shortest time that provides the quality of life that they seek. The approach of working with the independent sector includes the service that is provided by Medacs Healthcare, a private company that is based in Leeds and which is the largest supplier of locum doctors to the NHS. The company also provides a full service to the Scottish Prison Service as well as providing forensic medical examiners for detainees, police personnel and victims in Scotland. I made it my business to telephone one or two constabularies and the Scottish Prison Service, which confirmed that they receive an excellent service from Medacs. The good thing is that those organisations can examine their contracts every few years so that anything that is unsatisfactory can be negotiated and put right. The system has worked well to the benefit of people in Scotland. Another independent company is Atos Healthcare, which operates 31 medical centres in Scotland and employs more than 170 clinical staff here, including doctors and nurses. The company makes recommendations on entitlement to benefits after carrying out medical examinations and reviewing cases. I appreciate that entitlement to benefits is a reserved issue, but I hope that the Scottish National Party will not use forthcoming legislation to ban commercial companies, such as those that provide an excellent service to benefit claimants, the constabulary, the prison service and other organisations throughout the public sector in Scotland.  It is sad—I could use other words, but I will be diplomatic—that the SNP Government undoubtedly puts ideology above patient care. The Government amendment congratulates NHS staff on the excellent work that they do. All members would congratulate all NHS staff on their excellent work, but the Government could find it in itself only to note the role of the private sector staff who treat NHS patients—how shameful. The Labour Party amendment would even delete our tribute to it. My goodness—we are in a consensual Parliament with a minority Government, but when we congratulate our partners in the Labour Party, they attempt to delete our congratulations. However, the Stracathro project is undoubtedly excellent. The examples of the Scottish regional treatment centre; the medical work for the Scottish Prison Service and the police service; and Atos's work on determining medical fitness in relation to benefits or fitness to work give a taste of the range of excellent work that can be done through the NHS and other organisations working in partnership with the independent sector to deliver the best possible health care for the people of Scotland. That is what the Scottish Conservatives want. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the success of the Scottish Regional Treatment Centre at Stracathro and pays tribute to the previous Scottish administration for piloting the scheme; notes that the Stracathro pilot was rated as excellent by its patients and has reduced waiting times, that the centre has no reported healthcare associated infections and that it has saved several million pounds of taxpayers' money in the process of successfully treating NHS patients; further notes that since 1999 successive Scottish administrations have recognised the contribution that can be made by the independent sector to treating NHS patients, with a record 4,409 treatments performed in 2008, more than double the level in 1999 and a 38% increase since 2007, and accordingly urges the Scottish Government to continue to work with the independent sector in order to deliver the best possible healthcare for the people of Scotland.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of her statement. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the clarity that has been brought to the issue, and it is right and fitting that we pay tribute to Michael Gray and Tina McGeever, who did so much to bring the Parliament to this point, which will surely result in benefits for many patients. We welcome the health rights information project, the patient access schemes and other initiatives. I want to ask about co-payment. When a patient chooses to pay for part of their care privately, as recommended by their consultant, who will decide whether they will lose out on NHS care? The minister said in her statement that patients will "not necessarily" lose out on NHS care—that is not entirely clear. The guidance says: "NHS Boards should develop local processes ... to support clinicians and patients in reaching decisions about the appropriateness of combining NHS and private healthcare". There are 15 factors that need to be taken into account in the development of local processes. My concern is that those local processes will lead to local decisions that will mean that postcode prescribing can continue. That is against what most of us had hoped, which was that the proposal would bring an end to postcode prescribing in Scotland.

It is probably not surprising that the other major concerns existed in Fort William, Ardnamurchan and Lochaber, where 22 per cent of the local population turned up to a public meeting on the health service. I think that Jamie Stone would agree that there was a good outcome for both of those excellent campaigns.

On behalf of my party, I thank the clerks and the excellent and feisty convener of the Health and Sport Committee, as well as all who have helped in the bill's passage. It is odd, to say the least, that in the midst of the worst economic recession this country has seen since the 1930s, the democratically elected representatives of this Parliament are passing a  bill for elections to health boards, when the full costs of those elections, once they are eventually rolled out, will be taken from front-line services. However, I acknowledge that the costs of the pilot elections will not be taken from front-line services. Written evidence to the committee did not offer a ringing endorsement. Only 27 per cent of responses were in favour of elections to health boards. Of the 19 responses against the proposal, only five were from national health service bodies. We should not therefore assume that it is the NHS that is against elections. I hope that Jamie Stone will agree that not all health boards are poor at consulting. However, there is no doubt that the demand for elections comes from health board areas with a history of poor engagement. As I have said before, I have not met an MP or an MSP in the Highlands who has ever been asked to promote elections to health boards. People in some parts of Scotland will now face eight elections—relating to their national park, the Crofters Commission, their community council, their local authority, the Scottish Parliament, Westminster, the European Parliament, and now their health board. However, we will support this bill to have pilot elections. It could be said that we belong to the sceptical side, but we will carefully consider the outcomes of the pilots and the extension of the franchise. I have some concerns. I am trying to understand clearly in my mind what criteria will be used, in the evaluation process, to judge success or failure. Some people may think, because decisions went their way, that the pilot was successful; but others may think, because decisions did not go their way, that the pilot was a failure. We have not debated the evaluation process, which is for another day, but I am pleased that the cabinet secretary agreed to the use of the super-affirmative procedure. When we come to roll-out, parliamentarians will have to receive substantial information that spells out exactly why the elections proved beneficial for patient care. The SNP naturally wants to keep to its manifesto pledge, but the cost to the NHS—taken from front-line services in the depth of today's economic recession—has to be a significant consideration as it will have a serious impact. One and the same consultation—or one and the same chance to participate, work in partnership, or form procedures for joint decision making—can lead to both huge support and enormous criticism, sometimes depending on the outcome of decisions. I hope that the health boards used in the pilots will not avoid controversial decisions during the pilots; rather, I hope that they will take on the difficult decisions faced by the NHS today.  Change is needed in the NHS, to embrace new technology and new ways of working, and to empower patients to take more responsibility for the management of their own care—a point that Cathy Jamieson raised. Sometimes, very difficult decisions must be made, and the challenge for elected members will be to face those tough choices to ensure that Scotland has an NHS that is fit for this century and fit for the patients who depend on it.

We support amendment 3, which we will push to a vote if necessary, for reasons that are probably different from those of Ross Finnie. The Scottish Conservatives supported the reduction in the voting age from 21 to 18, but it is not our policy to reduce the voting age to 16. The SNP Government has raised the age for buying cigarettes to 18 and proposes to raise the age for buying alcohol in off-licences to 21, yet it proposes to lower the voting age for health board elections to 16. Voters who will be too young to give blood or to buy cigarettes and alcohol would be tasked with voting for people who will address Scotland's very serious public health problems. We are not convinced that lowering the voting age to 16 would increase voting turnout or interest in health board elections. If the piloted elections are to be considered on an equal basis with other elections, it would be consistent and appropriate to leave the voting age at 18. I support amendment 3 in the name of Ross Finnie.

We are facing the most serious economic crisis since the 1930s. On that basis—by today's standards—we judge that £800,000 is a huge amount of money.

Will the minister give way?

My intervention will be almost as brief as was the minister's reply to me at question time. Given that I received a one-word reply of "Yes", I seek further clarity in writing about Tornagrain.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that the consultation carried out on the national planning framework for Scotland 2 was adequate. (S3O-6064)

I thank the minister for that most helpful answer. Although the development at Tornagrain on the A96 is not designated as a national project, it is mentioned in paragraph 272 of the NPF 2 document. Given its inclusion, some of my constituents are concerned that the development has been approved. Will the minister clarify that planning permission has still to be granted for the Tornagrain development and that a local consultation on the application will take place in the normal manner?

I hear what the minister says about the Royal Blind School, but is there provision for children to learn Braille in each local authority in Scotland?

I, too, congratulate Robert Brown on securing the debate on the bicentenary of Louis Braille and commend him on his commitment to the issue. Indeed, I commend him and other politicians for their work on our cross-party groups. Given that that work is not done on the floor of the Parliament, it is unsung and few people get to hear of it. As Robert Brown said, Louis Braille lost his sight when he was only four. It is difficult for many of us to imagine life without sight. Undoubtedly, losing his sight so early must have been tough but, as other members have said, within 10 years the young Braille was inventing the system that is still in use today. The Braille system allows blind and partially sighted people across the world to read, write and communicate to the same level as sighted people. In 2008, almost 20,000 people in Scotland were registered as blind. There is no doubt that Braille empowers people to operate as normally as possible in their everyday lives. David Blunkett has not yet been mentioned in the debate—I thought that previous speakers would have done so. I have always admired him for participating in our profession of politics, including at the highest level when he was a minister. He may not be a member of my party, but I admire him as a fellow politician who so competently carried out his duties with the aid of Braille. That has to be commended. As Robert Brown said, Braille was developed almost two centuries ago. Nowadays, there is no doubt that it is not being utilised to its full effect. The frustration for blind and partially sighted people is that they continue to be disadvantaged because of the underusage of Braille and other methods that could assist them. The RNIB briefing for the debate sets out the problems that people with sight impairments have with the health service. Problems arise for them even with simple tasks such as visiting their general practitioner surgery. For example, given that many GP surgeries use automated screen-based systems to call patients for their appointment, people with sight impairments are left unaware that they have been called. Simple measures could also be used to address the  difficulties that people with sight impairments have in moving around their GP surgery. In a recent survey of blind and partially sighted people, there were disappointing results for patients' opinions on the service that they receive from the national health service. Worryingly, 95 per cent of respondents said that their preferred and requested format had never been used in GP letters, health advice leaflets or other information that they had received. Even test results had not been issued in the requested format. The NHS states that it meets the needs of everyone, but the survey makes it clear that, in many respects, it is not meeting the needs of blind and partially sighted people. A friend of mine who has had diabetes for many years is now—and it happened suddenly—registered as a blind person. There has been a huge increase in the number of people with diabetes and that will put extra pressure on a service that is not even able to meet present needs. The provision of Braille and other communication formats needs to be improved in future if it is to meet the needs of people with diabetes who incur blindness, in addition to addressing the needs of the blind and partially sighted. Another problem for patients arises when they leave the GP surgery. Prescriptions are produced with print that is too small for those who are partially sighted to read, let alone those who would prefer Braille. As the RNIB mentions in its briefing, patients have taken the wrong dosage, which can have serious side effects. We are talking not only about the health service; we have to ensure that pharmacies, too, understand the communication needs of those who are blind and partially sighted. I commend Ian Rankin on his recent launch of a campaign to make more books available to the visually impaired and to raise funds for rehousing the Scottish Braille Press. I wish him success in his efforts both to increase the use of Braille format and, as Robert Brown said, to produce more books in larger print, audio books and other materials. The invention of a talented young man at an institute in Paris in 1821 has undoubtedly benefited the lives of millions of blind and partially sighted people for generations. However, tonight we have found that more people could benefit from the use of Braille. We are in a position to ensure that they do.

I am not a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, so I was surprised when a bill to address additional support for learning was introduced fewer than five years after the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 was passed. I hope that the Parliament will not have to consider the matter again in another five years' time because the system is still not working. As others have said, the bill must be as watertight as it can be and understandable for local authorities, parents, schools and nursery schools. I hope that lessons have been learned about providing adequate resources to ensure that additional support for children is implemented in full. I have also found myself in front of council officials—not Queen's counsel, thankfully—with parents who have felt intimidated by the process that Aileen Campbell mentioned. Parents were battling to get support for their children and to do the best for them, but the council said, "What is passed in the Parliament is all very well, but we haven't got the money." Such resources are perhaps less accessible in many rural communities in the Highlands and Islands and throughout Scotland than they are in urban areas, therefore it is doubly important that those communities do not feel left out. I spoke in the debate on the previous Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill in 2004, and I am quite surprised that the points that I made then are equally relevant today. I want to ask again a question that I asked then, because I have not heard any member mention the issue: are we really doing enough to ensure that nursery staff and teachers are trained to pick up signs of learning difficulties and slow development? I welcome the recent moves by the General  Teaching Council for Scotland to provide more professional training within the teacher training programme—which I understand have been well received by teachers—but unless there is early diagnosis and early intervention, children will miss out on teaching and understanding. I am aware that sometimes children cannot catch up if they miss out at a crucial time, irrespective of what is done a few years down the road.

I was the convener of the cross-party group on mental health in the first two sessions of the Parliament and I worked closely with the minister. I have no doubt that he has brought to bear that experience and other experiences, and I welcome the point that he makes. The point was made in evidence in 2004—it was also made by someone whom Aileen Campbell mentioned—that the system in the bill was essentially the same as the system that was in place at that time, and that had that system been policed and enforced as it should have been, it would have been workable. The point was also made that the Parliament should not only pass legislation but ensure that local government implements it and is accountable. Have we not heard that said about many other acts that we have passed? It seems that local authorities and others have found ways to pass the buck, as Elizabeth Smith said, and that for many children, five years have passed with little progress and much detriment to their development and opportunities in life. The Education Committee's report on the session 2 Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill stated: "The Committee expects education authorities and other agencies to comply with their duties". We are all much more grown up now. In the light of experience, it is clear that that expectation was not fulfilled in many cases. The crucial issue is what is viewed as a statutory obligation as opposed to simply an expectation. It is clear that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee has taken that issue on board from several key witnesses.  There is something that I almost get angry about. Is it not unacceptable 10 years into devolution how often we are told that not only the national health service and local authorities but education and social care services, the police and the voluntary sector are still not working together as they should on child protection? If services are led by children's needs, there should be no need for the Parliament to tell agencies to work together. It is clear from the bill and the experience of the past that, first and foremost, there must be early intervention. Parents need to know and understand their child's condition so that they can play their part in understanding and coping with their child's behaviour and assisting with their learning. Schools and education authorities must put in place resources to meet the unique needs of each and every child. As Elizabeth Smith said, if that were done, parents would not face constant battles with teachers and others to get their child the support that they need. It would also assist with discipline in schools and reduce exclusions, and reduce the need for mediation, advocacy and the costly and intimidating tribunals. To expect a parent to work out whether their child's needs are complex or significant in comparison with those of other children is simply unacceptable. If all that I have asked for were in place, six-year-old boys would not be excluded from school for four months, as happened in Inverness last week because all the specialist centres in Inverness were full; the cuts in education staff that the Highland local association of the Educational Institute of Scotland highlighted would not continue, thereby enabling services to be provided; and the parent of a child who had an appropriate support system at nursery would not have to battle for it all over again when the child entered primary, or have to start another big battle to get what their child needed in secondary school. I welcome the bill, but I hope that I am not back here arguing the same points in five years. I welcome what members have said, the minister's comments and the consensual nature of the debate.

In the past 10 years, the national sheep flock has reduced by 23 per cent and the beef breeding herd by 12 per cent. Last week, the Crofters Commission stated that there is a real risk that the whole industry could collapse in certain parts of Scotland, namely north-west Sutherland, the western isles, Skye and, more recently, Argyll. Given that insufficient numbers of people are entering farming in Scotland's hill and upland areas—notwithstanding the new entrants—what other plans does the minister have to encourage younger generations not only to come into farming but to stay in it?

Thank you Presiding Officer, but my question has been answered.

I look forward to the day when we follow Asda lorries up the A9 on our way north. It takes three hours and 40 minutes to travel by rail from Inverness to Caithness. What plans does the Government have to reduce that journey time?

As the member represents the Western Isles, does he agree with the "NHSScotland National Cleaning Specification Monitoring Framework Independent Audit Report", which states that "NHS Western Isles should be commended as a beacon site" of best practice?

Scottish Conservatives want a health service in Scotland where patients and their families do not fear hospital admission due to health care acquired infections, which not only add to a patient's stay in hospital and suffering but, as we all know, can be fatal. Patients throughout Scotland should have confidence in the hygiene and cleanliness standards in our hospitals. They also need to understand why there should be a reduction in the prescribing of antibiotics. We welcome as a major contribution to tackling hospital-acquired infections the 15-point plan that has been drawn up by Professors Pennington and Toft, which is mentioned in the Labour motion. We endorse the proposal to raise the target for the reduction of C diff in hospitals to 50 per cent, compared with the current minimum target of 30 per cent, and we therefore support the Labour motion. However, the measures that we are addressing today come against the background of an ageing population, more patients and more severe and chronic diseases being treated, higher bed occupancy and more patients vulnerable to infections, alongside a higher turnover of patients and, in some health care settings, inadequate standards of hygiene. The British Medical Association briefing on health care associated infections highlights the need to inform and manage patient expectations  regarding antibiotics, as much prescribing is heavily influenced by patient pressure. The BMA states: "Complacency, poor prescribing practice and misuse of antibiotics are major factors in the emergence of drug resistant infections." I make that point today, as it is often lost in debates on hospital infections. As Cathy Jamieson said, the 15-point plan is not exclusive, and neither do we want to give the impression that only the Vale of Leven hospital needs to address the issue of hospital-acquired infections. Lessons that have been learned need to be applied throughout Scotland. The Scottish Conservative bed management and hospital-acquired infection information technology system would be of enormous benefit in tackling infections; we thank the Scottish Government for its budget commitment to the issue. In the best of Scottish traditions, where there is a problem, there are innovations. A small company in Inverness has developed an MRSA home testing kit, which saves time, travel to hospital and delays to surgery—in my opinion, it ticks all the boxes. I have sent a copy of a paper on the kit to the cabinet secretary. I welcome the guidance on death and the procurator fiscal that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has issued to medical practitioners. It includes guidance on any hospital-acquired infection, and I look forward to further clarification from the Crown Office. Many families have been fully aware that a hospital infection was either the direct cause of or a significant contributory factor in their relatives' deaths, but in recent years the NHS seems to have been reluctant to include any mention of such infections on death certificates. We welcome further clarity on the issue, as well as the other measures that have been announced. In the longer term, I hope that we will look at the design of our hospitals, including air conditioning and heating systems. The debate has been diverted on to the issue of private contracting, but it is for the NHS to ensure that standards set are standards met. Today we will support the Government amendment but not the Liberal amendment, as we have already debated and voted on the issue of a public inquiry.

In my reading and preparing for the debate, an issue that MSPs have raised over the years was once again brought to my attention. I refer to the problems of malnutrition, lack of regular and nutritional meals, and dehydration. Are you looking at that issue, minister?

It is never easy to be wedged between two doctors in a medical debate. I thank Irene Oldfather for bringing this debate to Parliament. As one of the conveners of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on Alzheimer's, I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Irene for all the work that she has done on the issue, and for the commitment that she has shown. Given the amount of work that MSPs have, it is often difficult for us to attend meetings of cross-party groups, but they are a crucial part of our work and provide us with a great opportunity to work with service users and people who are experienced in understanding and providing services. Cross-party groups are a major part of our work that goes largely unnoticed outside Parliament, but the report is a success story for the cross-party group on Alzheimer's. I would also like to thank Professor June Andrews, the Royal College of Psychiatrists and the many others who contributed to the report. As people live longer, the problem that we are debating today is likely to become greater. Any increase in investment for training and services in order to reduce hospital admissions—emergency or otherwise—and to provide people with the appropriate care and treatment for their condition is welcome. I met Irene Oldfather in the black and white corridor about an hour ago, and I have never seen her so happy. She was jumping for joy because all the recommendations in the report have been accepted by the Government. I know that the Government has also agreed to write to all NHS boards, attaching guidance on implementation of the six recommendations. Although I am ecstatically happy about that, it means that the rest of my speech is irrelevant, because it was all about campaigning on those issues. I felt uncomfortable about campaigning for A and E departments to diagnose dementia, but I appreciate that that is not quite what we are asking for. From what I have read, I think that it is possible for tools to be used in order to highlight problems, and I accept that that will happen.  As Ian McKee said, the best approach has to be the preventive approach, given that 40,000 people with dementia live in the community and use general hospital services, and that a further 70 per cent of those with dementia who present at A and E departments have not received a formal diagnosis. I should also say that I endorse the point that Ian McKee made about home carers. Delighted as I am with the Government's response, there are two points in it that we need to monitor because they concern issues that are not entirely in the Government's control. Since the Scottish Parliament was set up in 1999, we have been calling for health and social services to work together. In many communities, that partnership is excellent. However, in its response, the Government says: "Multiple programmes should already be in place in the community". I would say not only that they "should ... be in place" but that the Government needs to check to ensure that they are in place and working. Another concern involves cultural change, which is dealt with in point 5 in the Government's response. I appreciate that such change takes time, but there is no doubt that it can take place. Recommendation 4 in the cross-party group's report states that better partnership working between health and social services is crucial, and that there must be better integration of information technology systems and more specialist assessments in the community. I do not think that the NHS and local authorities make best use of the IT systems that are available to them. We should not allow anything to stand in our way in that regard, because effective use of IT leads to more integrated, better informed and better quality services. I commend the excellent—often unnoticed—work that is done by all cross-party groups in the Parliament. I acknowledge the success of the report of the cross-party group on Alzheimer's. I think that the Government's announcement of its intention to implement the report's recommendations will encourage many other groups to produce similar reports.

I appreciate those comments. No one could not welcome an increase of millions of pounds for refurbishment and rebuilding, but what I saw when I went round Wick high school was, basically, lack of care and maintenance, which is what I would like the minister to be kind enough to address today. I do not see any point in our wasting taxpayers' money with millions being spent on schools if we are not even prepared to invest some decent money in care, maintenance and good estate management.

I thank Jamie Stone for the opportunity to debate the subject of schools in the north Highlands. Many years ago, some teachers from Wick high school came to a surgery to tell me of the situation there. As Jamie said, the problem is not a new one. As a Highlands MSP, I cannot confirm or deny that Wick high school is the school in Scotland that is in greatest need of repair. However, following my visit to the school last year with Rob Gibson and some parents, I can confirm that it is in much need of significant repair. Following the visit, I wrote to Highland Council to record my shock at  the state of the building. In my letter, I listed the following: the presence of asbestos; highly visible cracks in the walls; many areas of dampness that show up in blistering on walls, which is a well-known hazard for anyone with asthma; warped and rotten windows; the poor state of decorative repair and visible leaks throughout the building; the poor state of the swimming pool, which is now closed on health and safety grounds; and on-going problems with heating and burst pipes. I also pointed out that the school has no social areas where pupils can sit. Other members mentioned that. The issues that I listed are by no means the whole list. Highland Council's response was to say that a new synthetic turf pitch had been established and that improvements had been made to the school entrance. The council also confirmed that the swimming pool would remain closed unless a low-cost solution could be identified. Some time ago, Highland Council allocated £1 million for additional toilets and increased dining room and social space at the school. No more funding has been identified in its four-year capital programme, although classrooms for home economics may be considered as part of the 2012-13 programme. I received a letter from a former Wick high school pupil, who said: "Spending 4-6 years in the rotten, unhygienic slum that is Wick High won't inspire young minds nor motivate teachers who are working under such intolerable conditions." As we have heard, the Highland users group for mental health patients can no longer utilise the swimming pool at Wick high school, which they used because of the privacy that it offered. Its members have therefore lost a particularly good form of exercise for body and mind. Swimming helps people with mental health problems to cope with their conditions. In writing about the Dounreay site closure, the Dounreay stakeholder group said that the social infrastructure needs to be improved if new business are to be attracted to the area. It went on to say that families who may be attracted to live in the area would want to ensure that an excellent education system is in place. The stakeholder group is supporting the call that members of all parties are making in the chamber tonight. Of course, the issue of retaining maternity services in the Highland area has also been raised. The motion "regrets the lack of a funding mechanism". As Jamie Stone said, the Liberal-Independent coalition on Highland Council will be pleased to have heard Jeremy Purvis say this week that the new funding mechanism would act as  "a green light for Edinburgh and others to bring forward proposals." In fact, the Lib Dem education convener on the City of Edinburgh Council hailed yesterday's budget as a "lifeline" for the refurbishment and replacement of schools in the capital. If it is good enough for Edinburgh, it is good enough for Wick.

Will the member give way?

In any democracy, it is the duty and responsibility of the Opposition parties to hold the Government to account. That is precisely what we are doing today. The SNP made many promises over the years and in the lead-up to the 2007 election. We are all elected on the basis of our manifesto commitments. I am proud to say that the Scottish Conservatives' manifesto was fully costed and all pledges were costed. Our financial guru, Derek Brownlee, would not allow anything less. However, that is obviously not the case for the SNP. I appreciate that an inexperienced politician can make gaffes on the way to an election. However, we are not talking about inexperienced back benchers, bag carriers or back-room boys; we are talking about pledges that were made by the First Minister of Scotland and Richard Lochhead, a local MP and previous SNP MSPs to bring forward an Elgin bypass. In addition, Fergus Ewing made a similar pledge for the Inverness trunk link route. The Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change has even said to the local newspaper in Elgin, the Northern Scot , in answer to a question about an Elgin bypass: "Improving the transport infrastructure is the key to unlocking Moray's economic potential". In the midst of all those SNP pledges and manifesto commitments, I should also mention Tavish Scott's response to a written question that I submitted in November 2005. He stated: "We have no current plans to construct an Elgin Bypass."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 8 December 2005; S2W-21541.]  The Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change has stated that the Inverness trunk link route and the Elgin bypass would provide poor investment returns. How could there be poor investment returns for congested Inverness from linking the main arterial routes in Scotland from the east, south and west? The minister's statement also begs the question that, if the Elgin bypass would give such a poor investment return, why is the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment allegedly fighting to get funding for it in the face of  opposition from his colleagues in Government? There is no doubt that Inverness is the economic hotspot of the Highlands and that Moray has the lowest average wage in Scotland. We all agree that Moray's potential needs unlocking, but refusing to build the Elgin bypass will make matters worse and not better. As someone else said, "What we would like to know is whether the Scottish Executive is committed to help deliver an Elgin bypass. We would like to know how long this will take and where an Elgin bypass stands as a priority for the Scottish Executive." Those are the words of Angus Robertson, the SNP MP for Moray, which I put to the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change. In opposition, the SNP slammed Mike Watson for voting with his Cabinet colleagues in favour of the Glasgow hospitals shake-up but campaigning against it at a local meeting. Nicola Sturgeon said: "He has betrayed his constituents. His position is untenable. He has been prancing around Glasgow for the last few months telling them he would oppose the plans for Glasgow's hospitals and then he goes to Edinburgh and votes for these plans." The same applies to the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment. I cannot confirm whether they were prancing, but they certainly gave pledges to constituents to deliver an Elgin bypass, dual the A96 and build a trunk link route around Inverness. However, when the chance came for them to deliver, they changed their minds.

Will the member give way?

As someone who has been struck off the list of speakers, I appreciate that. Does the member share my concern that Moray Council's £168 million budget will be seriously affected by the bill's financial proposals and that, in paying for its flood alleviation schemes, it will be worse off by £23 million a year?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive for what reasons the Elgin bypass and the trunk link road in Inverness were not deemed to be priorities for inclusion in the strategic transport projects review. (S3O-5602)

A positive business case was  made by HITRANS, which identified significant economic benefits from an Elgin bypass. The First Minister, ministers Richard Lochhead and Fergus Ewing, and local Scottish National Party MSPs all promised the Elgin bypass and the Inverness trunk link road. Will the transport minister admit that those promises were not costed? Will he apologise to the people of Moray and Highland, who were misled?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in the use of telehealth and telemedicine. (S3O-5461)

In the "Better Health, Better Care" action plan, the Government stated that a managed knowledge network would be launched in April 2008 and that a self-management framework would be in place in each community health partnership by the end of 2008. Will the health secretary give an update on those two initiatives in relation to telehealth? How is the new technology being used to support self-care by patients and how is it being used by GPs?

Will the member give way?

I ask the member to acknowledge that the turnout in New Zealand has fallen from 50 per cent to 43 per cent and that the number of candidates has halved since the elections were first introduced.

When I first approached the bill, I thought that its progress through the Health and Sport Committee and the chamber would be straightforward and that it would simply be passed with a few tweaks and amendments. However, the fact is that the bill has not exactly been wholly welcomed or endorsed by those who responded to the call for evidence. I can also confirm that, although I have been active in the political world in the Highlands and Islands for some time, I have never been asked to try to bring about health board elections. Further, when I asked my Labour and Liberal colleagues whether anyone in the Highlands had asked them to deliver health board elections, they said that that no one had. Ross Finnie made a good point about the governance of health boards: we should not assume that all health boards are bad at consulting. Although I have my differences with Highland NHS Board, I can confirm that it consults on various issues. Thousands of people participated in the consultations on maternity services in Caithness and the proposed reduction in services at the Belford hospital in Fort William—indeed, one health board official returned to Inverness saying that he was traumatised by his experiences in Caithness. There was engagement and the health board listened to the public, which resulted in the retention of the services that we fought for. Although we will support the bill at stage 1 today, that should not be taken as a guarantee of our support at stage 3. Of the 54 responses to the Health and Sport Committee, 15, or 27 per cent, were in favour of health board elections, and 19 were against. If we take out the 20 responses that expressed no preference, that still means that only 44 per cent were in favour while 56 per cent were against. Further, of the 19 responses that were against the proposal, only five were from NHS bodies, so we should not assume that it is only the NHS that is against elections to health boards—civic Scotland does not support the bill either. In any democratic system, that lack of support cannot be ignored. There was more favourable support for the pilots, however, with 19 responses in favour and two against. On that basis, we will support the Liberal Democrats' amendment today. I am not entirely convinced that it is necessary, but I feel that putting a greater focus on the pilots and having something about them in writing would be helpful. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the commitment of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to reconsider the issue of restricted NHS posts, to make use of the super-affirmative  procedure, which none of us seemed to have heard of until now—

Those on the Subordinate Legislation Committee are, of course, familiar with it. We also welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment to ensure that thorough and independent evaluations of the pilots are conducted, to change the long title of the bill to reflect the emphasis on pilots, and "to bring forward details of non statutory pilot schemes that will run concurrently with elections in advance of stage 3." Like Cathy Jamieson, we are also concerned that the cost of the full roll-out of the elections has risen from £13 million to £16 million—and we are still only at stage 1 of the bill. With the use of personal identifiers, we are looking at a cost of £20 million. Our main concern is that those funds will come from front-line NHS services. I ask that more attention be paid to the issue of the NHS Highland electoral ward, which would cover more than 40 per cent of Scotland's landmass and would include 30 islands. Its population centre is Inverness, which makes it likely that candidates will come from Inverness and the surrounding area. Although the salary will be the same for each member, members from further afield will have to pay considerable travel costs. More important, some of them will have to make a much greater time commitment than others. I give, as an example, the situation that an elected member from Tiree would find themselves in. The ferry takes three hours and 40 minutes to get to Oban from Tiree, and there would be a further three-hour journey by car, or a whole day's journey by public transport, to get to Inverness. The shortest time that it would take a member from Tiree to get to Inverness and back would be six hours and 40 minutes each way, which means that they would need to allow for a day's travel on either side of a meeting, with possibly two overnight stays. Anyone with a full-time or part-time job would find it impossible to make that commitment. A further problem is the issue of leafleting the NHS Highland area. How could a candidate afford to pay for the distribution of a leaflet across that huge area? All of that means that only those who are both time and money rich will stand. I appreciate that not all meetings will be in Inverness, but, as it is the main population centre, it is likely that most of them will be.

We are not discussing that issue. Anyway, there is no doubt that, before an appointment is made, there is a discussion about whether the person is able to commit the time that is required. The point remains that NHS Highland has the largest health board area in Scotland. I know that, in the Health and Sport Committee, Dr McKee has raised concerns about the potential politicisation of health boards, which is something that we do not want. However, it is likely that political parties will put forward candidates for the elections, given that they have the necessary organisation and experience.

That is a possibility, and people in Caithness have been concerned for years about the fact that they do not have a representative on NHS Highland. Although election expenses are to be determined by regulation, I presume that that will involve the maximum spend rather than assistance with election addresses and so on. I would like that to be clarified. We are concerned that independent scrutiny panels, public partnership forums, health councils and other fairly new initiatives have not been given sufficient time to bed in prior to the introduction of the bill. We also remain concerned about ministers' power to remove elected members from health boards. However, my main point of concern involves the Government's capacity to overturn health boards' decisions. Its reversal of the plan to remove accident and emergency services from Ayr and Monklands hospitals was welcomed by many across Scotland. However, how difficult would it be for the Government to overturn a decision of an elected health board, following the intervention of an independent scrutiny panel? Would a minister take the advice of the directly elected health board or that of the independent scrutiny panel? I look forward to that issue being clarified later today.

I am pleased to speak in this debate as a Highlands and Islands MSP, because moving the forensics lab from Aberdeen to Dundee will have a serious impact on the work of not only Grampian Police, but Northern Constabulary. Some of the best-trained police civilian staff scientists have been employed in Aberdeen since 1969, which makes the lab, which does excellent quality work, the second-oldest police lab in Scotland. Northern Constabulary has serious concerns about the quality of service that might be delivered following the proposed move to Dundee. In a recent meeting with Northern Constabulary, SNP, Labour and Conservative MSPs heard fulsome praise for the hard-working and dedicated staff of the Aberdeen lab. The representatives of Northern Constabulary confirmed that an excellent service had been provided by the lab over the years and said that they were truly concerned about the uncertainty around the lab's future. Nicol Stephen talks about the anger of staff. Before today, I had not met any of the staff. The concerns that I am raising come from the police officers and others in Northern Constabulary. This is not only a debate about uncertainty about the proposed changes to this excellent service and concerns about delays in processing evidence due to those changes, it is a debate about a sham consultation that did not involve even Northern Constabulary or the unions. The Aberdeen laboratory processes evidence from an area of 14,500 square miles, which is nearly 50 per cent of the land mass of Scotland. The lab serves more than 813,000 people from Unst in Shetland to Glencoe in the south. It is true that investment has not been forthcoming in recent years for the Dundee lab and that its current site must be vacated by 2011—for its owners, Tayside Police. However, that investment should not be made at the expense of the custom-built, state-of-the-art, fit-for-purpose and highly valued forensics and fingerprint facility in Aberdeen. In the Highlands, where major crimes are, thankfully, rare, volume crimes such as minor assaults and theft are of the greatest concern. During one week in November last year, there were three murder inquiries in Aberdeen, yet there was no backlog in the volume-crime services while those murders were being investigated. In other words, the murder investigations did not impact on the service that was provided to Northern Constabulary. That continuity of service simply could not happen if the lab in Dundee took cases  from up to four different forces. Volume crime might be pushed to the back of the queue as more pressing, high-profile crimes came in. On recent visits to Orkney and Shetland, I found that officers there have serious concerns about getting evidence to the lab in Dundee. At present, they can get a direct ferry or plane to Aberdeen, drop off the evidence and return to their station, often with the results, to continue their duties. If we add a trip to Dundee, they could be forced to stay on the mainland overnight, which will increase the costs and the time that is taken and might reduce visible policing on the islands. As Brian Adam said, £600,000 has been set aside for the Aberdeen lab. I ask the minister whether he appreciates that Grampian joint police board felt it necessary to threaten the SPSA with freedom of information requests.

Will physiotherapy services be discussed at the next meeting? The previous Liberal-Labour Administration revealed that, in 2006, 28,000 patients were waiting for physiotherapy in Scotland. Last year in Inverness, many patients had to wait more than a year for physiotherapy. What plans does the cabinet secretary have to reduce waiting times for physio, to increase mobility, reduce pain and help people to get back to work?

I welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's speech and her confirmation that she will review progress in the next one or two years. That will be important. As I have said in previous debates on organ donation, the Scottish Conservatives have agreed to a free vote on the issue. Therefore, the views expressed from this side of the chamber are personal to each speaker and are not part of the collective view of the Conservative party. Like the task force members, the more that I have examined the evidence for an opt-out system, the less obvious I have found the benefits for addressing the shortage of potential transplant donors to be. I very much support the main principles of the task force's report, and I congratulate the task force, and the health secretary, on dropping the words "presumed consent" from the title and on the accurate use of the words "opt out system". I hope that I will now make this point for the final time, because I do not think that the concept of "presumed consent" has totally gone yet. Presumed consent is not consent. To consent means to agree or to give assent. Consent—whether to sex, marriage or the giving of body parts—cannot be presumed; it can only be given freely by an individual. Likewise, a donor is a giver. Donation is an act of choice. Whether financial or otherwise, a  donation is something willingly given, not something willingly taken, by the state or anyone else. In that respect, I agree with the point made in paragraph 5.2 of the task force's report, which says that "presumed consent" is a misnomer. My second point was mentioned by Richard Simpson, but is worth repeating. Diabetes is the main contributory factor to kidney failure. We should not lose sight of early diagnosis and management of diabetes, but we must also put more emphasis on the prevention of diabetes. In previous debates, I have also raised the issue of trust between clinicians and families, and I further agree with the task force that an opt-out system of consent might undermine that concept. As the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said, the system that is used in Spain is often cited as the preferred system. However, those who continue to argue for the system that they call presumed consent can no longer be in any doubt that what made a difference in Spain was not the opt-out system that was introduced in 1979, which had little or no impact on transplants, but the action that the Spanish Government took 10 years later when it invested in specific training for health care professionals and appointed donor transplant co-ordinators in every intensive care unit. I also point out that Spain has three times as many intensive therapy beds and transplant doctors as the United Kingdom. There is a further point that is often missed in debates on organ donation. In Scotland, we still do not know how many people would have been willing to donate organs but were not asked to do so or could not do so because the organisation and co-ordination of retrieval were lacking or there were insufficient intensive therapy unit beds. In that respect, I welcome the £5 million and the increase in donor co-ordinators that the cabinet secretary announced today, although much more needs to be done. There were only 20 more transplants in the UK last year than in 1999. Although I support the cabinet secretary's motion on organ donation, I want not only an increase in the number of donors but an increase in the number of transplants. However, unless there is considerable investment, that simply will not happen.

I will come to that. If we are to be successful, we need two measurements—not just the number of people who are willing to  donate, but the number of successful transplants. Increasing organ donor rates is one thing, but actively using organs that are given with consent to save lives is quite another. I was surprised to read that the number of cardiothoracic transplants reduced by 14 per cent last year and that there was an 18 per cent reduction in heart transplants and a 10 per cent reduction in lung transplants. I ask the cabinet secretary whether people who live in Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles are given the same opportunity to donate and receive organs as people in the rest of Scotland. It has been raised with me that people in Shetland might be unable to donate, despite their wishes, because of the time, resources and distances involved, but also that they might be unable to receive organs. I ask the cabinet secretary to look into that. I support the task force's view that a system of presumed consent "would distract attention away from essential improvements to systems and infrastructure and from the urgent need to improve public awareness and understanding of organ donation." Further, there is not much point in increasing the number of donors unless the system is in place to make transplants happen.

There is no doubt that the recession is having a serious impact on the construction industry. What is being done to ensure that apprentices are being recruited and retained? In particular, what is being done to ensure that third and fourth-year apprentices who are facing redundancy because firms are going out of business can finish their apprenticeships to ensure that Scotland will have the necessary skills base for future years?

I can confirm that, last week, Highland MSPs met the deputy chief constable and the chief superintendent of Northern Constabulary, who both confirmed that Northern Constabulary had not been consulted on the proposed closure of Aberdeen forensic laboratory.

At the most recent meeting of the Grampian joint police board, the SPSA chief executive said that even if the majority of responses were in favour, it would not be the SPSA's recommendation. Will the fresh consultation include Northern Constabulary and the Highlands and Islands, and will the cabinet secretary ensure that there is no fait accompli?

I am a regular traveller on the A96 and a resident of Inverness, so I welcome the announcement on improvements to the A96, but what happened to the First Minister's commitment to dual the A96 between Aberdeen and Inverness, which was in his election campaign literature for the Gordon constituency?

I acknowledge the cabinet secretary's comments, but I remind her that while we await the welcome project that she described, many highly trained and experienced NHS employees will be suspended or on gardening leave, which has an almost immeasurable effect on an individual's health. Many such people are unlikely to return to work. After the survey's results are produced, I ask not only for those people to be treated with dignity, but for human resources departments in the NHS to be more professional and to conduct their business with more dignity than at present.

I congratulate Marlyn Glen on securing this debate, which recognises the anniversary of world AIDS day. I also thank Kenny Gibson, particularly for raising the issue of infected women. The aim of the day is to highlight the challenges posed by and the consequences of the HIV epidemic around the world. Although other countries are plagued by the disease and problems of treatment, we in Scotland have our own problems. Figures released earlier this week show that, in 2007, 453 new cases of HIV were identified in Scotland. That is the highest number since recording began about 25 years ago. Since 2000, there has been a 194 per cent increase in new diagnoses. Between January and September this year, a further 298 people have been diagnosed with HIV. I am sorry about all the figures I am quoting. Of those who were diagnosed this year, 46 per cent are identified as heterosexual individuals and 75 per cent are known to have been infected outside Scotland. I welcome Marlyn Glen's point about gay and bisexual men, but we  should also be looking at the heterosexual community. The figures are worrying, but possibly of greater concern is the number of people with HIV who do not know that they have the virus—a point that Kenny Gibson and Marlyn Glen raised. It is estimated that about 40 per cent of gay and bisexual men who are HIV positive do not know that they have the virus, which has consequences for the risk of the disease being spread. It is estimated that people who are unaware of their own HIV infection could account for between 53 and 70 per cent of all new sexually transmitted HIV infection. Health economists have estimated that one onward transmission of HIV has a value of between £0.5 million and £1 million in individual health benefits and treatment costs. As Marlyn Glen said, late diagnosis also has implications for the individual's health. It can lead to pneumonia, TB, heart and liver disease and some cancers. The Terence Higgins Trust states that nearly half of infected people who are diagnosed late show signs of an immune system that has already been compromised and around 7 per cent have an immune function that has been significantly damaged. Around a quarter of the HIV deaths that occur each year could be avoided through earlier access to diagnosis and treatment. The stigma that world AIDS day seeks to remove is part of the problem of late diagnosis. People are unwilling to get tested because of the fear of others finding out or because of the stigma. The delay in diagnosis can have a devastating effect on their health and the health of others. Today, I called some of the organisations that manufacture drugs that are used in the treatment of HIV. I can understand that people might not wish to get on to a regime of triple therapy, which can mean up to 30 or 40 tablets a day, but once the viral load is at a normal or acceptable level the drug intake can be as little as one tablet once a day. I also understand that there are now cases of people coming off treatment permanently. The message that I would like to get out today is to encourage people to come forward for testing; the fact that new drugs are being developed all the time will ensure that treatment is less complex.

I, too, congratulate James Kelly on securing the debate. As he said, it is estimated that there are about 10,000 people with Parkinson's in Scotland. Although most people who are diagnosed with the disease are over 60, one in 20 are under 40, which poses a greater problem when it comes to prescribing medicines. Although drugs cannot cure Parkinson's, they can do much to relieve its symptoms—the aim, as Kenny Gibson said, is to replace missing dopamine. As James Kelly's motion states, delayed medication can lead to serious problems for patients—the inability to move, speak or swallow, uncontrolled movements and distressing psychotic symptoms. I was pleased to attend today's event in Parliament, arranged by the Parkinson's Disease Society, at which James Kelly was also present. There, I met a lady from Buckie who explained the issue to me in a way that has enabled me to understand it much better than I could have from reading material. Although I am delighted to contribute to the debate, I also feel some anger and frustration. I am sure that that is no more than patients feel, but I find it incredible that in this century patients can go into hospital but are not given the medication  that they need when they need it. People worry a great deal about going into hospital and about facing distressing symptoms that can lead to confusion, extended stays and so on. The get it on time campaign is excellent, but I am frustrated by the fact that staff are not responding to patients' needs. That is why the campaign is so important. It was launched in 2006 to help and support the work of nursing staff in stabilising people who are suffering from Parkinson's. A survey of Parkinson's disease nurse specialists in 2006 found that nine out of 10 nurses believed "that patients with this disease experienced clinical problems or an extended hospital stay because of ... late administration of medicine." It is a problem of communication as much as anything. Much of the problem seems to stem from the fact that patients are admitted to hospital for conditions other than Parkinson's such as falls, urinary disorders and heart and lung problems. They are admitted to busy general wards, where nurses are obviously unaware of the importance of the timing of medication for Parkinson's. Hospitals may do four drug-dispensing runs a day, but those do not necessarily coincide with patients' timings. I asked a lady today at what time she takes her drugs. She told me, "I take them when I know my body needs them." That is why self-medication and respect for the patient are so important. Another worrying issue, which was highlighted in a report on hospital audits of medicines management for people with Parkinson's, is that "there was prescribing of contraindicated drugs." Patients are being given drugs that can have side-effects when taken with the drugs that they are smuggling in under their nighties. That is a very serious issue. It is not just the problems that are associated with the disease that are exacerbated by patients receiving medicine at the wrong times; extended stays in hospital and the potential for hospital-acquired infections should also be considered. As we know, those bring additional costs to the national health service. I understand that there are 13 Parkinson's nurses working in Scotland. They provide valuable care to people. I know, representing the Highlands and Islands, that it would be almost impossible for a Parkinson's nurse regularly to visit every person with Parkinson's in the area, but I have discussed the matter with my colleague, Dr Nanette Milne, and we both visited the Scottish Centre for Telehealth in Aberdeen last week. We wonder whether more support could be provided through telehealth to cut down on travel times for people with Parkinson's as well as for nurses and doctors.

I also welcome the more comprehensive energy assistance package, which replaces—or, should we say, extends—the current central heating and warm deal programmes. However, we also  acknowledge that it will take some time to go through the detail. Given that I represent the Highlands and Islands, I welcome the emphasis on tackling rural fuel poverty. I welcome, for example, air-source heat pumps for homes that are off the grid, particularly given that I understand that one in three homes is off the gas grid. We would also welcome solutions for insulating homes that have solid walls, which is a huge issue in rural areas. My colleagues at Westminster are committed to addressing the prepayment meter charges and the issue of requiring energy companies to offer social tariffs to vulnerable households—to which the cabinet secretary referred—and advice on how to switch to the cheapest tariff. I appreciate that some of the issues are reserved, but has the Scottish Government had any meetings with energy companies here in Scotland about the prepayment meter charges and, if so, were any agreements reached? When the cabinet secretary used the phrase, "without condition", did she mean that persons aged over 60 will not have to live in a house without central heating for a year before they are eligible for the free central heating programme? Many people in Scotland today are facing unemployment and hardship and many others simply want to reduce their carbon footprints. What is in this Government package of measures for them?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government intends to take following the publication of figures showing that domestic abuse against men has increased by 110 per cent since 1999. (S3F-1176)

Although it acknowledges the fact that the majority of domestic abuse cases involve male abuse of females, Home Office and British crime survey research has repeatedly found that men are much less likely to report violent domestic abuse. Given that the Welsh Assembly now funds a project that provides services that are appropriate for men and same-sex couples, will the Government ensure that all the victims of violent domestic abuse and the children who witness it are given the same support?

I remind the minister that the funding for someone who lives on Coll or Tiree is around £700 less than for someone who lives on Barra in the Western Isles. That is an example of the funding differences that Highland NHS Board faces.

I do not object to the use of a formula, be it Arbuthnott's or NRAC's. What I object to is the fact that the NRAC formula does not take into account remoteness and rurality, community data, or supersparsity. That is reflected in lower settlements for certain areas.

Following the Punch and Judy show, we can now move to calm reflection from the Scottish Conservatives. We welcome this debate on health spending, and I make no apology for focusing on NHS Highland. There is no single reason—or, indeed, excuse—for the financial pressures that the board faces. The reasons include NHS Scotland resource allocation committee funding, the inclusion of part of NHS Argyll and Clyde, pay rises, and increased fuel costs and other costs. I could go on. On current projections, the savings, or "cuts", of £36.6 million that are required over four years, have led the board to consider what were previously considered to be, as Cathy Jamieson said, "scary and untouchable" cuts. Redundancies, freezing recruitment, and reductions in emergency admissions are but three of the 39 measures that have been suggested by NHS Highland in order to balance its budget. I would like to consider the background to that more closely. When NHS Highland took over the Argyll part of the previous Argyll and Clyde NHS Board, the financial fault lines that had led to the previous board's large financial deficit were not fully known. What was known was that the funding per person  in Argyll was £80 less per annum than the figure for Highland, despite Argyll's many remote islands. I want to ask the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing whether she will examine the resources that are given to NHS Highland and consider whether the board has inherited responsibility for the provision of NHS services without being given sufficient resources. NHS Highland is responsible for an area that covers 41 per cent of the Scottish land mass, including 30 islands. The restructuring that was brought about by the previous Government's intervention has led the board to conclude that "the challenges and risks faced by NHS Highland were unprecedented", even by NHS standards. The travel and communication issues of island communities and areas of supersparsity link with fragile economies to produce particular challenges for delivery of NHS services. I remind the cabinet secretary that that point was often raised by the SNP MSP Duncan Hamilton in the first session of Parliament. Highland also faces significant consultant travel time and costs: out-of-hours services in Highland are five times more costly than those in urban areas, and specialist peripheral outpatient clinics and other facilities are required to provide NHS services.

It will get an additional £86 million, but it is certainly facing "scary" cuts. It is important that we reflect calmly on the matter and consider the background. I think I am doing that responsibly. If it is fully implemented, the NRAC formula, which is the replacement for the Arbuthnott formula, will lead to £21 million of cuts. I understand and welcome the fact that the NRAC formula is constantly under review, as the cabinet secretary said, but the fact remains that NHS Highland is facing £21 million of cuts, and that will remain so until the formula changes. NRAC, which was set up by the previous Administration and is accepted by the SNP Government, has led to an excess cost adjustment based on changes around hospitals and not on community data. It fails to take into account the remote, rural and island issues in health provision.  We support the reallocation of efficiency savings to front-line services. On recent visits to Orkney and the Western Isles, I was impressed by the joint working on asset and estate management, human resource management, maintenance and payroll systems. However, I ask the Government to encourage boards to introduce more integrated working, because economies of scale have the benefits of leading to greater efficiencies and reducing the need to cut front-line services. My final point would also lead to savings for the taxpayer, NHS staff and patients. I mentioned it last week and I do not apologise for mentioning it again. Personnel departments should do much more to manage staff who are sitting at home for months and years and get them back into work. We are minded to support the Government's amendment, but we will reserve judgment until we have heard the SNP's contributions to the debate. We cannot support the Labour motion because the Labour Party must take some responsibility for the NRAC cuts, for the dissolution of NHS Argyll and Clyde, and for the closure of accident and emergency departments.

In evidence to the Health and Sport Committee during the budget process, the British Dental Association said that it would need £600 million to provide greater access to NHS dentistry—in other words, £245 million more than it receives at present. What is the cabinet secretary's response to that request?

Given that you are a medical professional, I ask you respectfully for your views on the unintended consequences of a patient being entitled to withdraw consent and refuse further treatment.

My question was: what difference will the bill make to the current situation?

The debate is useful. I was interested in Cathy Jamieson's comments on the unintended consequences of the Government's proposals and I will consider other unintended consequences. The Conservative Party introduced the first patients charter, in 1991. The charter was revised in 1995 and was revised again, by the Labour Party, in the late 1990s. Patients' rights and responsibilities are not new; what is new is the legal recourse that would be enshrined in the proposed bill—if members can find that in the consultation paper. Where there are rights, which we welcome, there must also be responsibilities. Jackson Carlaw will talk about patients' responsibilities. The Scottish National Party's manifesto contained a commitment to introduce not only a patients' rights bill but an NHS redress bill, which would "give patients an alternative to pursuing a medical negligence claim by introducing a right to redress without having to go through a lengthy legal battle." The NHS redress bill was intended to "replace the current NHS clinical negligence scheme with a no-fault system of compensation". Conservatives are committed to a lighter touch in legislating, so we could accept two bills that were rolled into one. However, we question whether legislation is needed at all, as does the Labour Party. The consultation document contains 79 paragraphs, but only paragraphs 68 and 69 mention no-fault compensation. If the consultation exercise does not invite people to give their views on no-fault compensation, no one can be expected to do so—ask no questions and you will get no answers. The paper says: "It is possible that there may be cases in which financial compensation should be paid without the need to go through such a legal process ... We therefore favour no- fault compensation as the way forward for the NHS in Scotland". However, I sense another SNP U-turn. A proposal that might have sounded good in the manifesto and at the hustings is disappearing when the reality check kicks in. The proposed patients' rights bill must be underpinned by a clear definition of patients' rights in every sector. It cannot be right to introduce waiting time guarantees in relation to some conditions but not others. In that regard, I use again the examples of mental health services, infertility treatment, drug and alcohol services and physiotherapy. Many general practitioners do not bother to refer patients to physiotherapists because the waiting lists are too long and they think that patients can pay for private treatment. It is proposed that patients will be able to seek redress if the waiting time guarantee cannot be met. According to paragraph 60: "feedback will be actively encouraged. This will be used to explore the best approach to quick and effective means to resolve any problems patients may encounter when using health services, and to ensure effective redress where patient rights are not met. The feedback will also be used to make changes and improvements in the way services are delivered". I thought that that was already happening. Where is the mention of legal redress? I worked until 8 pm last night and I had to ask a few colleagues whether I had missed something. Is the proposed legal guarantee simply an assurance on feedback and resolution, as paragraph 60 suggests? What legal implications will there be if the waiting time guarantee is not met? I would have thought that patients have a right not to become infected during a stay in hospital, but it is not clear what legal redress a patient in such a situation would have. Could they sue? If a patient died as a result of an infection, would the family have more right to sue the health service than is currently the case? Will the proposed new arrangements bring benefits for patients?

Not now. What would happen if a clinician refused to prescribe a cancer drug that a patient wanted? I want to talk about patients' involvement in decisions about their care. Like the RCN, we all want patients to be treated with respect and to be accorded dignity. None of us wants to hear about cases such as the ones that were described on "Good Morning Scotland" today. It says in the consultation paper that patients' views "will be given the same level of consideration as clinical opinion when coming to decisions about their care and treatment."  A patient might decide not to have further treatment, despite the best clinical judgment. As it says in paragraph 53 of the consultation paper, the bill will enshrine a patient's right to "withdraw consent or refuse further treatment, even if previous consent has been given to the treatment or procedure". A huge amount of clarification is needed in that regard. If a patient died because they had refused further treatment, would their death fall into the category of voluntary suicide? If a clinician supported a patient's right to have no further treatment and the withdrawal of treatment led to the patient's death, could it be argued that there had been a case of assisted dying? I ask the question with the best of intentions, because the issue has been raised in the Parliament. More clarity about the Government's intentions and greater scrutiny of the proposed bill's unintended consequences are needed in relation to paragraph 53 and other aspects of the consultation paper. My final point is that, in considering rights and responsibilities, we must remember the rights of NHS staff. Our national health service may be the caring profession, but it is not always too caring about the management of its own staff. I ask that all NHS staff be treated with respect and dignity by their employer, particularly in relation to employment rights, human relations and personnel management. Far too many staff are suspended in the long term without any proper support, dignity, respect or hope of getting back to work.

Will that include using spare capacity in the private sector to meet the waiting time guarantee?

I thank Kenny Gibson for taking the opportunity to highlight lupus in his members' business debate. Given that the condition affects 5,000 people in Scotland, and given that this is lupus awareness month, the debate is indeed timely. It is difficult to imagine a condition in which the immune system attacks the body's healthy cells and tissues instead of protecting them from illness and infection, but that is what lupus does. As Kenny Gibson outlined, the various difficulties surrounding the condition include the fact that the disease has many manifestations and that each person's profile, or list of symptoms, may be different. Lupus can also mimic other diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, which makes it even more difficult for lupus to be diagnosed by GPs, who see so few cases of the condition that they may not be alert to its being a possibility. Such problems are exacerbated by the lack of a single test that can say definitely whether a person has lupus. Against that background, as Kenny Gibson said, diagnosis of lupus is complex and requires comprehensive examination and consideration of the symptoms. For those reasons, I welcome the establishment of the Scottish lupus exchange, which I understand first met at the Scottish Society for Rheumatology in 2007. The exchange allows rheumatologists to share expertise that they have gained through their experience of seeing many patients frequently. The exchange may not be a centre of excellence, but it is a centre in which expertise is being gained. Such a medical network has the potential to advance knowledge and practice in the clinical and scientific fields of lupus and other connective-tissue diseases, and can help to raise awareness and understanding of the condition. Its key objective of becoming multidisciplinary is a pragmatic way forward, which will be achieved by including specialists with, for example, renal, neurological and dermatological expertise as well as interested doctors in training and specialist nurses. The Scottish lupus exchange is not a managed clinical network—although it might sound like it—but the fact that people are working together is to be welcomed. Undoubtedly, the exchange will help to develop  the high-quality standards of care that are needed and the much-needed research into the condition. Sharing information and best practice is the model for improving patient care across Scotland for lupus as for other conditions. I was pleased to see that the room at the back of the chamber has some excellent leaflets, which are very attractive and set things out clearly. That is extremely helpful. In reading about all that research and integrated work, I was struck by the efforts of Sheena Edwards, whose story is covered in the national magazine of Lupus UK. As a Hibs fan, Sheena managed to convince her favourite club to feature an item on lupus in its match programme some time ago. Given that football programmes are guaranteed to be read and—depending on the result—kept by many people, perhaps the Minister for Public Health might want to consider taking that sort of opportunity to promote some of the Parliament's positive public health messages to some of the more hard-to-reach sections of the population. I apologise for not staying for the remainder of the debate, as I hope to get an earlier train to Inverness. I thank the Presiding Officer for calling me early.

Is the First Minister aware that, even before any more money is taken from front-line services to pay for direct elections, mental health patients in the Highlands already have to wait up to four years and seven months to see a psychologist? How long does he think that a mental health patient should or can wait to see a psychologist? Is four years and seven months acceptable?

As the convener of the cross-party group on palliative care, Michael McMahon has been a tireless campaigner for improved palliative care services in Scotland since 1999, and I welcome this debate on advanced heart failure and the equality of care that he seeks. Before the debate, I looked through "Living and dying with advanced heart failure: a palliative care approach", which was published in March, and at the more recent action plan for palliative care and end-of-life care, "Living and Dying Well". On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I hope that the recommendations in the earlier report, which focused on advanced heart failure, are included in the September report. I also hope that the debate will bring clarity to the issues, as is requested in the motion. Henry Dargie, the director of the Scottish advanced heart failure service, stated: "Patients admitted to our hospitals with worsening heart failure still stand only a 60 per cent chance of being alive one year later". Compared with many cancer patients, those with heart failure have a worse prognosis, poorer quality of life and more limited access to social services and palliative care support. That is worrying, particularly given the number of patients involved. I welcome the recommendation on when palliative care should be introduced. That is a key component. It is referred to in the third section of the report on advanced heart failure, and the severe symptoms are listed in the briefing from the British Heart Foundation. There is no doubt that palliative care used to focus mainly on end-of-life care, but in recent years it has broadened to include the time from diagnosis of a life-limiting condition. Given that advanced heart failure is defined as the presence of severe symptoms and poor exercise tolerance and given that patients face recurrent episodes of hospitalisation, usually caused by worsening heart failure and its complications or by problems relating to medication or co-morbidity, I will speak about the Nairn anticipatory care project, which included patients with advanced heart failure. The Scottish Government's "Better Health, Better Care" action plan highlights the need for a  greater emphasis on anticipatory, rather than reactive, care to meet the challenges in shifting the balance of care. The Nairn project developed a local case-finder tool that did not require a previous hospital admission, so it identified patients before they were referred or admitted to the hospital system. It then targeted interventions to the patients who were at highest risk of hospital admission. The project also assessed local nursing and residential home patients. The toolkit consisted of a screening tool, a patient leaflet, an anticipatory care plan, identification of at-risk patients, evaluation forms and a web link to patient administration information. The project was able to call on the primary care team, including occupational therapists, physiotherapists, community nurses and health care assistants. The evaluation conducted by the University of Stirling concluded that the reduction in bed day rates from admission rates was 61 per cent, and that the length of stay reduced by 39 per cent. That also reflected a transfer from Raigmore to the local community hospital in Nairn. Although no attempt has been made to calculate the financial impact of the intervention or the net investment required to roll it out across the Highlands, we know that hospital bed days for the population in question are projected to increase. With the anticipatory care intervention, which allows people to stay in their own homes, hospital bed days are significantly reduced and there is better anticipatory, rather than reactive, care. I raise awareness of the project as I feel that it is a uniquely patient-led service and that there is an opportunity in the model to include palliative care and the voluntary sector as appropriate. I hope that it will be considered with the other measures.

The cabinet secretary will be familiar with the flood alleviation scheme in Elgin, which includes a plan for a relief channel near the cathedral. SEPA wants that channel to remain dry, whereas Scottish Natural Heritage wants water to run through it all the time. What advice would the minister give to local authorities that face contradictory advice from those statutory bodies?

Given that antidepressant prescribing is increasing, and given the long wait for mental health services, would it not be beneficial to ensure that self-help groups such as Depression Alliance Scotland are fully funded to help individuals to understand and cope with their condition?

I acknowledge Ross Finnie's point that many issues for wider debate have been raised today. I thank the Public Petitions Committee for its excellent work on this complex issue, which was described by Professor Rodger of the Beatson Institute for Cancer Research as a "moral, ethical and logistical nightmare and minefield." I thank Michael Gray and Tina McGeever for raising the subject of our debate today, which I believe will lead to greater clarity, better understanding and, hopefully, as Nanette Milne said, cancer patients being given clearer options and better access to cancer drugs. Cetuximab is widely available throughout the European Union, yet not in the UK. That raises questions about the appraisal processes of clinical  cost effectiveness as well as the QALY process of NICE and the SMC. It is worth putting on the record the fact that in Scotland we are world leaders in cancer research, yet we have the worst cancer outcomes in the whole of Europe. A study published in The  Lancet Oncology last year charted patients diagnosed in 21 countries who survived cancer for more than five years. With only 48 per cent of women surviving after five years, Scotland sits at the bottom of the league table despite having three times the health budget of countries such as Poland and the Czech Republic. Our 48 per cent survival rate compares with 53 per cent in England and 52 per cent in Ireland. Only 40 per cent of Scottish men live for more than five years after diagnosis, which puts us in the bottom four of the league table. Although we might equal EU health spending, we are far from equal in cancer outcomes. I have discovered that there is a difference between co-payments and top-ups. I understand that a co-payment is a payment for the same episode of care and that a top-up payment is for a different episode of care. Unfortunately, no one seems able to define clearly an episode of care. When we talk about a health service that is free at the point of delivery, as Duncan McNeil did, and which based on clinical need, we are not being entirely truthful. We need to be clear that most people are not entitled to free podiatry treatment, that dentistry is certainly not free for many people and that many GPs do not even bother referring patients to physiotherapy because of the long waiting list—those patients are simply told to find a private practitioner. Although many thousands of Scots access homoeopathy treatment—they would not have taken Ian McKee's advice—no one assumes that, having paid for such treatments, those patients are then excluded from NHS treatment. Neither has anyone been excluded from NHS follow-up treatments following surgery in other countries, which many people in Scotland access. Consultation on the issue has to be wide ranging and has to result in much greater transparency. As I said to Ian McKee, it is worth pointing out that many hundreds of drugs that are prescribed day and daily throughout Scotland have never been evaluated. There is an assumption that we are in a perfect situation, but that is simply not the case, as he acknowledged. It is questionable whether all the drugs that are prescribed day and daily in Scotland would now pass the rigorous appraisals of NICE, the SMC, QIS, the area drug and therapeutics committees and a consultant's medical opinion.  I remember that when we arrived in the Parliament in 1999 Shona Robison joined the campaign for beta interferon to be given to multiple sclerosis sufferers. At one point, it was assumed that beta interferon would benefit all patients with MS; however, it benefited only 16 per cent of MS patients. I commend the Government for providing neurology assessments to ensure that those who would benefit from that drug would get it. I make that point because the therapeutic value of a treatment can be different in different patients. Rather than having a blanket ban on, or a blanket acceptance of, a drug or therapy, we could do more to specify which patients would be most likely to benefit from particular treatments. More clinical trials might be the answer, but I would prefer a drug such as cetuximab to be made available to the patients who are most likely to benefit from it, rather than being refused to all patients. Michael Gray was forced to pay for cetuximab, which was recommended by his oncologist. Only after it was proved to be effective did NHS Grampian agree to fund the treatment. Surely it is not for the patient to pay for the clinical trial and for the NHS board then to decide whether to agree to pay for the drug according to whether there is a health improvement. I hope that that important point is taken on board. In the context of arguments for private provision and those for public provision, I hope that the cabinet secretary's consultation will look at the availability of orphan drugs, which are referred to in paragraph 106 of the committee's report. There is no doubt that state intervention is essential in such cases to ensure that pharmaceutical companies carry out research on rare conditions. Given the low numbers of patients involved, the costs of those drugs can be prohibitively high. We welcome the Government's review of co-payment guidance and we trust that all the contributions to the debate will be taken into account. The Conservative health team at Westminster has had a huge response to its consultation on this complex issue. I understand that the UK Department of Health is also consulting on the issue. Although the SMC was set up to end postcode prescribing, that has not happened, given the role of the ADTCs. If no data are collected on the implementation of advice and guidance across NHS boards, a patient's chances of survival could vary significantly depending on where they live and what drugs are available locally. If we are to respect clinical judgment, more credence has to be given to the patient's clinician. We want our NHS to provide optimum patient care  and advice, not to have clinicians and patients fight their way through a mass of bureaucracy.

As an experienced prescribing doctor, does Ian McKee acknowledge that many medicines and drugs are given out to patients day and daily throughout Scotland that have never been evaluated?

Will that guidance also apply to people who pay privately for treatment in another country? When they come back here, they depend on the NHS for follow-up treatment. Will that situation also be covered in the guidance?

Like other members, I pay tribute to Margo MacDonald for giving us the opportunity to discuss some of the more challenging aspects of this highly topical and controversial issue. When it comes to lottery funding, we need to focus more of our attention at the grass roots. We should be doing that irrespective of whether the Olympic and Commonwealth games are happening in the UK. In talking about grass-roots sport and the promise of two hours of PE a week taught by specialist PE teachers, I do not include the walk to school, as Maureen Watt did in her proposal. The education ministers can do more to include some reference to access to facilities in the inspection and monitoring of schools, as well as physical literacy, which we heard about when the Health and Sport Committee met at Murrayfield stadium. Scotland's champion athletes—be it Chris Hoy, Katherine Grainger, David Florence or Aileen McGlynn—would all tell us that grass-roots support launched them on their successful careers. The effort that is involved on their part and on the part of coaches, often in difficult circumstances and with tight budgets, is commendable. That was highlighted by Louise Martin, Liz McColgan, Craig Brewster, Shirley  Robertson and the Scottish Rugby Union in evidence to the Health and Sport Committee. The two key issues are undoubtedly the provision of suitable facilities and the availability of professional and amateur coaches. As Jamie Stone mentioned Caithness, I will use an example from Highland. Young competitive swimmers in Inverness have to undertake a round trip of 300 miles to practise at the nearest 50m pool, which is in Stirling. I will also use an example from Moray. The Deanshaugh playing fields in Elgin were once a hive of football activity, with three full-sized pitches accommodating school games and adult football. In November 2006, Moray Council began environmental improvement work on the pitches, which are on a former landfill site; the work was due for completion by March 2007. The council issued a press release at the time, which stated: "Once the project is completed there will be four full-sized football pitches and one seven-a-side pitch". Almost two years on from the start of the work, people are still waiting and there is no prospect of football being played at Deanshaugh in the near future. Colin Rennie of Fields in Trust Scotland said that "three out of four pitches are not fit for purpose". I acknowledge that some advances have been made, particularly in Glasgow and Edinburgh. In coaching, one of the biggest problems is probably the decline, over a number of years, in the number of people who give voluntary assistance and the decline—mainly as a result of other pressures in modern teaching—in the number of teachers who offer extra-curricular activities. Taken together, those are serious concerns, which must be addressed with immediate effect. In response to Bob Doris's question, our MP, David Mundell, has said several times that he supports the call for the £150 million in lottery funding for the Commonwealth games in exchange for the money that is being diverted to the London Olympics. When people—I include myself in this—talk about obesity, they make the assumption that only young people are obese. In fact, Nigel Don and I learned last week at a meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on obesity that the greatest prevalence of obesity is among people between the ages of 65 and 74, so let us not assume that obesity affects only young people or those under 40. The problem that we are debating is complex, but we must not shy away from addressing it. The Scottish Conservatives have developed an  outdoor education policy whereby, between primary 7 and secondary 3, every pupil would be entitled to a week's residential course in outdoor education. I know that that in itself is not the answer, but it is a contribution towards it. Greater support is needed for the voluntary sector. Volunteer Development Scotland's positive suggestion that there should be accessible and tailored training of volunteer coaches is constructive, given that 80,000 of the 90,000 sports coaches in Scotland are volunteers. Olympic medallist Rhona Martin confirmed in evidence to the Health and Sport Committee that her curling club went from 200 members to 30 after her success; Liz McColgan's club, the Hawkhill Harriers, went from 80 members to fewer than 30 following her success. Shirley Robertson confirmed that sailing training had to be done in the south-west of England; Craig Brewster spoke about all the open spaces with signs saying, "No ball games allowed"; and we have a limited number of 50m pools in Scotland. It is not a lasting legacy that we should be looking for, but a rescue package for sport in Scotland.

I will have the utmost sympathy for Scottish Borders Council when Christine Grahame turns up on its doorstep tomorrow, but I wish her well. It is not so long ago that we discussed issues for cancer sufferers relating to travel insurance, in a debate on a motion by Brian Adam. I record my support for the excellent work of Macmillan Cancer Support in health care and in addressing all the needs of patients, particularly those that cause worry, which can in turn affect patients' recovery, as Richard Simpson so eloquently said. Many people go on to live long and healthy lives following cancer treatment. We therefore need a benefits and support system that helps people through their cancer treatment and helps them get back to work, but which also addresses the needs of terminally ill people. To take a local example, patients and carers from throughout the Highlands and the Western Isles have access to independent information, advice and advocacy services, which are provided by a partnership between Inverness Citizens Advice Bureau and Macmillan Cancer Support that is based in the grounds of Raigmore hospital. I acknowledge and praise its excellent work. Macmillan has funded the project, with an  undertaking to continue to do so until December this year. Beyond that, the project hangs in the balance, as it awaits the outcome of a Big Lottery Fund bid to migrate the project to a wider remit to include other life-limiting illnesses. The partners in the lottery bid include Highlands and Western Isles citizens advice bureaux, Chest, Heart and Stroke Scotland, Arthritis Care, the Parkinson's Disease Society, Highland Hospice, the Roy Castle Lung Cancer Foundation and Macmillan Cancer Support. The existing Macmillan-CAB service also provides a one day a week drop-in advice session at Maggie's Highlands, which is situated in the grounds of Raigmore hospital. It has, since it was set up in 2004, helped 2,400 clients and secured a financial gain of £6,500, a high proportion of which is benefits, in addition to debt write-offs and grants. At present, there are on average 60 new cases a month, and Macmillan says that the contribution to the health and wellbeing of their clients is crucial. Given, however, that each person's circumstances are unique, I found the case studies in the Macmillan guide to benefits and financial help very interesting. Anyone with cancer, whether they are familiar or unfamiliar with the benefits system, would find the guide to be of tremendous help. I looked up a case study of a 48-year-old man with bowel cancer who faced a 16-week course of chemotherapy. He applied for and received disability living allowance, income support, housing benefit, council tax benefit, an income tax refund, road tax exemption and a disabled parking badge. Because he was awarded income support, he also became eligible for free prescriptions, free eyesight tests, a voucher for glasses, a full refund of fares to hospital and free NHS dental treatment. I do not imagine that many people are aware of the full range of benefits, advice and support that can be given. Even less is probably known about the help that is available for carers, and there is no doubt that the projects between Macmillan and Citizens Advice throughout Scotland are hugely beneficial to patients who are affected by cancer. The ability to deal with the financial problems frees up energy to deal with the illness. I thank Michael Matheson again for bringing the debate to the chamber and giving us the opportunity to read up, learn more and raise the issue in Parliament. I trust that the Minister for Public Health will be equally supportive.

I, too, welcome Cathy Jamieson to her new post. As the cabinet secretary said, we will no doubt disagree on many issues, but all politicians from all parties are signed up to the best interests of patients in Scotland and I am sure that we can also agree on many issues. On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I welcome the cabinet secretary's response today. I thank her for the advance copy of her statement and the various accompanying documents, which will take some time to scrutinise. I am not alone in welcoming the end of single manning. Patients and ambulance staff across the Highlands will strongly welcome the initiative to tackle an issue that I have raised for many years, often filled with the dread that one day I may be alone in the back of an ambulance while the paramedic is driving. None of us would wish for that. I welcome the fact that there will be a paramedic rather than a technician in the single-crewed fast-response vehicles, but even the most experienced paramedic needs support in some incidents to provide effective treatment and intervention. Will the cabinet secretary put more emphasis on the recording of the effectiveness of the intervention and treatment, as well as on the time that is taken for the vehicle to turn up? The cabinet secretary announced an additional £4.7 million for the Scottish Ambulance Service over this year and the next two years. Will she  clarify whether that is a total of £14.1 million, or of £4.7 million over three years? As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I ask that at least 20 of the additional 40 front-line staff be allocated to the north division to eliminate single manning. Following the previous debate on ambulances, I spent a shift with an ambulance crew in Inverness. I met someone with 27 years' service who was being handed his 20 years' service medal, which had been found at the back of a drawer. Will the Scottish Ambulance Service ensure that it values its staff as much as people in Scotland do?

We join others in sending our condolences to all the families who were affected by the outbreak of C difficile and the 18 deaths at the Vale of Leven hospital. The Scottish Conservatives agree with much of Margaret Curran's motion, and we confirm that a public inquiry is not off our agenda. Undoubtedly, serious questions remain to be addressed. However, where we differ from the Labour Party and its motion is that we support and respect due process, allowing the procurator fiscal fully to investigate the C difficile outbreak and consider what action should be taken. However, we do not rule out supporting a public inquiry at the appropriate time, following the investigations and conclusions. It may be that a fatal accident inquiry will be recommended by the procurator fiscal; it may be that civil proceedings will be taken against Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board; it may be that actions will be pursued against individuals as they are held accountable for the outbreak; and it may be that persistent failures and negligence will be identified. However, we do not wish to pre-empt the findings of the procurator fiscal, and we respect the due process of the investigation. I also hope that the findings will consider the lives that could have been saved had action been taken at the Vale of Leven hospital at the appropriate time. Given the high level of expenditure on the NHS in Scotland, it is shocking to read the litany of failures at the Vale of Leven  hospital, which many members have highlighted. The failures include: underinvestment; ineffective isolation and infection control; lack of leadership; poor facilities; poor information on hand washing and laundry; and failure to monitor antibiotic levels. It is hardly surprising that staff morale was low. All of that should be placed against the statement from Health Protection Scotland that evidence from several countries concludes that hospital-acquired infections are avoidable. Jackson Carlaw and others have made that point. I will make a couple of points that have not yet been made today. I hope that the cabinet secretary will take up the issue of an inquiry and will consider the problem in a wider context, because it exists not only in hospitals. Infections also exist in nursing homes and care homes for the elderly, and many of those patients are then transferred to hospital. I am not saying that that happened at the Vale of Leven hospital, because I am not familiar with where the patients came from, but when people are transferred they can bring infections with them. We cannot simply concentrate on infection control in hospitals; we have to be just as rigorous in nursing and care homes. I hope that, when she responds to the debate, the cabinet secretary will advise us what the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care is doing in terms of inspections and infection control. What is its role? Is it as rigorous as we hope to be in the NHS? There is no point in considering hospitals unless we consider the whole sector. Neither is the prescribing of antibiotics wholly in the domain of the hospitals. We cannot blame just the hospitals for prescribing antibiotics. Before patients go into hospital, much more needs to be done to reduce the prescribing of antibiotics. That is true for all patients, but especially the elderly. I welcome the increased use of day surgery, and I also welcome last week's report from Audit Scotland report, which concluded that more procedures could be done by day surgery. Not only would that save money and provide a less disruptive experience for the patient, but it would cut down on hospital-acquired infections, because the stay in hospital would be shorter. We are pleased that the report recommends the empowering role of the charge nurse—something that Conservatives have long called for. We support the Government's amendment today, and we may well support Labour's call for a public inquiry at an appropriate point in future, following the current investigations.

I hope that I do not make a fool of myself in public either. I put on record my utmost respect for all the crews who work our ferries around Scotland and provide a vital lifeline for businesses, families and tourists all year round. They do so in weather conditions that would bring fear and trepidation to many of us. I have even more respect for them following a 15-and-a-half-hour journey from Aberdeen to Lerwick earlier this year; like Liam McArthur, I still have not found my sea legs. The taxpayer's subsidy for ferries to the northern isles is questionable. No private business in a competitive market would continue to exist with operating costs that rose from 22 per cent in 1991 to 62 per cent in 2007. Although the Lib-Lab coalition and now the SNP Government have seemed content to throw taxpayers' money at NorthLink, Andrew Banks of Pentland Ferries is running an excellent service at a lower cost to travellers and businesses, without a penny of Government subsidy. He is buying boats and building harbours and linkspans himself. Orkney Islands Council and the Scottish Government gravely underestimated the grit and graft of the Orcadian when they presented him with every obstacle possible. However, despite them, he has succeeded; he has managed to overcome the obstacles, although Orkney Islands Council succeeded in delaying the operation of the crossing and making it cost more money. It was mainly Orcadians who set up the great Hudson's Bay Trading Company, and such enterprising initiative still exists in Pentland Ferries today. The company is helping to increase tourism to Orkney, and it allows day trips in both directions  at prices that people can afford. Like Jamie McGrigor, I am going to quote SNP councillor Roy Pedersen, who said: "While Andrew Banks was applying every ounce of his energy, enterprise and ingenuity to set up, launch and operate Pentland Ferries without any help at all from the public purse, a chain of events was unfolding at the western end of the Pentland Firth in which vast and ever vaster sums of public money were to be poured into propping up an ill-conceived rival ferry service." That was the SNP speaking. It is unusual for the SNP to acknowledge and commend private enterprise, but I commend Highland councillor Roy Pederson for doing so.

No, I have quite a lot to say. When I was preparing for this debate I lost count of the tens of millions of pounds of subsidy, but I did note that one written parliamentary answer said that a planned £29 million subsidy was increased to more than £60 million between 2002 and 2005. Not only did the new NorthLink ships cost £30 million each, they use three times the fuel of the Pentalina, run by Pentland Ferries. It is difficult to understand the retendering process in 2005 when the minister responsible for transport announced a short list of three shipping companies that were invited to bid for the northern isles ferry services—V Ships, Irish Continental Group and CalMac. As we know, CalMac was wholly owned by the Scottish Executive and a 50 per cent stakeholder in NorthLink. All other bidders were excluded on the ground of poor financial performance, but state-owned NorthLink was included although the Scottish Executive had paid out £63 million because of NorthLink's inability to meet the financial obligations of its contract. It is not surprising that the SNP—then in opposition—called for the matter to be investigated by the Auditor General. Why was NorthLink—CalMac—invited to bid although it had failed to meet the financial obligations of its contract when others were excluded on the basis of poor financial performance? I go back to my friend Roy Pederson, the SNP Highland councillor, who described the tendering process as "crass inequity, inefficiency and extravagance" in contrast to the profitable, unsubsidised Pentland Ferries. I appreciate that the SNP Government refuses to work with the private sector in health care, but I hope that it will not be so blinkered in relation to ferry services. A new, purpose-built catamaran has been ordered by Andrew Banks of Pentland  Ferries for the Gills bay to St Margaret's Hope crossing, and I hope that the SNP Government—with the unique, entrepreneurial skills of Stewart Stevenson, the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change—will take a fresh approach to the provision of a quality service, an efficient and environmentally friendly service, and a service that provides value for money for the taxpayer, by recognising the contribution of the private sector as well as the public sector provision.

Does the member acknowledge and commend the contribution of Andrew Banks and Pentland Ferries, which carries thousands of passengers every year, as well as livestock, without charging a penny to the public purse or Orkney Islands Council?

When will the counterweight programme be available to people in all health board areas?

David Cameron was warmly welcomed in the east end of Glasgow. That is more than can be said for Gordon Brown, who never even set foot in the constituency.

I welcome this debate on the obesity action plan. My colleague and I sincerely hope that the Liberal Democrats will not make the eating of Scotch pies a criminal offence in future.

Indeed. I thank the minister for attending the reception on obesity that I hosted in the garden lobby in June, which, as she said, showed that there is not just tremendous good will, commitment and interest throughout Scotland but a willingness to engage with the Parliament on the issue. I put on record Nigel Don's work in setting up the cross-party group on obesity. I understand that he has an excellent adviser in his wife, who is a nutritionist. We will support the Government's motion and the Labour Party and Liberal Democrat amendments. Although we might disagree on aspects of the implementation of the obesity action plan, we are supportive of the overall approach. As Murdo Fraser said yesterday, Scottish Conservatives will support the Government on issues that we consider are in the best interests of the people of Scotland. There is no doubt that obesity is a huge issue, so action to address it is in the best interests of people in Scotland. I am delighted that Margaret Curran remains a member of the Scottish Parliament. Although she and I might disagree on political issues, I respect her political abilities. However, I regret the motion that she lodged on the comments that were made by Andrew Lansley, the Conservatives' shadow secretary of state for health—I regret having to say that, because I am bringing in a note that is not in tune with the rest of the debate, but I have a duty to address comments that have been made in condemnation of a member of my party. Conservatives know that health is truly devolved to the party in Scotland. We take no orders from our colleagues in Westminster—I appreciate that such a principle might be difficult for the Labour Party to comprehend. The only reference to Glasgow that  Andrew Lansley made in his speech was when he said: "If spending on healthcare alone determined health outcomes, Glasgow would be the healthiest place in Britain and Wokingham the least healthy." Andrew Lansley's comments are in tune with points that members have made in this debate and the key point in the European Union white paper "A Strategy for Europe on Nutrition, Overweight and Obesity related health issues", which is: "the individual is ultimately responsible for his lifestyle, and that of his children". We agree with Margaret Curran that the Government has an enormous and crucial role to play, but Government activity can be successful only with the commitment of individuals. I suggest to Labour Party members that they respect devolution in relation to portfolios in Scotland and England and that they fully read speeches before they make ill-founded comments, particularly given that health and wealth inequalities grew during 10 years of Labour government at Westminster and Liberal-Labour coalition in Scotland.

I have taken the time to read speeches by David Cameron and Andrew Lansley, who have said nothing that is not in tune with what we are saying. Individuals need support. Members talked about the removal of cigarettes from visual displays, which might be a nudge policy, if the evidence that such an approach discourages people from smoking cigarettes stacks up. We have to be realistic. In 1996, the Scottish Conservative health minister, James Douglas-Hamilton, launched the Scottish diet action plan. Had Labour ministers pursued the recommendations in that plan, the BMA figures that other members have highlighted might have been less concerning than they are. That is without mentioning the steadily rising cost to the national health service, which is £171 million a year, and the huge rises, to which others have referred, in the incidence of type 2 diabetes and other related conditions, particularly kidney failure, which increases day by day. There is a need not just for attitudes to be changed, but for Government support and for equity of access to support and advice for weight management. As Margaret Curran said, Scotland is second only to America on obesity levels and has twice as many obese adults as Ireland. I am  sorry that Tavish Scott is not here; I do not believe the Dr Foster Research finding that Shetland has the highest level of obesity in Scotland. As a member for the Highlands and Islands, my impression is that Shetlanders take full advantage of the excellent health and fitness centres in their communities. People who seek weight management support find it difficult to know what is available through the NHS, although I appreciate that the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guidelines are being updated. Is even a school nurse trained to identify and assist children who will have obesity problems? Does a system exist for a school nurse and a health visitor to work with a family? I have found no such system. I welcome what is happening—I disagree with little—but we need to know the pathways into help and support. When—whether at nursery school or another school—does someone say, "There is a problem here. You are likely to have additional health problems in the future. We would like to help"? There is no point in helping a five-year-old or 10-year-old child unless their family is helped, which is why the health visitor is crucial.

Margaret Curran mentioned that many voluntary organisations and others throughout Scotland do sterling work. The action plan is unclear about the independent sector's role in addressing obesity and about slimming on referral from general practitioners, which has proved successful elsewhere. As Ross Finnie said, we need a single labelling system that is clearly presented and clearly understood. When I go shopping, I find it difficult to comprehend whether so many grams of sugar, salt or fat are good or bad, when the next label describes the percentage of the recommended daily allowance. I have to think whether 6 per cent is 6g and how much of my daily allowance that is. Even if people want to buy nutritious food, that is not easy. I associate myself with Ross Finnie's comments. Clear and standardised labelling on alcoholic drinks is also essential, as most people in Scotland are responsible drinkers. The Conservatives would like to hear the Government's response to our outdoor education policy, which would entitle every pupil to a week's residential course in outdoor education between primary 7 and secondary 3. We appreciate that  that would not be the answer in itself, but it would at least be an introduction to the great outdoors that it is hoped would encourage more outdoor involvement in adulthood. We hope that a future review will address that. If someone asked me how to access advice and support for weight management, I would have to say, "Visit your GP. Beyond that, the rest is uncertain." Even with an action plan and an extra spend of £40 million, what individuals are entitled to through the NHS is not entirely clear. I ask the minister to work more closely with GPs to ensure that all those who face health risks because of obesity are aware of and can access weight management services in their locality.

Given the proposal for a health bill to keep general practitioner services in the national health service, will the First Minister confirm how many GP services in Scotland are not in the NHS, why the legislation is necessary and whether he plans to extend the proposal to ban dentists from private practice? Also, why has no commitment or support been announced for outdoor education for every child in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made on reviewing the eligibility criteria for infertility treatment. (S3O-3890)

Some health boards in Scotland have an age limit of 38 while others have an age limit of 40; and some provide two cycles of treatment while others provide three. Waiting times are up to 20 months in Glasgow and up to three years in Lothian, which forces many women to fund their treatment privately. Will all those differences be addressed to give equality of access to fertility treatment across Scotland?

I am not a Rural Affairs and Environment Committee member, or even a substitute member, so I do not have the depth of knowledge that committee members have. However, I want to speak because flooding is a huge issue in the Highlands and Islands, as David Stewart just said. The Scottish Government's flood risk maps show that the local authority with the largest area that is covered by fluvial flood zones is Highland Council. The same maps highlight the fact that Western Isles Council has the largest area that is covered by one-in-200-year coastal flood zones. Of course, horrific floods occurred in Moray in 1997 and 2002. Last night, I attended Jim Hume's textiles exhibition in the garden lobby, where I spoke to Johnstons of Elgin. It is well known that that company lost £20 million in the earlier floods. Its quotations for insurance policies now run into millions. That is just one business, which has also spent huge amounts of money on preventive measures, as the cabinet secretary—who is the local MSP—knows. In Elgin alone, 650 houses and 180 commercial properties were damaged in the 2002 floods. The combined losses from 1997 and 2002 are estimated to exceed £100 million. The committee visited Elgin to take evidence from a Moray Council official and residents whose homes and businesses were severely affected by flood waters. Councils such as Moray have overwhelming public support for introducing flood prevention schemes and Moray Council has promoted four flood prevention orders—in Lhanbryde, Rothes, Forres and Elgin—for schemes whose value is  estimated to exceed £150 million. The schemes attracted only 31 objections, but legislation says that if any flood prevention order receives even one objection—no matter how minor—that will lead to a public inquiry. As we all know, public inquiries can be expensive for the local authority and can significantly delay a scheme's implementation. I hope and trust that the minister will give guidance on whether that requirement will change and whether objectors will be limited to people such as those who live in or have businesses in the area and whom flooding would affect. I will focus on the recommendations on pluvial flooding. Recommendation 9 is "that the ... Government place significantly greater emphasis on pluvial flood management in setting future objectives for Scottish Water." That point arose in Moray only two weeks ago, when it was reported that the £83 million Elgin scheme will face further delays and extra costs, because Scottish Water will not do work that the local council's flood alleviation team understood that it would do to improve the drainage system and complement measures in the scheme. Scottish Water insists that that work is outwith its remit. I listened carefully to the cabinet secretary and I understand from what he said that the proposed bill will address the lack of co-ordination. I trust that that will bring clarity to the issue that I raise and that it will be addressed further down the line. Recommendations 11 and 12, which are on funding, are also significant to Moray. Flood prevention is a top priority of Moray Council, which has allocated £40 million over the next three years to advance flood prevention schemes. However, the current estimate is that the council will face a shortfall of £23 million over those three years. More worrying is the fact that, in the longer term, the shortfall could exceed £80 million. Therefore, clarity on needs-based funding or clear criteria for prioritising funding for flood schemes, which the committee's report recommends, would be welcome. My final point is on an important issue of guidance that was given to councillors about planning applications. At a recent meeting of Moray Council's planning and regulatory committee, members were faced with contradictory advice from SEPA and the council's flood experts on two applications. Guidance was sought from the director, who suggested that the better, more up-to-date, locally based advice was from the council's own team. I understand that the SEPA advice largely rests on desk-based maps and that, worryingly, it takes no account of flood alleviation schemes that are in place or planned. I ask the minister whether authorities, such as  Moray Council, that have expert local flood teams providing advice, should still have to contend with SEPA as a statutory consultee. I ask that because if the council ignores its own flood experts, and SEPA disagrees, the application must go back to the Scottish Government, which causes more delay and further costs. I know that the cabinet secretary will understand that delay and higher costs are not what we are looking for in Moray.

First, I note from your statement that TNT has confirmed that its searches are continuing. Can you advise me what happened to the computerised tracking, which I know from personal experience TNT uses for all parcels and documents? Secondly, although there seems to be no fault on the part of the Scottish Ambulance Service, what improvements will be made as a result of the data loss that has occurred with TNT? Thirdly, I note that the statement mentions a loss claim process. Can you tell me what penalty, if any, will apply to TNT? Will the Government make a loss claim? If so, what will be the value of that claim?

The chief medical officer's advice might be not to drink alcohol during pregnancy, but I quoted advice from the NHS Health Scotland website that was given to those of us who attended a briefing by Children in Scotland earlier this week.

I am pleased to discuss Scotland's relationship with alcohol. The Scottish Conservatives have no doubt that the issue should be a priority on the political agenda. Some months ago, we addressed the drugs issue in Scotland. That debate was broader than the norm, leading to Audit Scotland's investigation into what works and the drugs strategy "The Road to Recovery". We seek an evidence base to support the proposals for the alcohol plan, following the present consultation. Alcohol is, of course, a legal substance for people over the age of 18, which often means that the intervention points become quite blurred. There is an important factor that is rarely highlighted when we consider alcohol misuse. It was brought to my attention this week that there are huge costs to the fire service, both in lives and in financial terms. Those are, of course, included in the criminal justice costs, but I was told at a meeting in Tain on Monday night that alcohol is a large contributory factor in up to 90 per cent of deaths from house fires. We think about alcohol misuse in connection with health and justice, but we should also focus attention on the fire service and what can be done there. The majority of people in Scotland drink responsibly. It should not be assumed that, if three bottles of wine are sold for the price of two, people will drink three times as much. The truth is that, for most people, the wine purchase will simply last three times longer. I highlight some of the mixed messages that were raised by children in Scotland earlier this week. One of them is the advice to pregnant women. The Government advice from Health Scotland is that drinking one or two units once or twice a week is unlikely to do any harm. I welcome the survey of the incidence of foetal alcohol syndrome, but we have to be clear about the  matter. Some will think, "If people are saying one or two units once or twice a week for nine months, well, that's probably the minimum. I can probably take a bit more." I ask the minister, in developing the strategy, to look at the websites and the advice that is given. We are told that red wine is good for the circulation, and on a recent visit to the University of Stirling, Jackson Carlaw and I were told that red wine can prevent and delay dementia as well. There are a lot of mixed messages out there.

Either we say to people, "Alcohol is dangerous, and this is the minimum amount," or we do not. Especially in the case of pregnant women, we have to be careful. That is what I was referring to. Rather than just noting the 1.5 million accident and emergency attendances, we could take advantage of people's presentation at A and E to give brief interventions of advice. That idea is mentioned in the discussion paper, and we support it. We should make such interventions available systematically and routinely throughout the national health service, with possible support and follow-up advice through NHS 24. That is one of the most sensible proposals because it addresses the issue at the time of the problem. Paragraphs 112 to 115 of the discussion paper mention designated places of safety for people who are in a drunken state. Such places have been tried and tested and there is an excellent evidence base for them. Beechwood house in Inverness and Albyn house in Aberdeen, which are run by the Church of Scotland, provide exactly the brief interventions that are needed. Any repeat visits from clients give staff the opportunity to address the persistent drinking of people who are becoming a risk to themselves and others. Annabel Goldie has raised the issue of parental support, which is much needed, particularly given that more than 19,000 referrals to the children's hearings system last year were due to a lack of parental care, and more than 4,500 of those were partly or mainly due to alcohol abuse. Investment in that area would benefit not only the current generation but future generations and the wider community. Again, we would like to know what works and we would like to see the evidence base, but we are certainly committed to progress in that area.

Gosh. I wanted to say a few words about people of different ages. The discussion paper seems to be about targeting young people, as Pauline McNeill said, but the statistics show that six times as many 40-year-olds visit their general practitioner compared with under-40s, and that nine times as many women in their early 40s visit their GP compared with younger women. In communities in the Highlands where there is a problem with drink, it tends to affect 12 to 15-year-olds and not 18 to 21-year-olds. Finally, the group I met in Tain raised what it considered to be the main issue: why people drink to excess. It had its own answers from years of experience, but one that ranked highly was the low self-esteem of many people—low confidence and a low feeling of self-worth. As that was being discussed, one lady described how she had been told at her grandson's school that he was hopeless and would not go far in life and that teachers could see no future for him. When it comes to promoting a consistent message, we need to be sure that teachers and schools are playing their part.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of her statement and for the report on health inequalities, which we broadly welcome, although it will take some time to examine the document thoroughly. The minister has given a commitment to strengthen school nursing. Will the minister confirm the SNP manifesto commitment to double the number of school nurses? I also wish to ask about the obesity action plan. Will the minister ensure that there will be equality of access to those services throughout Scotland? On mental illness and improved mental wellbeing, when will the "evidence of what works" be known? When will it be applied, as outlined in recommendation 50 in the task force report? Given that it is more difficult to identify deprived areas in the Highlands and Islands and other rural areas, how will the keep well health checks benefit people who are suffering from depression, stress and anxiety and who live in remote and rural areas?

To ask the First Minister what action is being taken following the publication of the report, "Lessons for Mental Health Care in Scotland". (S3F-914)

If the First Minister is looking for our support, he will perhaps answer my question positively. During the six years of the study, about 5,000 suicides were recorded in Scotland and 500 murders. In the Highlands, many young men who were at risk of suicide never got beyond their local general practitioner or the repeat prescriptions for antidepressants. Will the First Minister take action to improve early intervention and to shorten waiting times for people with mental health problems to ensure that they can remain in work and at home with their families, and that they receive the appropriate treatment when they need it?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to improve services for patients who have suffered a stroke. (S3O-3789)

In a recent debate on the Ambulance Service, I raised the issue of the optimum time of 90 minutes for getting a stroke patient to hospital for a scan to determine the type of stroke and to get a clinical diagnosis to provide thrombolysis treatment, if appropriate. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing replied: "all paramedics are trained to deliver thrombolysis."— [ Official Report , 22 May 2008; c 8893.]  However, the British Medical Association, the stroke unit at Raigmore hospital and Professor Wootton at last week's meeting of the Health and Sport Committee all confirmed that a stroke patient has to be scanned and seen by a card-carrying stroke physician prior to treatment. Administering thrombolysis without that could cause a catastrophic bleed. Will the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing now confirm that paramedics are not trained to deliver thrombolysis to stroke patients, to ensure that there is no misunderstanding of the situation?

Scottish Conservatives echo the condolences that the health secretary expressed to the relatives of those who have died. I thank her for the advance  copy of her statement. Jackson Carlaw and I were shocked by the findings, which are much more serious than we expected. Were the findings and recommendations of inquiries into C difficile outbreaks in England and Wales distributed to all NHS boards in Scotland? If so, what action was taken as a result? Given the previous Executive's and the current Government's policies on and priority for infection control, why did the outbreak happen? How soon will patients know that the local surveillance systems in their NHS board areas are fit for purpose? A serious confidence issue is involved. We welcome the new guidance that Health Protection Scotland is preparing, but how can we be assured that future surveillance systems and infection control procedures will be adhered to, monitored and audited and that accountability will be provided for?

I wish that I had prepared a 20-minute speech. Like Margaret Curran, I doubt whether I will need all the time that I have been allowed. It is difficult to follow such a consensual speaker, whose tales of a night out with the local constabulary I cannot compete with. As I said during the stage 1 debate, consideration of the bill has been surprisingly interesting and, of course, consensual. I thank the Health and Sport Committee’s clerks and others who supported us during that process. In my opinion, the committee, under the able convenership of Christine Grahame, did an excellent job—I would say that. [Interruption.] Jamie Stone is suitably impressed. During our scrutiny, we raised many issues that were acknowledged, addressed and discussed both at stage 2 and again today. I trust that Scotland is now as prepared as possible for any potential threat, whether it comes from severe acute respiratory syndrome, pandemic flu or sunbeds. I hope that lessons have been learned about the drafting of bills. In comparison with recent years, the legislative commitment in the third session of Parliament has been extremely light but, on legal issues, the drafting of the bill was very poor, as the Law Society of Scotland highlighted. It was embarrassing to be told by the Law Society that the bill contained incorrect references to summary applications, problematic appeals provisions and provisions that did not accurately reflect current Scottish civil procedure. That is not good enough. I hope that lessons have been learned and that such errors are not made in future. Neither parliamentary draftsmen nor MSPs should need to depend on the Law Society to correct legislation so that it reflects current Scottish civil procedure. I trust that the bill outlines clearly the responsibilities of local government and the health service in relation to any serious public health event, but the test for any bill is in its implementation. We hope that its more serious measures, such as those to do with quarantining, will not need to be used very often. At this week’s meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on mental health, at which Richard Simpson and I were present, a representative of the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland raised a number of points, one of which is pertinent to today’s proceedings. A lack of knowledge of mental health legislation among various professionals and organisations was identified. That is worrying because knowledge of mental health legislation is required and used on a daily basis across Scotland to ensure that people are treated and cared for in line with the principles of the legislation and the understanding of it that MSPs had when they passed it. Given that many of the powers, duties and responsibilities in the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill will not be enforced on a daily or weekly basis, and perhaps not even on a weekly or yearly basis, there is even more need to ensure that all health, local government, legal and other stakeholders are fully informed of the impact and implementation of the legislation. In my opinion, passing a bill in Parliament is not the end of the process, although it may be the end of the process for us; it should be a catalyst for further training, awareness raising and enhanced communications. How often do people come and tell us that agencies out there do not even talk to each other, work together or share information? All of that is essential to ensure that the eventual act is implemented with the same good will with which we are passing the bill today, and that public health threats are responded to in the manner that is intended and outlined—I am trying to speak as slowly as I can—in the bill. On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I am very pleased to support the bill.

Members will not need to reject amendment 29, because I have decided to ask to withdraw it.  Amendment 29, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendment 30 not moved.

Amendment 29 would delete the word "civil" from section 76(4). I am reliably informed that the term "civil debt" is not a term of art in Scots law and should be amended. Amendment 30 would allow a person who has received a notice of expenses to appeal to the court against the local authority’s notice in respect of the amount sought or the instalments proposed. The reason for the amendment is that section 76 entitles local authorities to recover expenses for work done under part 5, but there is no provision in section 76 for review. The amendment would remedy that deficiency. Amendment 30 has two main advantages. First, it would make it clear that the sheriff can decide what is reasonable in terms of recoverable expenses. Secondly, by providing for summary application procedure, it would provide one procedure with one set of appeal rights. I move amendment 29.

I clarify for the minister that I neither implied nor said that any GP would refuse to give notification of a disease on the basis of not receiving a £3.50 fee—that is the minister’s interpretation, not the BMA’s, the GPs’ or mine. Nor am I suggesting renegotiation of the GP contract. On the drafting issue, I received information at lunch time from a member of your office, Presiding Officer, and from the Health and Sport Committee clerk, that the bill contains order-making powers, so the point that the minister made about that should not be an issue. I see that the Minister for Parliamentary Business is shaking his head. I am not a legal draftsman, so I do not know whether I have been given the right or wrong information, which puts me in a difficult situation. I was referred to section 108(2). However, I intend to press amendment 1.

The purpose of amendment 1 is to ensure the on-going co-operation and support of registered medical practitioners in implementing the bill by providing help to meet the costs of undertaking notification. The current fee system allows for payment, to doctors working in all specialties, for reporting notifiable diseases, but the bill will remove such payments. In order to ensure effective reporting of notifiable diseases, however, general practitioner practices need robust systems, which require resources that are not currently provided under the new general medical services contract. A number of fees are currently paid to GPs—for example, the fee for a secondary examination for compulsory treatment orders under the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984. Such fees recognise the additional work associated with the responsibility for carrying out a particular duty. The principle behind the new contract is that any additional services outwith the core contract should be fully funded.  Nothing has been removed from the notification scheme that would justify the removal of the fee previously paid to GPs. Indeed, the proposals in the bill appear to increase the requirement for GP notification and, of course, failure to notify would be breaking the law. The national health service has always depended on the good will and dedication of staff. At a time when GP morale is fragile, it would be particularly detrimental to remove that fee. I suggest that the matter should be negotiated between the Government and the Scottish general practitioners committee. The Government papers state that amendment 1 would require consequential amendments and that order-making powers are needed to retain the fee paid to general practitioners for notification of a disease. I was not advised of any problems relating to the amendment at any stage following lodging. The issue has come to light only because we have been given copies of the Government’s papers on the purpose and effect of stage 3 amendments. Amendment 1 would retain the current position, so no parliamentary approval would be required. It says in the minister’s papers that there are no order-making powers in the bill. However, order-making powers are set out in section 108(2).  I lodged amendment 1 in good faith. I am not a parliamentary draftsman, so I would expect problems to do with an amendment that I lodged to be highlighted by the minister, the bill team or other officials. Presiding Officer, will you consider the support and advice that is available to members of the Scottish Parliament who lodge amendments in good faith? Members are not given the legal advice and support that would assist them in the democratic process. Surely all amendments are of equal value and every member should receive equal advice and support when they lodge an amendment, whether or not other members intend to vote against it. There is a principle of equity in that regard. I ask Labour and Liberal members to support amendment 1, not just so that the £3.50 fee to GPs will continue, but on the basis that all MSPs deserve equal support and advice in the parliamentary process. I move amendment 1.

Margaret Curran talked about Western Isles NHS Board. On behalf of all of us and for the sake of NHS staff and patients in the Western Isles, I hope that people there can now look forward to a period of stability. I commend all those who contributed to the excellent report on remote and rural health care. Urban models, such as that for allocating funding under the NRAC formula, are all too often inappropriate to rural health care, particularly given that, for example, the out-of-hours service in the Highlands costs five times more than that in Glasgow. We are minded to support the Liberal amendment, but we would like to hear more. We will decide whether to support the Labour amendment after hearing more speeches. The report highlights well the differences of remote and rural areas, such as the higher suicide rates, higher incidence of alcohol-related disease, higher number of accidents on roads and through climbing, farming, diving and fishing, and the  palliative care workload, which the cabinet secretary mentioned. I pay tribute to the excellent work of Marie Curie Cancer Care and Macmillan Cancer Support nurses in the Highlands, where many people choose to die in their own homes and localities. The proposed integrated teams that would be based in GP practices and the potential increase in mobile diagnostic facilities for aneurysm, breast and osteoporosis screening are good news for locally delivered health care. My colleagues throughout Scotland tell me that GPs in remote and rural areas are asking for the flexibility to do what meets the needs of patients in their localities, rather than be forced to follow centrally prescribed agendas. I will leave the matter there—that debate is for another day. It is worrying to read in the report that the workforce in remote and rural areas "is ageing and organised"— if "organised" is the right word— "in a fragmented and reactive way." We have heard about integration, partnership working and seamless care for many years. The situation has improved, but there is still a long way to go to put the patient at the heart of the service. The role of allied health professionals is not entirely clear. Given the 18-week target for referral to a consultant, it is possible to see a consultant long before one can see a podiatrist or a physiotherapist. Waits for psychiatry and psychology services, particularly in the Highlands, are very long and just as difficult. The role of community and rural general hospitals is critical to the model of care: my colleague Murdo Fraser will say more about community hospitals. I will concentrate on two issues: mental health services and the Scottish Ambulance Service, although I have scored out quite a lot of what I planned to say about the Ambulance Service because of yesterday's statement. I commend NHS 24 for developing cognitive behavioural therapy in the islands. That is an excellent example of the delivery of high-quality professional care and support over the telephone to meet the needs of patients in isolated areas. It is disappointing that NHS Highland has not provided the small amount that is needed to fund the Depression Alliance Scotland self-help group in Inverness. When people take the initiative and the time to understand and address their mental health problems, surely we should encourage that. The report concluded that consistent difficulties were experienced in managing patients with mental health crises, especially out of hours. Early  diagnosis and intervention are as essential in rural areas as they are elsewhere—for example, to prevent mild depression from becoming severe and chronic. However, there is no doubt that community hospitals could be enhanced to deal with mental health and various other issues, as outlined on page 18 of the report. Although an inquiry is being carried out into the management of the Scottish Ambulance Service, we cannot ignore the substantial part of the report on that service, or the fact that many aspects of patient care are dependent on it. I will move my amendment, although I appreciate that many of the issues were addressed in yesterday's ministerial statement on the Scottish Ambulance Service. To give some examples of the issues, there is a lack of an integrated response, delays occur in accessing health care, little or no planning or co-ordination takes place within agencies, and there is a fragmented approach in which there is duplication and inefficient use of resources. The report asks for a nationally co-ordinated response and suggests that the service be "more embedded in the NHS Territorial Boards". A merger of the Scottish Ambulance Service with NHS boards is not our policy or something that we have discussed but, in the current circumstances and with the serious issues relating to patient care, the suggestion is undoubtedly worthy of further consideration. I hope that the Government inquiry into the Scottish Ambulance Service considers not only what is happening in the service, but how the service works in partnership with other agencies. I cannot say much about the target on responding to 999 calls, given that the data collection is questionable. I simply point out that there is a target to respond to 63 per cent of calls within eight minutes, although people in Bettyhill have a 1 per cent chance of seeing an ambulance in that time. Page 51 of the report comments on support workers. I am not sure who the new generic support workers are, but the Conservative party welcomes support for young families from all backgrounds. However, my understanding is that a support worker is not a registered nurse and does not have the training and experience of a health visitor. Health visitors are paid at band 6 or 7, but support workers are paid at band 3 or 4, yet they are expected to support individuals with self-care, to carry out health promotion work, to manage chronic conditions, to prevent unnecessary hospital admissions, to support young families and to screen people who are over 75. Although all health professionals have a role, we do not want support workers to be expected to do the work of health visitors but at a significantly lower salary.  I move amendment S3M-2056.1, to insert at end: "further notes the concerns raised regarding the provision of ambulance services, and asks the Scottish Government to ensure that those living in rural communities are not disadvantaged."

I welcome the opportunity to debate the national health service in its 60 th year, and I congratulate Bill Butler on the motion that he has lodged for debate. It is always good to be reminded of mistakes that were made 60 years ago—doing so serves to remind us just how far we have come. A system that strives for equal access to health care is not a dream of socialism. I want to make clear my party's support for the NHS and the equity of treatment that it provides. Conservatives acknowledge and respect fully the institution that is the NHS. I pay tribute to the excellent work of NHS staff, who have for the past 60 years provided a service to each and every one of us in Scotland. However, the NHS is not just about nurses and doctors—Christine Grahame will not be surprised to hear me mention allied health professionals such as physiotherapists and podiatrists. David Whitton mentioned them, although they are often forgotten when we praise the NHS. As we celebrate the NHS's 60 th anniversary, I want to consider the differences between when the NHS was formed in the late 1940s and today, in 2008, because they are different times and eras. In 1948, penicillin had been on the market for only three years, whereas now it is widely available. As Bill Butler said, the greatest threats to health in the 1940s were the big epidemics such as diphtheria, whooping cough and measles. Now, we face new public health threats that would have been alien to the founders of the NHS six decades ago, such as obesity and widespread drug abuse. People are aware of the dangers but do not always try to avoid them, which is the opposite of the 1940s, when people tried to avoid the epidemics. Because of huge advances in immunology, we do not live with the threat of those diseases. Much progress has also been made in areas such as organ transplants, in vitro fertilisation, anaesthesia, antibiotics and surgery and the potential in genetics, nanotechnology and robotics is unlimited. The 21 st century will undoubtedly be one of the most exciting times in the history of medical science, although there will be questioning and challenging debates, as happened at Westminster a couple of weeks ago. I referred to how personal choices affect our health. We cannot rely on advances in medical science to save us from our decisions. We can do more for ourselves by staying in shape, taking more exercise, avoiding toxins and eating and drinking in moderation. We need to look after ourselves more proactively and not just reactively when problems occur.  Nowadays, doctors are often seen as special advisers who engage with patients on complex choices about medical care or changes to lifestyle. In the 1940s, a visit to the doctor happened only when a person was extremely ill. As with all aspects of life, the internet now plays its part: a patient can check the doctor's diagnosis and is presented with a bank of knowledge. Patients in the 1940s did not have that tool. Today, patients are much more ready to challenge doctors—rightly or wrongly. I agree with much in Bill Butler's motion. We should acknowledge that the national health service has achieved much in the past 60 years, and look forward to what it will deliver in the next 60 years. We want a service that is focused on outcomes rather than on process targets because a focus on outcomes would result in an evidence-based health policy that would deliver not only equity, but excellence and value for taxpayers' money.

This has been a good debate on one of the most important issues, which affects many people throughout Scotland. Conservatives made the commitment to choice, abstinence, recovery and re-engagement in our manifesto and we are pleased to honour that commitment by supporting the strategy. As Annabel Goldie said, we are moving to solving the problem and not just managing it. The move to open-mindedness about what works is welcome. We also welcome the choice along the road to recovery, which should be for patients and clinicians and not for politicians. Labour's amendment is premature. The Conservatives called for Audit Scotland's investigation. As the Health and Sport Committee knows, until we know where the money is going and how effective that spend is, spending more on justice and health matters—as Labour requests—would be unwise. More might need to be spent on education to address the truancy link, for example.  The fact that every £1 that is spent on recovery results in a saving of £9.50 on other services was well costed in our manifesto, but the benefit of a parent, son or daughter returning to their family cannot be measured financially. There have been mixed messages on drugs—particularly on cannabis—from the Westminster Government. That has not been helpful. Cannabis is the most commonly used illegal drug in Scotland; cocaine is the next most commonly used; and ecstasy is the third most commonly used. I raise the issue because recreational drug use today can become problematic drug use tomorrow. Neither cannabis nor cocaine users are included in the estimated 52,000 problem drug users, but there is no doubt that the detox and rehab facilities and prevention strategies that we are considering will need to take into account the proliferation of what are known as recreational drugs in the future. I am not implying that everyone who uses those drugs will become a problem drug user, but some will. Poly drug use alongside the consumption of alcohol is a serious issue that cannot be ignored in the debate. Much has been said about children who are affected by drug-addicted parents. There are up to 60,000 such children in Scotland. I hope that the minister will ensure that any cutbacks in local government funding to voluntary groups will not prevent young carers groups from being adequately and appropriately funded. As Jamie Stone knows, there is a particularly excellent group in Golspie; there are also excellent young carers groups in many other villages and towns in Scotland, with child carers for people with a cross-section of diseases and parents with addictions. As Johann Lamont said, the responsibility on those young children should be underestimated. I am concerned about the minister's confidence—if that is the right word—in alcohol and drug action teams delivering such an important drugs strategy. As members have mentioned, the stocktake of ADATs concluded that although many had done excellent work, there were serious shortcomings in many of them, and that clarity about their remit and function was needed. The Health and Sport Committee was even told in evidence that their accountability is not clear, and it was alleged that they are not empowered to do the job that they should be doing. I hope that the minister will look closely at the delivery of the strategy through ADATs. My main concern about "The Road to Recovery" relates to the desperate need for dual diagnosis—the need for detox and rehab services to address people's mental health issues as well as their addictions. That is critical, given that an estimated 42 per cent of drug addicts have mental health problems. Those problems may be the result of  their taking drugs, but they could also be the underlying cause of their taking drugs, which may be a form of self-medication. Whatever the cause and effect, it seems that there is no point in treating a person's addiction unless services are also in place to address their mental health problems. That said, the Scottish drug services directory does not offer an option to search for mental health treatment, and the Scottish Government has confirmed that it does not have a list of dual diagnosis facilities and that it has not produced such a list. I ask the minister to consider that matter. Finally, paragraph 98 on page 27 of "The Road to Recovery" mentions "a strong association between unemployment and poor mental health." Even if a person successfully comes through detox and rehab, their mental health problem will be an obstacle to employment. I ask the minister to ensure that the issues that I have raised are addressed.

I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for a copy of her statement and I place on record the Conservatives' recognition of the excellent work that ambulance crews and staff do. I acknowledge the Government's commitment to the serious issues that were outlined in the statement and which have been raised previously by MSPs of different parties. I am also pleased that single manning is being dealt with and that the Ambulance Service is being listened to as it expresses its concerns for the people whom it serves. Will the health secretary consider opportunities to train to paramedic level the ambulance technicians whose salaries were cut by £3,000 a year as a result of agenda for change? On the independent evaluation of the front-loaded model, will she now properly consult the staff members who have serious reservations about the model but who have felt unable to express their opinions on service changes for fear of repercussions from senior management? I thank her courteously for the letter that I received from her last week and the explanation that she gave today on the traffic light system, which I raised last week. I suggest that she should ensure that local ambulance services keep MSPs fully informed of change. That is crucial, particularly given that three meetings that Highland MSPs were to have with the Scottish Ambulance Service in recent months have been cancelled and August or September has been suggested for a replacement date.

Given the fact that respite care is not mentioned specifically in Highland Council's single outcome agreements but appears in another document that has a primary focus on older people, can the minister advise members how we can scrutinise the single outcome agreements to ensure that, over the next three years, the additional 10,000 weeks of respite care that the SNP Government has promised are delivered?

How will the drugs strategy be integrated across Government departments and local agencies, not only to ensure that people break their addiction, but to enable them to get back into education, training and employment and to help them with housing? Housing is an enormous problem for those who come through the system in Inverness. Many people with a drug problem also have an underlying mental health problem. How will the minister ensure that people are treated for their mental health issues at the same time as they receive treatment for their drug addiction?

I thank and commend the Labour Party for choosing to debate the Scottish Ambulance Service and fully support Margaret Curran's call for a full debate. I also join members in praising the excellent work that the Scottish Ambulance Service does. The key starting point for the debate is the 12 per cent increase in demand for the ambulance service year on year, which Audit Scotland has confirmed. That increase is the result of NHS 24 referrals and more people using the service out of hours to access health care. One would expect an increase in supply to match such increased demand, but it appears that the opposite is the case; it appears that demand has increased and supply has decreased. The cabinet secretary will know that in the Highlands—particularly in Sutherland—there is regular single manning of vehicles in response to category A calls. A local member of staff in the ambulance service in the Highlands recently offered to do some overtime work, but he was told that such work could be done only at red stations. That was the first time that he and his colleagues had heard about the new coding of red, amber and green stations for manning. So much for ambulance management communications. Staff did not even know about that. Problems with the ambulance service are not confined to the Highlands. My colleague John Scott has made me aware of serious concerns in the NHS Ayrshire and Arran area. I have been led to believe that between 40 and 70 ambulances in Scotland are being taken off the road to be replaced by what is known as a front-loading model—I think that that means that a single paramedic will respond to an incident, and will see and treat at the scene, which should mean that there will be fewer admissions to hospitals. I commend the work that paramedics do, but it is surely unfair to expect them to have the diagnostic and treatment skills of a general practitioner who has taken nine years to train for their profession.  Last week, NHS Highland briefed MSPs on treatments for the two types of stroke. We were told that there is an optimum time within which thrombolysis must be given and also that the diagnosis and treatment of strokes can be made only on the basis of a clinician's judgment—I understand that strokes are not easy to diagnose. That example illustrates the fact that single manning, seeing and treating at the scene and aiming for fewer admissions to hospitals are not appropriate in all emergency call-outs. In the recent Scottish Ambulance Service annual review, the cabinet secretary stated: "For those cases which required thrombolysis, the average ... time was 43 minutes", which is well below the 90 minutes optimum time. How many patients who would have benefited from that intervention did not reach the hospital in time, did not meet a stroke physician for diagnosis or were deemed not unwell enough to be taken to hospital? The Scottish health council's annual report concluded that "little or no progress" had been made by the service in evaluating patient focus and public involvement activity. I have much to say, but little time in which to say it; I will therefore move on to the final points that I want to make. Audit Scotland reported that the Scottish Ambulance Service had missed its performance targets. I listened carefully to the cabinet secretary, but did not hear much about the service's improved performance in recent months. We like the Labour Party's motion and again thank it for this debate. However, we are unsure about immediate independent scrutiny and whether that was proposed on the basis that there should be a major service change. On the Government's amendment, ministers should not tell the Health and Sport Committee what to do. However, we like the bit in the middle. We support and fully agree with the Liberals' amendment.

We, too, will support the motion and the amendments. Concerns about hepatitis C have been raised in the Parliament since 1999, by Brian Adam and by many others. Although the previous Administration is to be commended for its commitment to the phase I action plan and the achievement of 40 out of 41 of the plan's action points, there is no doubt that much remains to be done, particularly in the light of the statistic that 50,000 persons in Scotland are estimated to be infected with the hep C virus and that 38,000 are chronic carriers. When I read the hep C action plan, I noted in particular the evidence base, the actions to be taken and the outcomes as well as the reviews, audits and monitoring systems, which we agree are essential to ensure that there is a targeted and focused approach. The evidence base that underpins the action plan is shocking and it aptly illustrates the fact that co-ordinated action is needed for diagnosis, treatment and support. Other members have raised some of the points that are made in the phase II action plan, which states: "The training of the Hepatitis workforce is substandard."  It also states: "There is a lack of integration among primary care, specialist, addiction, prison and social care services". How often have we heard that? As the minister said, the plan points out that "Insufficient numbers of infected persons" are given antiviral treatment. As Richard Simpson and others have said, the plan refers to variations "among laboratories in the way they test for Hepatitis C and report results to clinicians". In addition: "More than half of Scotland's main Hepatitis C treatment centres have no outward referral links with mental health and addiction services and only one-quarter have outward referral links with social care services." Furthermore: "Approximately 95% of GPs in Scotland did not diagnose a single case of Hepatitis C during 2006." I have mentioned but a few of the evidence-based issues. That is all against the background that approximately 50 per cent of newly diagnosed infected persons who are referred to a specialist clinic fail to attend their appointments. We have no doubt that action is needed. How does today's hep C action plan fit in with the drug strategy that will be announced next week by Fergus Ewing? In the Health and Sport Committee's short scrutiny of the budget, we raised many concerns about drug and alcohol detoxification and rehabilitation interventions and treatments. The picture that was painted is similar to much of the background information in the hep C evidence base. There is a lack of co-ordination; lack of knowledge about which interventions are most effective; lack of knowledge about investment in relation to outcomes; and a distinct lack of a joined-up service throughout Scotland, although there were undoubtedly areas of good practice. In respect of integration, I am pleased to note that the action plan includes mental health services. I appreciate that there are many answers to the question why people take illegal drugs, but there is no doubt that for some people drug-taking is a form of self-medication for issues that should ideally be addressed in a mental health setting in which they can be given the appropriate support and treatment. If we expect people to stop injecting and spreading the virus, we need to provide them with the appropriate mental health support, at the appropriate time, in the appropriate place. My other concern relates to the NHS QIS standards for hep C testing and treatment, care and social support for persons with hep C infection. The standards are welcome, but I was  surprised to learn that they are not due to be developed until 2010, one year before the end of the phase II action plan period. I am concerned that the integrated and co-ordinated approach for which all of us hope may not be achieved until the NHS QIS standards and guidelines are set out. I hope that the next two years will not see more of the muddled and ad hoc approach of the past and that actions will not be delayed until standards have been published. Given the crucial need for an integrated approach between the NHS, social services, primary care, the voluntary sector, mental health services and secondary care, it is interesting to note that each local authority will identify a strategic and operational lead for hep C infection and that each health board will have a hep C prevention lead person. I accept that the monitoring that will be put in place will produce robust data, as the minister said, but I am not sure what will be the lead organisation or authority with responsibility for co-ordinating all services, to ensure that the user does not fall through the net, as happened in the past. Scottish Conservatives welcome the publication of the action plan, but we have concerns about the inclusion and integration of all stakeholders, in order to put the patient first. It is fair to say that injecting drug users are not the most compliant patient group. For the action plan to be effective, it must, first and foremost, be tightly co-ordinated with the patient's needs.

Will the restrictions on displays at the point of sale apply equally to supermarkets and small shops? Will there be a consequential increase in the number of trading standards officers and school nurses?

We welcome this debate on free personal and nursing care, which is often referred to as the flagship policy of the Scottish Parliament's first session. In moving the Conservative amendment, I confirm that it has nothing to do with blame but everything to do with fairness. We seek the support of MSPs across the chamber to ensure that there is no postcode lottery in relation to funding or payments in different local authorities in Scotland. It is neither fair nor equitable for elderly people to pay for assistance with food preparation in eight council areas while the service is free in the remaining council areas. My colleague David McLetchie will speak in more detail on that issue. I pay tribute to the Presiding Officer—I wanted the opportunity to use the word "you", but Alex Fergusson is not in the chair—for the sterling work that he has done in supporting his constituents in successfully challenging Dumfries and Galloway Council to overturn its policy of charging for food preparation. The £40 million to address the funding shortfall that Stewart Sutherland identified is welcome. However, I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that the monitoring of the new single outcome agreements ensures that that money is allocated to the care of the elderly. Another issue that I want to raise is the higher funding that is provided to people in council-run homes in comparison with the funding that is provided to those in homes in the independent and voluntary sector. I note the report's reference to the positive work that is being done by the Government and COSLA. I hope that the end result of that is that all elderly people who are eligible for free personal care are treated fairly and equitably. It cannot be right that councils pay a higher amount to residents in council-run homes than they pay to those in homes in the independent and voluntary sectors, given that all care homes are expected to achieve the same  care commission quality standards. On the issue of direct payments, still not enough elderly people or their carers are aware of the scheme. Direct payments offer people freedom and choice of care package as well as the independence to ensure that care is given in accordance with the assessment, rather than the monopoly of council-only care provision. For many people throughout Scotland, the care provided by councils is first class—the time promised is the time given—but in many instances that is simply not the case. We seek more choice. I make no apologies for repeating my next point on integrated care homes. When the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill passed through its various parliamentary stages, we were given to understand that every care home would have nursing input. That might mean a nurse on duty 24/7 or a visit by a district nurse as and when required. When a frail elderly person's condition deteriorated, a move to a nursing home was not to be necessary for the person to receive the appropriate end-of-life care. However, somewhere between the bill's parliamentary stages, the care commission, guidance and the bill's implementation, we ended up with not one type of care home but three: residential care homes, nursing homes and integrated care homes. Only in integrated care homes will elderly people receive care that ranges from that found in residential care homes to that found in nursing homes. As a result, elderly people are now being kept in residential care homes when they need nursing care. Before the expansion in the number of care homes, frail elderly people were treated in NHS hospitals for their end-of-life care, with the appropriate medical and nursing input. What we have now is a lesser service, with less nursing and medical input in end-of-life care. The selling of the family home to pay for care also needs to be examined. I had a recent case—two or three years ago—in which a 50-year-old woman who had lived with her mother all her life and cared for her at home was faced with having to sell her home or take out a mortgage to buy out her mother's share in order to pay for care. I trust that that issue will be examined along with the other financial points that Lord Sutherland raised. Jackson Carlaw will discuss future needs in relation to demographic policy, which is an absolutely crucial issue that Margaret Curran spoke about well. I found the figures in Lord Sutherland's report quite shocking. Over the past five years, from 2002 to 2007, the average increase in the number of publicly funded older people receiving care at home was 51 per cent. The increases ranged from 0.1 per cent in Dumfries and Galloway to 212 per cent in Perth and Kinross.  I never miss an opportunity to talk about podiatry. Elderly people would undoubtedly be more mobile and less likely to need care in the early stages if they had greater access to chiropody, which is now called podiatry. I am not talking about getting someone to cut toenails; I am talking about ensuring access to a qualified podiatrist, where appropriate, who would provide high-quality foot care advice and ensure that people had greater mobility. We will support the Government in its pursuit of fair and equitable care for the elderly and in addressing the issues raised in the Sutherland report. However, we will not support the Scottish National Party motion, mainly because it contains the phrase "pursue vigorously", which, in nationalist speak, tends to mean having a big rammy or a big constitutional wrangle with Westminster. We will support the considered Labour amendment, not only because of the content but because of the tone. The amendment calls on the Scottish Government "to enter into discussions" with Westminster. We would always prefer that the issue of the care of the elderly was examined in a mature and dignified manner and that elderly people were put first and foremost, rather than being used as pawns in a constitutional wrangle. I move amendment S3M-1902.1, to insert at end: "and calls on the eight Scottish councils which continue to charge for assisting with food preparation to cease to do so forthwith and all councils which have levied such charges to refund everyone who has been wrongly charged for this service."

I apologise for having to leave before the minister sums up; I will read the Official Report . I congratulate my colleague Nanette Milne on securing the debate and on her interest over many years in the issue. Her use of the DynaVox was moving and was probably the best way to hit home on what we are talking about. As Cathy Jamieson said, there is no doubt that we all take for granted the ability to speak. A document that the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists provided contained touching quotations from AAC system users. A young child who had been given the ability to engage with classmates said: "I can take part in school activities and discussions". How simple is that? A 46-year-old said, "My communication aid gives me a voice." Those statements are simple, but they hit home. It is unfortunate that such comments can come from only 16 per cent of potential AAC system users. As Nanette Milne and others said, we have a postcode lottery. The briefing paper surveys current service provision. The overall rating of NHS Highland's service is good. It has a funding procedure in place and a defined budget for AAC services. That is wonderful. However, the service in the neighbouring Western Isles has an overall rating of poor—that area has no funding procedure in place and no defined budget for AAC services. Constituents who live in those areas receive a vastly different service and experience a different quality of life as a result. As Nanette Milne said, an AAC strategy for Scotland would be a positive way forward to ensure consistency and to set minimum standards for the service. The strategy could cover pooling of  budgets from local authority education and social work departments and health services. That would not only maximise resources and streamline delivery but prevent potential users from being denied an AAC system because, for example, as they are close to the school-leaving age, the education budget will not give them funding. Mobility issues can entitle people to a wheelchair, as Trish Godman said, or to a walking stick, but people have no such entitlement to assistance for communication problems. As Richard Simpson said, it is tragic that although we have the technology to aid communication, as we have seen, only 16 per cent of those who could benefit do so. We must move away from the current situation in which the AAC provision that a person receives is determined by the health board area in which they live or by other factors, such as their age, their medical problem or their ability to pay, which Kenny Gibson mentioned. In some areas, users must fund their communication aids, whereas other users choose to do that because of the time that statutory agencies take to make decisions. That situation must not continue. I hope that Nanette Milne's voice will be listened to and I commend her for raising the issue in the Parliament and for all her hard work to ensure that people without a voice are heard.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of her statement. Scottish Conservatives welcome the on-going discussions on attendance allowance, the recognition of the need for further clarity on eligibility and the funding of the policy, and the commitment to address the funding shortfall of £40 million. The review is mainly about funding. Will the Government now ensure that councils pay the same amount to the independent and voluntary sector as they pay when someone is placed in a council-run home, given that the same quality standards apply? Secondly, with so much confusion over the policy, how does the Government intend to improve public information and understanding, as recommended by Lord Sutherland? Thirdly, in looking at the future provision, will the Government revisit the issue of integrated care homes? When the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 was passed, the Health and Community Care Committee understood that the issue would be revisited, to ensure that elderly people did not have to move from residential to nursing care when their condition deteriorated. Finally, what is being done to increase the uptake of direct payments for care?

I welcome the new NHS 24 service that offers psychological support, using cognitive behavioural therapy, to people with low moods and depression in Orkney. How will that initiative be audited? Does the cabinet secretary have any plans to roll it out to other rural and island areas, as I hope she will?

As members have said, housing is one of the most important issues that Scotland faces. We support speeding up the planning system for housing, the shared ownership scheme and having more rural homes for rent. It is also right that the Government works with the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association and community groups to utilise potential homes more fully by bringing properties up to standard. However, there is no doubt at all that stock transfer has the potential to transform social housing in Scotland. To be honest, stock transfer is the only game in town. It is unfortunate for tenants in Scotland that the Government does not support it. We must not only consider the costs of building new homes; we must also increase our focus on energy efficiency to ensure that homes are cheaper to live in. It is all very well for people to get affordable homes, but if they cannot afford to live in them there is little point in having them. As Shelter has said, 6,000 families are evicted from their homes every year. We can be sure that a percentage of those families were unable to pay utility bills and other bills. Better insulation and energy efficiency could address that problem. Many families are evicted as a result of the lack of support to get people back into training and employment. In fact, when many people get a  house, they lose contact with support systems and fall back into old ways. In the past 10 years, the number of people in temporary accommodation has doubled, and the number of households living in bed and breakfast accommodation has more than quadrupled. The current economic conditions are leading to even greater difficulties for first-time buyers. In Scotland, the average age of first-time buyers is 37. As David McLetchie said, the stock transfer policy is a means of addressing the housing shortage in Scotland. It is a means of not only writing off debt but refurbishing existing homes and building new ones. I remind the minister that, thanks to the Conservatives' policy, which Labour supported, more than 300,000 families in Scotland exercised their democratic right to buy the home in which they lived. In 2006, tenants in the Highlands voted on housing stock transfer. Not only would transfer have wiped out the £153 million council housing debt, there would have been money for new homes. One of the major incentives to vote for the housing stock transfer was that 41p in every pound of rent that was paid to the council went towards paying off the debt. That situation is unsustainable in the current economic conditions, because less money is available to invest in properties. We can look towards a deteriorating housing stock in future. There were additional benefits. The housing stock transfer would have guaranteed rent rises of no more than the rate of inflation for five years, and in the following five years rents would have risen by only 0.5 per cent above inflation, and probably by less than that. There would have been even more tenant control and improved repairs and services. Tenants would undoubtedly have been far better off. I support the motion in the name of David McLetchie. My experiences are from the Highlands, but it is no surprise to me that a motion has been lodged that states: "That the Parliament regrets the failure of the Scottish Government to actively pursue and promote housing stock transfer by local authorities". Highland Council has one of the largest housing debts in Scotland. Things could have been different if the party in government, supported by the Scottish socialists, had not carried out their concerted campaign. Quick action needs to be taken to address housing problems. I urge the Government to have a rethink, and to work with the stock transfer moneys and housing associations to benefit tenants in Scotland.

I will do my best to be courteous, as usual. I commend the work of the Local Government and Communities Committee in compiling its report into the planning application process for the Menie estate. The Government may not welcome the report into the Trump development, but we can be sure that if it was Labour, the Liberal Democrats or the Conservatives who were allegedly indulging, manipulating and interfering in the planning process, the SNP would be first in the queue for—at the very least—a committee inquiry and report to Parliament. The Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 reviewed existing legislation and, just as important, set out a new culture and approach to the planning process. While many aspects of the act are not yet in force, there is still plenty of scope for all of us to change our approach to planning, for example by moving to consensual working and away from the adversarial approach of the past; by moving to upfront, positive and proactive consultation rather than reactive, niggling and negative consultation; by making local authorities an attractive place for newly qualified planners; and by ensuring that every development plan in the country is up to date. It is the responsibility of every elected member and councillor to adhere to and support the 2006 act and the forthcoming guidelines. Like other members, I have been critical of supermarkets and wind farms. In a democratic country, we can express our views on those matters. The structures and processes are in place for an open, accountable and impartial planning system in this country. Scotland has a commitment to enterprise. This might be the time to remind developers that Scotland is the birthplace of enterprise and the free market. The division of labour, comparative advantage, the natural order, and truck, barter and exchange were all written about here in Scotland in 1776, in Adam Smith's "An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations". We do not need lectures on enterprise, planning or the democratic system of local and national Government. All that that leaves is trust in the process. The ministers met the developers but did not meet "all parties with an interest in the decision", as is clearly stated in the Scottish ministerial code. As paragraph 93 of the committee report says, "The Chief Planner told the Committee that the circumstances of the application were 'one in a million.'" He was not speaking about Donald Trump's chances.

I wish to correct Mr Neil. I said that the minister did not meet "all parties with an interest in the decision". That is clearly stated in the ministerial code. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth gave different reasons for the call-in. It seems clear that the call-in by ministers was not only based on the refusal by the council; it was more to do with the desire to take credit for the development. A more constructive approach by the Scottish Government would have been to make the conduct of the appeals process known to the Trump Organization and to explain "how this would not necessarily be any longer or more expensive than a call-in process". That is acknowledged by the committee in paragraph 175. I support the committee's view that "The appeal mechanism provides the checks and balances required" in our planning system, as is recorded in paragraph 178. I found it incredible that the SNP committee members—many of whom, Mr Kenneth Gibson for example, are known to have good judgment—dissented even on paragraphs of factual evidence. How can someone disagree with a factual statement by the Royal Town Planning Institute in Scotland? Members might not agree with the points that were made, but they cannot disagree with the fact that the statement concerned was recorded. Paragraphs 226 to 231, 268 and 269 refer to the Aviemore case, of which I have personal experience. I was asked to attend an urgent meeting of great national importance regarding the development of the Aviemore centre. If I am told that one of Scotland's premier conference centres and 300 jobs are at risk, with Aviemore facing another setback, I do not hesitate to attend.

Even if I had known that Mr MacDonald contributed to the SNP, I would still have attended the meeting, given my local commitment and support. When I was asked to write to Alex Salmond, John Swinney, Stewart Stevenson, Richard Lochhead, the Cairngorms National Park Authority, Highland Council, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and others within 24 hours, I did so—on time and as promised. I am very pleased that the intervention  by me and Rhoda Grant was so successful in removing the planning logjam for the development. However, I was infuriated that, while I was gathering all the correspondence and seeking advice from Macdonald Hotels and the Parliament in order to release information as requested, and while my colleague Rhoda Grant was attending a family funeral, the Scottish Government was busy instructing David Thompson MSP to submit a motion calling on us to provide the information. Even when MSPs across parties—

—do all the right things for business and jobs—

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to review the Scottish Ambulance Service. (S3O-2966)

Given that 15 Highland ambulance stations are staffed by just one person for periods of at least 24 hours over weekends, and that single-manned ambulances are becoming a regular feature, will the minister ensure that there are sufficient trained staff in the Highland ambulance service to respond to patient needs, and that ambulance staff are supported and valued for the important service that they provide?

I thank the health secretary for the copy of her statement. The Conservatives, too, acknowledge that no one can undo the pain and suffering of the individuals and families concerned. With that thought in the background, we welcome the inquiry to investigate thoroughly all the facts, and indeed the allegations, surrounding the management of contaminated blood products, especially as the issue has been on the Parliament's agenda since 1999. We fully welcome the appointment of Lady Cosgrove to take up the remit. I wish to ask about the inquisitorial terms of reference and remit of the inquiry, which have still to be agreed between the Government and Lady Cosgrove. If a substantial amount of evidence is forthcoming in relation to compensation payments, will the Government revisit the matter of compensation to victims, given that, as the health secretary has said, the remit can change as the inquiry progresses? Is there a timescale for concluding the inquiry?

The Conservatives welcome and support the bill, which reviews and updates legislation on public health after 109 years. Given that some of the existing approaches were in place before the inception of the NHS, there is no doubt that the bill before us is necessary. As others have said, it is essential to prepare our response to potential threats, whether from SARS or pandemic flu. The bill has not been controversial in its passage through the committee to date. It has even been surprisingly interesting at times. It has certainly been more interesting that I anticipated at first glance, although it has not exactly been exciting. The minister addressed many of the issues raised in the committee's stage 1 report and I acknowledge the commitments that she has made. I am pleased that the Government has reflected on the competent person issue and will lodge amendments on that at stage 2. I am sure that Ross Finnie will also be pleased about that. He is our expert on the competent person issue, given that he is a very competent person himself. I also welcome the fact that stakeholder consultation prior to guidance being issued will be addressed more thoroughly. There is no doubt that we have to learn from experience. The guidance on free personal care contradicted the act that introduced it, specifically in relation to food preparation. That led to significant confusion in implementation, so I am pleased that the need for consultation prior to guidance has been recognised and addressed. As Margaret Curran said, the Law Society—and, indeed, our legally minded convener—gave excellent evidence on the legal issues in the bill. Given that the Law Society states that  "references to summary application are incorrect", appeals provisions are "problematic" and that provisions in the bill do not accurately reflect current Scottish civil procedure, it is obvious that serious amendments are required at stage 2. It is incredible that this bill raised such significant concerns from the Law Society. I have welcomed the evidence that was given by our convener, so it is only right to acknowledge the evidence that was given by the two doctors on our committee, which was also helpful. I welcome the provisions dealing with the notification of diseases to funeral directors, which are long overdue. It is only right that we extend to those who are responsible for the removal and disposal of bodies a duty of care and information on risks to public health. However, the Government should reconsider the withdrawal of the fee to GPs for the notification of diseases. The bill increases the requirements for GP notification and extends the list of diseases quite exceptionally. In those circumstances, I would have thought that it was more appropriate to, at the very least, maintain the current GP fee.

The GPs and the BMA do not think that it is appropriate. That is something that we will discuss further at stage 2. I am not sure about the balance between the protection of public health and the need to uphold the rights of the individual. My instinct is that, if a person is a threat to public health, his or her rights and liberties should be secondary to the greater good of the greater number. In that respect, I disagree with the BMA, but I will certainly give further thought to the matter. That is one of the major issues for discussion at stage 2.

That is why it is important to get the balance right. That point underlies the difficulty that faces us. However, if there is an established and known risk to public health, the rights of the individual should be secondary to the rights of the greater public.  I look forward to hearing more information about sunbeds, to developing an approach to the issue and to working with Kenneth Macintosh. As is our usual way, the Scottish Conservatives will thoroughly scrutinise the bill and will work constructively to ensure that it is right and appropriate for people in Scotland and that it addresses the threats to public health that we might face in future.

I, too, thank Hugh O'Donnell for the opportunity to debate issues relating to epilepsy. I also thank Alasdair Allan for giving us his first-hand experience—it is always helpful to get that. I associate my party with Hugh O'Donnell's comments on the work of Epilepsy Scotland, particularly that of Allana Parker. Hugh O'Donnell highlighted specialist epilepsy nurses. I understand that there are 21 such nurses in Scotland. The situation is probably better than it has ever been, but there is a long way to go before we meet the recommendation from the Joint Epilepsy Council for 50 specialist epilepsy nurses. Some years ago, I helped to set up a support group for people with epilepsy in the Highlands. Unfortunately, the group folded, but people with epilepsy are now coming forward and are determined to set up another group. When we started the group, a neurologist from Aberdeen visited Raigmore hospital two or three days a month, but there is now a permanent neurologist there. At that time, there was no specialist epilepsy nurse, but we now have one for children, mainly for those who also have a learning disability. Progress has been made, but there is still a long way to go. When I was told that I was speaking in the debate—which I am delighted to do—I thought about where to start and what patients should expect. People come to my surgery and say that  no services are available, so I thought to look at the SIGN guidelines to find out what patients should expect. I began by looking at SIGN guideline 81, on children with epilepsy. I noted that "Children with epilepsy should have access to specialist epilepsy services, including dedicated young people and transition clinics". I also found that "Each child should have an individual management plan agreed with the family and primary care team" and that an "Annual review is suggested as a minimum, even for children with well controlled epilepsy". Guideline 81 also states: "All children with epilepsy should have their behavioural and academic progress reviewed on a regular basis", and that "Epilepsy awareness training and written information should be offered to schools." That sounds good—I see that Mr O'Donnell is impressed. Guideline 81 states a lot more, but I want to know who audits the guidelines. Who audits whether health boards choose to implement them partially or fully, or to ignore them and leave them to gather dust? It is all very well stating that children should have access to specialist epilepsy services but do parents know that? Or general practitioners? How can politicians know whether the services are even barely adequate if the SIGN guidelines are not monitored? Perhaps the minister can answer that in her summing up. I would be interested to know which health boards have complied. I moved on to SIGN guideline 70 on "Diagnosis and management of epilepsy in adults". I assume that diagnosis is done correctly, but I was looking more at the management of epilepsy. I noticed that SIGN 70 says: "A structured management system for epilepsy should be established" It goes on to say that "an annual review is desirable" and that the shared care management system should seek to carry out certain things. It also says that advice on contraception should be given. Many of the epilepsy sufferers whom I know in Inverness got their diagnoses from GPs 30 years ago and have been getting repeat prescriptions ever since. They have never seen a neurologist, know nothing about SIGN guidelines and have had none of what is recommended in the guidelines. There is little in SIGN guideline 70 to highlight exactly what patients can expect. It is all  very well saying what should be given, but that means nothing. What on-going reviews, monitoring of care, and new drugs and the opportunity to access them can a patient expect? Where is the clear guideline that would allow patients the opportunity to see what they should expect in management of their condition?

I thank all the members who supported my motion and those who have stayed behind to speak in the debate. I welcome the councillors from Moray Council who are in the public gallery. I know that several more campaigners who were unable to attend are watching the debate on the webcast. I acknowledge the work that was done in the two previous sessions of the Parliament to support an Elgin bypass, particularly by Margaret Ewing in the first session of Parliament and Maureen Macmillan in the second session, both of whom secured members' business debates on the subject. I hope that this debate will be third time lucky for Elgin. Given the recent visit to Elgin by the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change and that the findings of the strategic transport projects review will be announced in the next few months, the debate is likely to be one of the last chances for members to show their support for an Elgin bypass. Moray Council and the Northern Scot have provided excellent briefings that have been passed to most members. Moray Council has been proactive in the campaign for a bypass. For successive administrations, the issue has been a top priority in recent times. I know that councillors, members of Parliament and members of the Scottish Parliament, from all parties and none, have supported the campaign. The Northern Scot has always been at the forefront of efforts for a bypass. Its extremely useful briefing highlights the  time for which the campaign has been running and the support that it has received over the years. I will highlight some of the points in support of a bypass. Elgin is the largest conurbation in Scotland that is between two cities and does not have a bypass. It is the capital of a picturesque constituency, yet commuters face significant delays getting through the city at peak times. That has an adverse effect on the environment, as more fumes are emitted by vehicles slowly winding their way through the narrow roads or sitting idle in traffic jams. Thousands of vehicles pass through Elgin every day. Vehicles are getting larger, which contributes to the delays and queues that people face. It is almost unbelievable that, in 2008, the main trunk road between Aberdeen and Inverness can be blocked by someone unloading their shopping from their car on the West Road in Elgin, or that buses have significant problems leaving the bus station as they try to access the main road. Moray is home to some of Scotland's most renowned companies, such as Baxters of Fochabers, Johnstons of Elgin and Walkers Shortbread, as well as half of all Scotland's distilleries. Those companies have prospered despite the poor transport links, but their businesses could be significantly improved with better roads in and out of Moray. The airbases at Kinloss and Lossiemouth contribute significantly to Moray's economy. The efficient movement of personnel and material associated with the Royal Air Force bases relies on good road links and would be greatly assisted by an Elgin bypass. The poor trunk road infrastructure is also a negative for inward investment and undoubtedly affects tourism. Pressures also arise from the increasing housing developments in the area. When people leave Inverness, they see a sign that says it is 110 miles to Aberdeen; that distance would take an hour and a half or an hour and 40 minutes on normal roads or motorways, whereas I certainly cannot get to Aberdeen in much less than two and a half hours. I think that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, who is the constituency MSP, is nodding in agreement. In the Highlands, we hear a lot about the upgrading of the A9, which I support fully, but we must not forget the need to upgrade the A96. While he was in opposition, the First Minister, Alex Salmond, pledged his support, along with thousands of others, by signing the petition for the Elgin bypass. I do not think that the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change needs to be reminded of his manifesto commitments, but the Scottish National Party manifesto promised "key improvements to ... the A96".  I am pleased to offer the minister the opportunity to confirm that pledge, given that no improvement to the A96 could possibly leave out an Elgin bypass or a commitment to a Nairn bypass. The motion mentions the A96 corridor. Massive developments are planned around Nairn and in the A96 corridor between Nairn and Inverness. We are talking about not hundreds but thousands of houses and, indeed, about new towns and villages. Surely it would be wise to plan the Nairn bypass infrastructure prior to those developments taking place. Angus Robertson, MP for Moray, said to the transport minister in 2002: "What we would like to know is whether the Scottish Executive is committed to help deliver an Elgin bypass. We would like to know how long this will take and where an Elgin bypass stands as a priority for the Scottish Executive." Those are the very questions that I would like answered today.

I thank Jeremy Purvis for giving us the opportunity to debate the motion. I agree with him that everyone has the right to a dignified end to life. My party has a free vote of individual conscience on the issue, so the views that I express are personal. In March 2004, the House of Lords debated a bill, the purpose of which was "to provide an option for terminal patients who are suffering unbearably to bring an end to their suffering".—[ Official Report , House of Lords , 10 March 2004; Vol 658, c 1316.]  My starting point is that no one should suffer unbearably. I acknowledge the excellent work that Michael McMahon has done in the Scottish Parliament's three sessions to raise awareness of and bring about improvements and excellence in and better access to palliative care. Gil Paterson and I run the cross-party group on chronic pain, which Dorothy-Grace Elder established in the first session and which Jean Turner and I ran in the second session. Jeremy Purvis is welcome to join that group. I am pleased to say that tremendous progress in dealing with chronic pain has been made through the McEwen report, the new NHS Quality Improvement Scotland report, a managed clinical network in Glasgow, the development of QIS clinical standards and meetings between pain consultants and the Scottish Medicines Consortium to ensure that drugs to alleviate pain are given due consideration to achieve better patient care. No terminally ill person in Scotland should suffer unbearably if this Government—like the previous one—takes seriously palliative care and the treatment and management of chronic pain. I pay tribute to all the staff who work in the national health service, in hospices, in primary care and in the voluntary sector—particularly in Marie Curie Cancer Care, which Jeremy Purvis mentioned—to support patients who suffer from persistent and chronic pain. Please let us not make people afraid that they will suffer unbearably when they are dying. Palliative care services and pain management are improving by the day, although there is still a long way to go to achieve equal access, as Jeremy Purvis said. For several reasons, I do not support Jeremy Purvis's motion. I do not want any person to be frightened of pain when they are dying. I do not want anyone to feel that they are being a burden by taking up an NHS or hospice bed. I do not want anyone to think that their life is worth less than another's or that they have outlived their usefulness. No person should feel obliged to choose to die sooner than nature dictates because, for example, they are worried about being a burden or about the financial implications for other family members of a long-term illness. Another issue is trust between a doctor and a patient and the honouring of the Hippocratic oath and the duty of care by all doctors. It can be difficult to interpret the wishes of a terminally ill patient if they are delirious, confused or—as in many cases—depressed. How can a clinician be absolutely confident that a request for a life to be ended sooner does not arise from a person's state of mind, whether or not that state of mind is treatable? Finally, the BMA's briefing for the debate is excellent. I would have thought that no politician  should force doctors who voted by an overwhelming majority against legalising physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia to change their minds.

It is always good to follow the gracious Margaret Curran. The Conservatives welcome the debate on health care associated infection. We also welcome the investment of £54 million in the targeted three-year programme of action on health care associated infection from April this year alongside the one-year MRSA screening pilot. However, we do not know whether £54 million is enough and I did not know until I came to the chamber exactly what outcomes we could expect from the programme and how they would be measured. I also want to be gracious in welcoming the quarterly audits. It will be helpful to see not only what the outcomes are and where the money is invested, but how effective the investment is. I acknowledge the target of 90 per cent hand hygiene compliance by November. My colleague Nanette Milne will say more on that. We note the previous Government's work on the issue. Although the measures that it took had a negligible effect on the number of infections, we can only assume that the situation would have been much worse had that action not been taken. We can all safely assume that the detection and recording of infections are also much better thanks to the measures that have been put in place. However, while I was preparing for the debate, I came upon some interesting statistics and information. I ask the Minister for Public Health to consider responding to one or two of the points in her closing speech. First, I notice that, in response to a written question from Margaret Mitchell in July last year, the cabinet secretary confirmed:  "Recording of MRSA infection on death certificates is based on the clinical judgement of each doctor."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 13 July 2007; S3W-1495.]  Given the £54 million investment, should we not insist on a standardised method of recording MRSA and other health care associated infections when they are significant contributory factors to death? Unless the information is recorded consistently, we will never know the true extent of the problem. Moreover, in 2002, hospital-acquired infections were not notifiable causes of death. Has that changed in the past six years? I trust that the minister will respond to that in her closing speech. We need guidelines on the provision of proper changing facilities for staff to combat the possibilities of cross-infection. All members have probably had letters from constituents asking whether it is all right that their doctor walks round Tesco with his uniform on or that nurses walk their dogs with their uniforms on. I do not know the answer, but Brian Adam posed that question in 2006, and the British Medical Association confirmed that research has shown that pathogenic micro-organisms, including—I hope that I pronounce this right—S aureus and C difficile are frequently carried on clothes, which represents a potential source of infection in the clinical setting. Are there clear guidelines on wearing the same clothes in hospital and outside? Unless the basic facts about how health care associated infections spread are made known to staff, we are unlikely to be able to prevent them and treat them early. Many hospital patients now fear a hospital-acquired infection more than surgery. The cost to the health service is significant: £186 million a year. Hospital-acquired infections also mean that patients take longer to recover and have longer hospital stays, which reduces bed nights for other patients and delays admissions and discharges. There is also the cost of closing wards to prevent the spread of infection. I welcome what the health secretary said about the care commission recruiting a nurse consultant to address standards in care homes—the point about care homes is well made in the Labour amendment. The delivery plan states that care home surveillance will be explored in March 2009. I would like more information about that. I welcome the recruitment of the nurse consultant, but we must wait another year before there is proper care home surveillance. There is another interesting set of figures relating to MRSA rates for large, medium, small and very small hospitals. I noted that the very small hospitals fared the best, whereas the large hospitals fared the worst by far. There could be many and various reasons for that, which I hope will be investigated during the period of the  delivery plan. However, it is concerning that the training package for infection control teams relating to ventilation and water systems has no stated target completion date in the delivery plan. Once again, I ask the minister to address that in her summing-up speech.

What progress has been made on waiting time targets for mental health, drug and alcohol and infertility treatment, and for the 28,000 people who are waiting for physiotherapy?

The debate has been interesting and constructive points have been made by members of all parties. I am pleased to acknowledge that even Robert Brown made constructive points today. I acknowledge the points that were made by Alasdair Allan and Liam McArthur about housing in the Western Isles and the Orkney Islands. Those points need to be highlighted. I echo Johann Lamont's tribute to the late member who did excellent work here and at Westminster. Any debate that raises awareness of fuel poverty is welcome, given that the Scottish house condition survey revealed a 30 per cent rise in fuel poverty between 2004-05 and 2005-06. Many factors determine fuel poverty: for example, the price of fuel, wage levels, welfare benefits and the type of fuel that is used. We can all argue about which is the most significant contributory factor, but none of us is arguing about the contribution of energy efficiency measures to household and business bills and to tackling climate change. We can also discuss the various incentives to invest in energy efficiency measures and microgeneration. I am pleased to hear that the Government is considering those. In our manifesto for last year, we pledged to invest £12 million a year in an eco-bonus scheme for households, communities and small businesses, who would be able to apply for a grant to install modern energy-saving and energy- creating technology. That could include microgeneration, solar-powered heat and water and wood-fuel heating. Under the scheme, households and businesses would be entitled to apply for a grant of up to £4,000 to cover the cost of buying and installing a wind turbine or solar panel. Community projects could apply for a grant of up to £100,000. Consumers would see a cut in their energy bills, small-scale renewable technology production would be given a boost, and there would be a reduction in carbon emissions. Under such an initiative, there are no losers—there are only winners. We also called for an urgent review of building standards to incorporate world class energy-saving design. I appreciate that we proposed a different incentive system to the one that the Liberal Democrats are proposing, but the end result would be the same.

That is a fair point. I am now putting forward our suggested incentives. Whether they are better than the Liberal Democrats' incentives is a subject for debate. I think that our policy is excellent. With Jim Hume, Jack McConnell, Rob Gibson and Robin Harper, I am the Conservative participant in the Friends of the Earth Scotland energy challenge for MSPs, which has been extremely interesting. I live in a 14-year-old house in Inverness, which I presume was built to all the required building standards of 14 years ago. It is quite shocking to see from the thermal imaging that the insulation is not quite what I thought it would be. The Tory Government did not build my house—I think that we need to ensure that builders are meeting energy efficiency requirements. I have discovered local energy advice centres. I have to admit that I did not know that they existed and I hope that they will be rolled out throughout Scotland.

Will the evidence base that is presented to the independent scrutiny panel include the cost implications of service delivery and the cost pressures that the health board is facing in relation to efficiency savings?

This has been a good debate. I welcome the constructive speeches from the Labour Party members, including Margaret Curran and James Kelly, who made an excellent speech. Jamie Stone omitted to tell members that the independent scrutineer who examined the Caithness maternity services never travelled up the A9. He tended to fly into Wick airport, as I remember. If anyone is to scrutinise health services in Scotland, they need at least to travel by road. Jackson Carlaw—my colleague—talked about credible options being proposed. That is critical. We have all seen health boards in the past argue for one favoured option. Independent scrutiny panels can scrutinise only the proposals and options with which they are presented: we should not expect them to come up with other options by themselves. My second point concerns an issue that was raised by Ross Finnie about the timing of the independent scrutiny panels against the background of directly elected health boards. Asking unelected independent scrutiny panels to challenge elected health board members could present difficulties. Maybe—just maybe—we are setting the precedent for independent scrutiny of major change in local government. I am not sure whether our councillors would be too happy about that. The consideration of panels should take into account the fact that a number of health board members may be directly elected. I have some further points for consideration, including an issue that was mentioned by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. I understand that more work is being done on major service change. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and others raised that point in the consultation. What is the definition of "major service change"? For example, Orkney and Shetland NHS Board may decide to reduce a visiting consultant's time on the islands. That would not be considered a major service change, but to people living in the northern isles, a trip by air or ferry to Aberdeen for a check-up is a major change. [ Interruption. ] I am being constructive. A small change for a health board could be a major change for patients. My second point is on the evidence for change. I am concerned about the scrutiny panels taking into account—or not, as the case may be—the cost implications of their decisions, and which services may be cut as a result of decisions and recommendations. To an economist, that is the opportunity cost. A major change proposal, examined by the scrutiny panel, could lead to  cutbacks in services that are not considered to come under the heading of major change. For example, retention of a service could have severe implications that might lead to cuts in areas such as podiatry and physiotherapy, but it could also undermine service development, for example in cardiac rehabilitation. The independent scrutiny panels do not just need to look at the options in front of them; they need to know the cost implications of the options. I understand that the panels have to take into account value for money, but do they also have to take into account cost pressures and efficiency savings—which I agree with—that face health boards? That is a central question, especially given that people who will be affected by changes need to understand that the recommendations that will be made by the independent scrutiny panels can be overturned by boards and ministers.

I appreciate that, but if the public hears an independent scrutiny panel saying, "This evidence is robust. This is good. This stands up. This is what the public wants", its expectation is that what is favoured by the ISP is what will happen. A crucial point is that the overturning of the recommendations of independent scrutiny panels by boards and ministers could lead to conflict between the proposals of independent scrutiny panels and those of health boards. That would be in no one's interests. As many members have said, we must acknowledge that change is not always bad. It may not be what we are used to—it may not be what it has aye been—but innovation and change in service delivery can be necessary and beneficial. We should not assume that an independent scrutiny panel is a block on change. MSPs need to be positive in supporting local changes. I want to raise a point that was first raised by Highland NHS Board. When summing up, will the minister confirm whether the Government will fully fund the independent scrutiny panels, as opposed to the health boards having to fund them? In responses to the consultation, NHS Highland asked how the conduct and effectiveness of the panels would be monitored and assessed. NHS Lothian asked whether more of the scrutinising  role could be given to Audit Scotland. That is worth considering. I hope that those and other questions will be answered when the Government analyses the consultation responses.

I talked about managed clinical networks and integrated care pathways, and the minister mentioned that Dr Harry Millar is the lead clinician for the north of Scotland eating disorder managed care network. What area does the managed clinical network cover? Do people throughout Scotland have access to it, or is it just for the north-east?

I welcome the debate that Kenny Gibson has initiated on anorexia and bulimia. In preparing for tonight's debate, my starting point was to look at the Parliament's previous consideration of the issue. The Health Committee initiated an inquiry into eating disorders in June 2004, after receiving a petition on the subject. The petition called for appropriate treatment and resources to be made available across Scotland given that, without proper specialist treatment, eating disorders can become chronic and life-threatening. As Kenny Gibson said, the 2006 report by NHS QIS made some impressive recommendations on the management and treatment of eating disorders. The report made so many recommendations that I cannot repeat them all, but they include: "Care and treatment should be tailored to the needs of the individual ... based on a multidisciplinary model ...Individuals involved in school health should receive training ... A choice of psychological treatments ... Integrated care pathways ...access to assertive outreach, day hospital care and inpatient care intensive treatment". The recommendations are very impressive indeed, but what is not impressive is that very little appears to have been done since the report was  published in 2006. The Health Committee's 2005 report also found that the provision of "eating disorders services has not been treated as a priority by health boards". A report from the mental health and well-being support group noted that upwards of 100 adults might be expected to be admitted to hospital care each year in Scotland. Precise estimates for the number of patients with eating disorders in Scotland are difficult to calculate, given that it is likely that many sufferers do not seek medical help. The figure of 80,000 to which Kenny Gibson's motion refers is likely to be a gross underestimate. Currently, we have no NHS specialist in-patient beds for anorexia nervosa in Scotland—although I very much welcome the plans for a new unit in the north-east of Scotland—despite the fact that the condition has the highest death rate of any psychiatric illness. Often, the only available option is for patients to be referred to unsuitable mixed psychiatric wards, which can have a detrimental effect on the patient's psychiatric and emotional state. Although specialist in-patient care is provided in Edinburgh and Glasgow, I understand that many patients are referred to hospitals in England. Although in January 2004 guidelines were issued to all health care professionals in Scotland, as Kenny Gibson indicated, they do not seem to have filtered through to general practitioners, psychiatrists, teachers, dentist, midwives and others who come across eating disorders in their work. There are few community facilities in Scotland to support patients and their families after discharge, which frequently results in patients suffering relapses. Approximately 90 per cent of all cases involve women. I am concerned not just about eating disorders themselves, but about the effects that they can have on future life and health. Those effects include poor circulation, brittle bones, infertility and kidney damage. Estimates suggest that 30 to 50 per cent of patients go on to experience long-term chronic problems such as the development of osteoporosis and tuberculosis. Eating disorders also limit significantly the capacity for reproduction of female patients. Support given at the time when it is needed can alleviate many future problems. I highlight again the potential problem of infertility. Whereas there has been a lack of action—or insufficient action—on the issue in Scotland, the Welsh Assembly has taken dramatic and decisive action to combat eating disorders. It established a cross-party committee on the issue to compile a comprehensive analysis of eating disorders in Wales, including recommendations from the NHS  in Wales on provision and support for patients and their families. The committee has managed to raise awareness of eating disorders across Wales and has called for proactive campaigns that specifically target young women in schools and universities. It has also promoted the need for increased training in the health sector to equip front-line staff with the skills to identify and to deal effectively and efficiently with patients suffering from eating disorders. As well as establishing proper health guidelines for medical practitioners, the Scottish Government should endeavour to ensure that individuals in school health teams receive training in eating disorders and to establish communication networks. I hope that the Government's review of the responsibilities of school nurses and school health teams will address that issue. If a person with an eating disorder—especially someone who lives in the Highlands and Islands, the area that I represent—is unwilling to accept assessment or referral to secondary care, it would be wonderful if GPs could seek advice and support from specialists in eating disorders, through either a managed clinical network or another pathway. I thank Kenny Gibson for bringing this issue to the chamber and hope that the Scottish Government will respond positively to the debate.

Wick high school was given the lowest rating possible for the current state of its buildings. At what point and against which standards can a school be deemed to be unfit and unsafe for the purpose of educating children? [ Interruption. ]

I, too, thank the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for the copy of her statement. The issue was under discussion in 2003 and I welcome the progress that we seem to have made. First, the health secretary states that "with modern treatment, through drugs and therapies ... mental illness can be treated and managed". Will she confirm that all patients with a personality disorder, both in Carstairs and the community, will be given the appropriate diagnosis, treatment and support? Secondly, I agree with the health secretary that patients should be cared for as near as possible to their homes and families. Will she give more information on the proposed medium-secure unit to serve patients from the north and north-east of Scotland? Finally, with 100 patients from Carstairs about to be moved to medium-secure units—I appreciate that that will happen over a period—and only 124 medium-secure unit beds in Scotland, will the health secretary give an assurance that those patients who are currently in the Orchard clinic and Rowanbank will not be moved into the community to make way for the Carstairs patients unless and until it is clinically safe for them to be independent in the community, and public safety is assured?

In paragraph 4.13 of its report, the task force said: "there is a lack of legal clarity around how, if at all, a patient close to death can be treated differently in order to facilitate donation, particularly if their wishes to donate are not expressly recorded." Will the minister work with members of Parliament at Westminster to ensure that the same legal definition will apply consistently throughout the UK?

I thank the member for his comments on presumed consent, with which I said that I had difficulty. Does he also agree that if we change the language from presumed consent to something else, we would also have to change the use of the words "donor" and "donation"? The act of donation would no longer relate to something that is willingly given, but to something that is willingly taken.

As the Scottish Conservatives have agreed to a free vote on organ donation, the views that I will express are personal, rather than those of my party. Having previously contributed to the excellent members' business debate that was secured by George Foulkes, I will not apologise for repeating to today's broader audience some of the points that I made on that occasion. However, I agree with the minister that it is essential that we implement the task force's recommendations, regardless of whether we move towards presumed consent. My first point is that we should not lose sight of the need for prevention. Given the increase in type 2 diabetes and given the fact that diabetes is the main contributory factor to kidney failure, we should ensure that enough is being done to diagnose, manage and prevent diabetes.  Secondly, like Mike Rumbles, I have difficulty with the concept of presumed consent. In my opinion, it is a contradiction in terms. Presumed consent is not consent. To consent means to agree or to give assent. Consent—whether to sex, marriage or the donation of body parts—cannot be presumed; it can only be given freely by an individual. Similarly, a donor of organs is a giver of organs. Donation is by choice, whether financial or otherwise. A donation is willingly given; it is not willingly taken, whether by the state or anyone else. My third point is that opting out is not a familiar concept to most people in this country. Those should be the starting points for the debate. Organ donation is a matter of individual conscience and freedom rather than a matter for the state. The fact that hundreds of people die each year because organs are not available is tragic, but the question is whether a system of presumed consent is the answer. I am pleased to note that the Government will take on board the task force's recommendations, which will potentially increase organ donations by 50 per cent within five years. However, the main point that the report highlights is the current lack of a structured and systematic approach. The introduction of co-ordinators, not the introduction of presumed consent, is the main reason for the increase in organ donation that has taken place in Spain. When the current Spanish model was introduced, Spanish officials created a network of transplant co-ordinators to act as the main point of contact between donors, recipients and medical staff. According to the UK Transplant website, there are a significantly higher number of road accident deaths in Spain than in the United Kingdom, which suggests that, even if the Spanish model were used in the United Kingdom, we might still not reach the same level of organ donation as in Spain. Spain has three times as many intensive therapy unit beds and three times as many transplant doctors as the United Kingdom. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has taken on board the report of the organ donation task force, but there is a desperate need to build up the infrastructure of staff, co-ordinators, beds and systems in order to increase the number of transplants. That is far more urgent than imposing a system of presumed consent. According to the UK Transplant website, the number of organ offers that were refused by Scottish transplant centres due to a lack of staff or infrastructure problems doubled between 2006 and 2007, from 21 to 41. We also do not know how many people in Scotland were willing to give organs but were never asked to do so. We need to  have that piece of information before moving to any system of presumed consent. An increase in the number of organ donations will not lead to an increase in the number of transplants without crucial investment in the NHS. I hope that the current network of donor transplant co-ordinators will be expanded and strengthened through central employment by a UK-wide organ donation organisation, to ensure a highly skilled and efficient service. We know that 25 per cent of the UK's population have signed up to an organ donation register and that a higher number of people carry the donor card. However, the organ donation task force's report shows that fewer transplants were carried out in 2007 than in 1997. The task force also estimates that there are 5,000 more donors than there are transplants. Why are we talking about introducing presumed consent when we are not coping with the people who are willing to give at the moment? We also need to know why, although more people put their names on the organ donor register in Scotland than in other parts of the UK, we still have the lowest organ donation rates in the European Union. Margaret Curran mentioned the legal situation, which is crucial. The legal situation regarding non-heart-beating donation is unclear, in part because it differs across the UK. Concerns have been expressed about the extent to which the timing of removal treatment may be influenced by delays resulting from the time that is necessary to complete retrieval. A person can switch status from being a patient to being a potential donor only when care staff have complete confidence in the means by which death is certified. There needs to be a clear legal framework that is consistent throughout the UK and ensures that organ donation is both legally and ethically clarified, for the benefit of both recipients and donors. The task force's report raises the issue of conflict and seeks to ensure that steps that are taken to facilitate organ donation are clearly lawful. I will use again a quote that I used in George Foulkes's members' business debate on organ donation. It is from Dr Kevin Gunning of Addenbrooke's hospital, who said: "If as a doctor you have turned your thoughts to your patient being a donor when they are still living, that is a real conflict". Putting in place an infrastructure of co-ordinators and resources will ensure that those who wish to donate organs can do so. That—and not imposing on the whole population what is called presumed consent—is the sensible and practical way forward.

We welcome the announcement that the planned closure of A and E departments at Ayr and Monklands hospitals has been reversed. Given that you said that decisions about the services were based on consultations that "compromised local people's trust, faith and confidence in their national health service", and given that you said that neither board made a convincing case for significant changes, can I ask whether you will now reconsider—

I apologise. Will the cabinet secretary reconsider the downgrading and loss of services at the Vale of Leven hospital, or is she convinced that a significant case has been made for the reduction in services? The Walker report questioned or contradicted recommendations that were made in the Kerr report. Will the cabinet secretary consider commissioning another independent review?

Will the member give way?

I acknowledge the points that the member makes as they relate to care in the community and delayed discharge. To correct him, I said that there should be at least one councillor on each board, because of those issues.

Paramedics.

We, too, welcome this debate on the consultation on a local health care bill to directly elect members of health boards. Like Margaret Curran, we will monitor the responses to the consultation. It is fair to say that we would welcome another parliamentary debate. My colleague Jackson Carlaw is unable to be here today, which is unfortunate given his interest in independent scrutiny panels. However, I understand that ISPs will be the subject of a separate debate in the future. A publication from the Scottish health council landed on my desk this week. Its new website is a step in the right direction on the issues that we are discussing today. The publication says: "The Scottish Health Council Evolving Practice website will enable healthcare professionals to share their experiences of how they have engaged with patients and the public to improve services." It does not cover everything but, as I say, it is a step in the right direction. The current chairman of the British Medical Association is on record as saying that "the Government should strengthen local structures and support NHS boards to improve their own consultation processes and communicate better with the public". I am inclined towards that view. Much of the enthusiasm for directly elected health boards arises from dissatisfaction with the current consultation process. All too often, communities are presented with what are seen as faits accomplis. They have to argue against eminent health professionals and economists such as Kerr  and Andrew Walker as to what is the best option for the delivery of services. The issues surrounding consultation of communities on health issues have rarely been off Parliament's agenda since 1999. I remember the petition on Stracathro, which attracted 48,000 signatures. The petitioners felt that they were not being listened to. I also remember the petition on Stobhill, where the local community felt strongly that no one was listening to them. I remember, too, our being concerned about the consultation process and I remember the work that was done by Dr Richard Simpson on the Stobhill proposals. My colleague Jamie Stone is in the chamber, and I want to acknowledge the campaigns in the Highlands to save the Belford hospital in Fort William and the consultant-led maternity services in Caithness. In both cases, communities were united to stand against a mighty health board. My goodness—it was quite something to watch. Surely public involvement at the earliest opportunity, so that people can understand why change is needed, and their further involvement in drawing up options would help. The public should not just be involved in the final stages. Representation is another issue—Margaret Curran spoke about it. For example, if all of the Highlands was to be one constituency, it could be that all board members lived in Inverness. The area now takes in Argyll and small communities such as Appin, so ensuring that people are heard will be a huge challenge. I do not think that having a representative from each multi-member ward would be acceptable, given the numbers involved. Scottish Conservatives are concerned that single-issue campaigners may wish to be elected and that they are very likely to be elected, especially when they are recognised as the guardians of existing services. That could work well, but, equally, it could be a block to innovation, modernisation, development and change, which are inevitable in the NHS. When I was thinking about that issue, I thought of the former Tory health minister, Michael Forsyth, who proposed that ambulance personnel should upskill to become paramedics and fought tooth and nail to ensure that that happened. The Opposition of the day said that that would lead to a two-tier ambulance service and campaigned strongly against the new paramedic post. However, I do not think that any MSP or health board member would argue against the excellent work that paramedics and ambulance staff do. I use that example to show that difficult decisions have sometimes to be taken and changes have to be made. We do not always like change but, in the long term, it can deliver a better outcome.  We support the appointment of at least one councillor to each board, given the need for people to work together on delayed-discharge issues and care in the community. I see no reason why a councillor who has been elected to a council need be elected again to gain a place on a health board. My party supports the inclusion of a general practitioner on each board, given that 90 per cent of patient contact with the NHS is in primary care. Based on recent experience, having a representative of the Scottish Ambulance Service on each health board and a health board member on the Scottish Ambulance Service board would also lead to much better working relationships. Will direct elections to health boards of less or more than 50 per cent of their members enhance transparency and accountability and lead to greater public satisfaction and agreement over decision making and consultation? The truth is that we are not entirely convinced that that will be the case. However, we think that improvements can be made to the existing process.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is anticipated that any NHS boards will have a financial deficit in the next financial year. (S3O-2354)

Highland MSPs recently received a briefing from NHS Highland, at which we were told that NHS Highland would have to find more than £17 million of savings in order to break even in 2008-09. With smaller budget increases planned for the next few years; with ever more stringent targets to meet; with the spectre of a new funding formula that would work against rural health boards; and with the additional cost on rural boards of providing services such as out-of-hours care to remote communities, will the cabinet secretary assure us that the Government is not embarked on a path that will lead to deficits or cuts in services in future years?

Will the member give way?

Will the member confirm that all the Lib-Lab coalition's deals between 1999 and 2007 were done in an open, honest, transparent  and accountable format for all Scotland to see and hear?

Will the member give a little bit of credit to the Scottish Conservatives who, this afternoon, called for measures to help to increase the uptake of pension credit and council tax credit?

Tommy Sheridan will be pleased to know that he left behind him a legacy of solidarity that is now a golden rule for this Government. Reading "Taking Forward the Government Economic Strategy", which mentions the concept of independence, it is quite interesting to note that it says that, between 1995 and 2005, the percentage of people living in poverty fell in both parts of the UK, while in Ireland, Denmark, Sweden and Finland, it rose. Independence is not a golden rule. I welcome the cabinet secretary's initiative to aid benefits take-up, particularly by pensioners.

I volunteered with Citizens Advice Scotland for many years, so I can testify to the excellent work that it does. I sincerely hope that its funding will not be cut. Greater emphasis must be given to getting  people out of poverty and, if possible, back into work. There are many types and causes of poverty and just as many ways of dealing with it. We still have in Scotland what is known as genteel poverty. Many people—many of them elderly—are too proud to admit that money is short, and blankly refuse to take up benefits. Largely in the Highlands, there is also hidden poverty. When people live in a beautiful location—as opposed to a deprived part of a large city—the setting can conceal much poverty, and there are the added problems of lack of public transport, high fuel costs and, often, day-to-day necessities cost more. According to Help the Aged, 40 per cent of pensioners in Scotland live in fuel poverty and 20 per cent live in income poverty, yet as many as 40 per cent of eligible pensioners do not claim pension credit and an estimated 44 per cent do not claim council tax benefit. We have asked the Scottish Government and the Westminster Government to respond on that issue and I am pleased with what I have heard in that regard today. Energy efficiency can greatly help to lower fuel bills. The Scottish Conservatives had a manifesto commitment for a fully funded eco-bonus scheme, which would have increased the grant available from local government for insulation, solar panels and other measures. I will look for a similar initiative in the single outcome agreements between local authorities and the Government, which will be published in April. The Health and Sport Committee has taken evidence on drug and alcohol addiction services. All members should take note of these statistics: 70,000 children in Scotland live with an alcohol-addicted parent and up to 59,000 children live with a drug-addicted parent. I commend Annabel Goldie's work on the issue. I hope that before next week's vote on the budget the Government will make a commitment to support services that do not just park people on methadone but lead people to abstinence and back to independence. Social enterprise must be one of the best passports out of poverty caused by disability, mental health problems or addiction. There are more than 1,000 social enterprises in Scotland, one of the best of which must be the Shetland community bike project. I met people in Lerwick who were back at work, interacting with other people and no longer dependent on benefits. Many of them were moving on to full-time education or employment. The project's business model is simple. People restore old bikes and then sell them or rent them to tourists. The project is based on the principle of recycling and it helps people and the local and national economy. Such a business model could be replicated in every town in Scotland.  I have received a letter that says that despite the project's positive outcomes in relation to the scheme that is operated by the Scottish centre for healthy working lives, it is threatened with closure due to a lack of funding from the local alcohol and drug action teams. I will pass the correspondence to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and I trust that the issue will receive her support. Last week I attended a briefing hosted by Margo MacDonald. We heard from Transition, which is an Edinburgh-based charity that provides employability services and support for people who are moving on from care, prison, years of drug or alcohol addiction, prostitution or homelessness. Margo and I met people who are in work and people who are at college, preparing for university. We met people who had regained their self-confidence, self-esteem and independence. We will not support the Liberal amendment, on the basis that the Local Government and Communities Committee's inquiry into fuel poverty offers the best example of cross-party working on poverty. I have no doubt that Jim Tolson, who is the Liberal member on the committee, will do sterling work. I move amendment S3M-1260.1, to insert at end: "recognises that the Scottish Government, UK Government and local governments need to work together to get people off welfare and into work where possible and to increase the percentage of benefit take-up ensuring that those most in need of help get it, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward proposals to achieve these aims."

To ask the First Minister what the known extent is of fraud in the national health service. (S3F-473)

First, I thank Alex Neil for reminding us how much better life was for students under the Tories. Given the fact that an estimated £100 million is filtered out of the NHS each year by fraud, is the First Minister concerned that only 135 charges have been reported to the procurator fiscal, with a paltry three convictions?

I, too, thank George Foulkes for lodging the motion and I put on record my appreciation of Margaret Jamieson's excellent work on organ donation in the previous two sessions of Parliament. The Scottish Conservatives have  agreed to a free vote on organ donations. The views that I will express are therefore my personal views, not those of my party. We should not lose sight in the debate of the idea of prevention. Given the expected surge in type 2 diabetes and the fact that diabetes is the main contributory factor to kidney failure, we should first of all ensure that enough is being done to diagnose, manage and prevent diabetes. That hundreds of people die each year because organs are not available is tragic, but the question is whether a system in which there is presumed consent is the answer. Like Roseanna Cunningham, I used to be minded towards supporting the idea of presumed consent, but I am now moving in the opposite direction. I hope that the Government will take on board the 14 recommendations in the organ donation task force's report, which states that the recommendations could increase organ donations by 50 per cent in five years. The task force highlighted many problems, but it mainly highlighted the lack of a structured and systematic approach. There is no doubt that there is a desperate need to build up the infrastructure of staff, co-ordinators, beds and systems in order to increase the number of transplants that take place, and that that is far more urgent than imposing a system in which there is presumed consent. The success that has been attributed to the Spanish model has been as much to do with organisation and infrastructure improvements as it has been to do with presumed consent. Spain has three times as many intensive therapy unit beds and three times as many transplant doctors as the United Kingdom has. George Foulkes quoted other figures for Spain. What we do not know is how many people here were willing to give organs but were not asked to do so or could not do so because the organisation of co-ordination and retrieval was lacking or because there were insufficient ITU beds. We know that 25 per cent of the UK's population have signed up to the organ donation register and that a higher number of people carry the donor card, but the task force report shows that fewer transplants were carried out in 2007 than in 1997. We should ask why, although more Scots have put their names on the organ donor register than people in the other parts of the UK have, we have the lowest organ donation rates in the European Union. I do not support the concept of presumed consent. It is a contradiction in terms. Presumed consent is not consent. Consenting means agreeing or giving assent. Consent—whether to sex, marriage or donating body parts—can only be given freely by an individual. A donor of organs is a giver or provider of them. It has always been  assumed that donation is by choice. Donation is willingly giving, not willingly taking. As Roseanna Cunningham said, opting out is not a familiar concept to most people. Organ donation is a matter of individual conscience and individual freedom—it is not a matter for the state. The task force's report raises the issues of conflict of interest and ensuring that steps to facilitate organ donation are clearly lawful. It is indeed a concern that the legal position on non-heart-beating donations is unclear. Dr Kevin Gunning of Addenbrooke's hospital has said: "If as a doctor you have turned your thoughts to your patient being a donor when they are still living, that is a real conflict". As I said, I welcome this informed debate.

Can the First Minister give an assurance to patients in Scotland that all the so-called flying doctors have appropriate training in all NHS procedures and protocols and can be held to account for the provision of care in the same way as our own doctors?

Does the member acknowledge that not only do many people have drug and alcohol problems, but many such people suffer from underlying mental health problems, such as depression?

I welcome the debate on health improvement—it should always be on our agenda. I particularly welcome the extra £40 million to tackle obesity, and the increased emphasis on cognitive behavioural therapy, which will be welcome in remote and rural areas. The commitment to tackle diabetes and depression at an early stage is very good news indeed. The SNP Government has enjoyed a honeymoon for almost nine months. It has been easy to blame Labour for health problems in Scotland—as if it did not have enough problems already. Responsibility and accountability are the hallmarks of government, and certain issues are now coming to the fore. First, there is the SNP's manifesto commitment to double the number of school nurses by 2011, which is now diluted. I quote: "The exact number of school nurses employed in 2011 will depend on a number of factors yet to be determined."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 19 November 2007; S3W-6199.]  That is quite different from the clear manifesto commitment to double the number of school nurses.

I recognise that many staff could back up that health resource, but I also recognise the Government's clear and concise manifesto commitment to double the number of school nurses. School nurses care for, advise and support children through their school years. They promote healthy lifestyles; provide health screening; support pupils with conditions such as asthma, diabetes, epilepsy and mental health problems; and work alongside teachers, social workers and other professionals to help to protect vulnerable children. Their role is crucial. Despite the warm words about early years and positive interventions, the SNP appears to have broken another promise. How often did we hear the SNP in opposition say that it would end postcode prescribing? Yet after eight months of the SNP in government, postcode prescribing is alive and well in Scotland. A Sunday paper revealed that of the 25 new treatments that have been recommended in the past year—during which the SNP has been in Government for eight months—for conditions such as cancer, HIV, heroin addiction, osteoporosis and anaemia, a quarter are still not available in most areas. In fact, NHS Lothian is top of the list—or bottom, if you like—with 19 out of the 25 new treatments still not available. Tayside is the best, as always, with all but two of the new drugs available. In the week in which we will debate kidney donations, a treatment for anaemic patients on kidney dialysis has been rejected by all NHS health boards except one—Grampian—despite enormous cost savings to the NHS, as well as benefit to patients. There is also the matter of extended opening hours for general practices. Being an agreeable and consensual person, I supported the idea, although I must admit that no one had raised the issue with me before. I had assumed that the Government carried out research on the unmet needs of patients. I further assumed that there was a strong evidence base, but now I discover that there is no evidence base, at least not one that is known to GPs. In fact, all existing research comes from an English survey, which concluded that four people in every 100 said that they would like extended opening hours at evenings and weekends. The British Medical Association recognises that some people want access to their  GPs outwith normal surgery hours. A BMA briefing paper on the issue states: "The BMA was prepared to discuss a package that would have offered extended opening hours and improved quality within the current level of funding. Unfortunately Prime Minister Gordon Brown intervened and insisted on further extended doctor consultation time with limited flexibility and the sacrifice of evidence-based potential new areas of work in exchange for non-evidence-based government-driven, politically-motivated targets."

The health secretary did not tell the Parliament or the people of Scotland that the extended opening hours for GPs came at the cost of preventive health care. For example, in its briefing the BMA referred to—

I am in my last minute.

The cabinet secretary will see this in the BMA's briefing, which refers to better management of fractures, earlier diagnosis and treatment of osteoporosis, more hospital admissions for fractures, better management of peripheral vascular disease and a new heart failure indicator. The SNP rejected all those new initiatives to improve the health of people in Scotland in order to pay for extended access, for which there is no sound evidence base, and just to follow Gordon Brown's line—the London line. The BMA has said that that is "not in the spirit of collaboration and partnership".

Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that progress on and outcomes for mental health issues are difficult to measure?

I am sure that David Mundell will be pleased to know that he can still get Elaine Murray excited. I offer the finance secretary this piece of advice: the next time that he is in his ministerial Mondeo and sweeps past poor Tavish Scott waiting at the bus stop in the rain with his pack-a-mack and wellies, instead of driving through the nearest puddle, he should offer him a lift—that would do us all a favour.  I want to raise the issue of drugs abuse, which is of huge concern in Scotland. The cabinet secretary will be aware of my party's views on that and of the interest of my colleague Annabel Goldie in particular. The Scottish Conservatives' manifesto was clear that political leadership on this issue was needed and pledged additional resource to expand detox and rehabilitation. In the context of this budget debate, it is right to acknowledge that it is impossible to get a baseline figure for expenditure on drugs abuse. In fairness, I accept that that is not a fault of this Government exclusively, but an aspect of inherited financial process, which means that we can neither track expenditure on drugs abuse nor measure the effectiveness of that expenditure. Having said that, the SNP election promise was for an extra £24 million over the next three years and it appears that it is now offering only a third of that. I acknowledge and welcome the £85 million over the next three years to tackle alcohol addiction. There is £95 million over the spending review period in the justice portfolio for drugs, but there is an overall lack of clarity about what is spent on tackling addiction, which cannot be right. We note the expansion of drug treatment and testing orders to the district courts—my party welcomes that acceptance of our policy. However, we are concerned about four aspects of the Scottish Government's approach to drugs abuse as identified in the budget. First, there is a lack of clarity as to the overall strategy. Secondly, there is no transparency in the funding channels. There is no ability to measure outcomes. Estimated expenditure on methadone is set to continue at £12.5 million per annum and rising. The promised SNP increase in funding does not appear to be there. That combination of circumstances is not acceptable to the Scottish Conservatives and it should not be acceptable to the Government. I echo what Bill Aitken said: we have still not decided how we will vote in this process. The Conservative party requires a pledge to produce detailed information on expenditure on drugs abuse across the budget before the end of the calendar year and a statement of political intent by stage 3 of the budget process. As Annabel Goldie has said often, we need to make a start in switching resource to a wider range of options including abstinence-based approaches. We need a commitment to a longer-term strategy based on reducing overall levels of addiction to both illegal and prescribed drugs—rather than just having people parked on methadone—and to providing the necessary resource to see that through.  The second issue that I want to raise is single outcome agreements, which many other members have raised. I listened carefully to what the convener of the Finance Committee said. The point is that the single outcome agreements are based on the Government's objectives and priorities. Let me spell out the mental health priorities: reducing the prescription of antidepressants; reducing the rates of readmission to acute mental health facilities; ensuring the general well-being of all the population; and ensuring the early diagnosis and management of dementia. There is nothing in the targets or objectives to say that mental health is a priority. For example, there is nothing to say that early diagnosis and treatment of depression will be addressed and nothing to address the issue of people with serious mental health problems who are cared for in the community.

I will certainly have another look at the document. The point is that, if the Government does not make mental health a priority, a target or an objective, it is unlikely to feature in any of the 32 single outcome agreements. That concern is shared by the Health and Sport Committee. I support the emphasis on outcomes, which John Swinney has just mentioned, rather than on measuring success by the amount of money that has been spent. However, unless we get the agreements and the scrutiny right, we could be in danger of losing any transparency and accountability around those local government responsibilities that affect many of our most vulnerable people—such as care of the elderly and mental health care—and the funding of organisations such as the Crossroads Association and the Princess Royal Trust for Carers, which do great work supporting carers. Carers are concerned about the possibility that the Government's pledge of 10,000 additional respite hours will not be met. I await the Government's response.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to tackle obesity. (S3O-1875)

I note the Government's commitment—in the budget and elsewhere—to tackling children's obesity but, given that around 60 per cent of Scottish adults are overweight or obese, what is being done to provide weight management services and support for adults? I must add, Presiding Officer, that the question is intended for the greater good of public health in Scotland, rather than for personal advantage.

I agree about the magic of Caithness. I welcome the excellent new facilities at the Eden Court theatre and Culloden battlefield, both of which I visited last week. What is being done to ensure the continued increase in flights—and therefore tourists—into Inverness and the rest of the Highlands and Islands?

Will the minister give way?

I thank Liam McArthur for the debate and for lodging the motion, which sums up the concerns and the experience of people who live on Orkney and reminds us of how much we miss Stewart Stevenson's comments about aircraft. In a written answer to Liam McArthur on 6 December, the Minister for Public Health stated: "I see no need to commission an independent review, but we will continue to monitor the performance of the air ambulance service".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 6 December 2007; S30-1574]  However, in written answers to other questions about air ambulance delays due to adverse conditions and shift changes, the minister states that the "information is not collected." It must be very difficult, if not impossible, to monitor any service accurately when crucial information is not collected and the experience of people who live on the islands that is giving rise to the main concerns that we have heard about tonight is ignored. I will consider some general points on the air ambulance service before I come back to the service in Orkney. Despite many calls from MSPs across the chamber, it took eight weeks for the Scottish Ambulance Service to meet members such as Rob Gibson and me to discuss issues such as single manning. At today's meeting of the Health and Sport Committee, I was quite surprised to learn that of the four community health partnerships represented, none had a representative from the ambulance service on their management board. The ambulance service is not yet fully integrated into the national health service, and more needs to be done to value the commitment of ambulance personnel and to ensure that the service is seen not as an add-on to the NHS or as a transport service, but as a fully integrated part of the NHS, NHS 24, GP services and community health partnerships. In the document, "Better Health, Better Care: Action Plan", which was published today, one of the health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment targets is "To respond to 75% of Category A calls within 8 minutes from April 2009 ... across mainland Scotland." That is a very reasonable target. However—and I am not sure whether I have got this right—there is no target for island communities. In the same  edition of The Orcadian that has already been mentioned, Dr Ponte said: "I requested an air ambulance within two hours as it was an emergency case." It was an emergency—so he wanted it in two hours. Surely we are not saying that eight minutes is okay on the mainland, but two hours is okay on the islands—in fact, in that example, the air ambulance took closer to seven or eight hours. We need to be concerned about that. It is worrying that the trial period for the current service in Orkney—which ended in 2006—has resulted in a service that does not carry the confidence of the local community. I do not have evidence to support this, but I presume that local people raised concerns during the trial period that should have been taken into account. It is doubtless very worrying, particularly for people who are not in the best of health, when an emergency category A call takes two hours and when there is no GP back-up on the islands—or on some of the islands. The situation also raises concerns—I know that this is an issue in Orkney—about the removal of a GP from other islands. In a discussion that we had this week with the ambulance service, the management told us that the air ambulance will be used more extensively across the Highlands. Given that a helicopter can be in only one place at a time, if it is to be used more extensively across the Highlands, I am not sure what that will do for response rates in Orkney. I support the request for a review and I endorse the points that Liam McArthur made.

I, too, thank the cabinet secretary for the advance  copies of her statement and the action plan. I put it on the record that the Scottish Conservatives acknowledge and appreciate the continuing commitment of all NHS staff. We welcome much in the statement but, as we have had only an hour to read it and the action plan, we will need more time to read it more thoroughly. We welcome the reintroduction of the patients charter, which the Conservatives introduced in 1991, when it was not roundly accepted by every other political party in Scotland. I trust that the cabinet secretary will build on the excellent practice that the Conservatives set out in the patients charter all those years ago. I welcome the increased role for community pharmacists and the identification of lead maternity care professionals. Any measures to tackle MRSA and reduce hospital stays are welcome, but we would like more information on the evidence base for the MRSA proposal. We welcome the additional spending on alcohol and drug treatments, but we are concerned about the evidence base on what works and is most effective. How will the cabinet secretary allocate funding to ensure value for money, achieve the best outcomes and—an issue that I have raised many times before—tackle any underlying mental health condition at the same time? The additional funds to tackle obesity are welcome but, given the patchy service throughout Scotland and the fact that the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline on obesity is largely ignored, how will the considerable need that exists be met, and how will a consistent service be rolled out throughout Scotland? I am concerned that two forms of local authority funding for mental health services have been abolished and that we will not know the local authority outcome agreements for mental health spending and outcomes until January. Will the cabinet secretary give a commitment that a driver or incentive will ensure that the money follows the patient for mental health services? The cabinet secretary did not mention the importance of early intervention. In many cases, treating people for mild depression means that the condition does not become severe, chronic and enduring. Will she make a commitment on early intervention?

As many younger children are now being diagnosed as depressed, will the minister confirm that the Government intends to honour its manifesto commitment to double the number of school nurses, which would help?

I thank the health secretary for the advance copy of her statement, which I confirm was not fully covered by BBC Radio Scotland this morning. I acknowledge the difficulties in compiling a list of chronic conditions for exemption from charges. There is no doubt that the current system is beset by anomalies, such as patients with epilepsy and diabetes getting free prescriptions but patients with asthma and Parkinson's disease having to pay. Wastage of drugs is a major issue. How will the cabinet secretary ensure that wastage is not increased when prescriptions are made free to all?  I seek further clarification on a point that Margaret Curran raised. How will the cabinet secretary ensure that the abolition of prescription charges does not lead to rationing of more expensive treatments in favour of cheaper alternatives and that people with diseases such as Hunter disease, which affects only five people in Scotland, and other rare conditions get the drugs that they need? We hope that there will not be even a modest increase in demand for antidepressants. Will the cabinet secretary give an assurance that therapies such as cognitive behavioural therapy will be made widely available and that there will be shorter waiting times for referral to psychiatrists and psychologists in order to achieve her target of reducing the use of antidepressants in the long term? What measures will be put in place to monitor the free prescriptions policy to ensure that there are not more prescriptions for over-the-counter drugs such as aspirin and paracetamol? Does the cabinet secretary know the percentage increase in the number of prescriptions in Wales following the reduction in and subsequent abolition of the charge there? I remind the health secretary that many drugs have significant side effects, so this announcement should not be viewed as a pill for every ill. Individual responsibility and lifestyle changes can sometimes be even more beneficial than drugs.

To ask the Scottish Executive what initiatives it is taking to improve reading, writing and arithmetic in primary schools. (S3O-1381)

How will the closure of eight Highland primary schools, which the SNP-independent Highland Council proposes, benefit primary education? Does the minister agree that the recent success in improving basic literacy and  numeracy in West Dunbartonshire is a good example of what can be achieved? Does he agree that that model confirms that tried and tested learning by phonetic methods and basic number patterns remains the most successful way of raising educational standards among primary school children?

This has been a good debate, with many considered contributions from members throughout the chamber. Many issues could be highlighted in such a debate, and I commend the minister for covering such a broad section of views. However, other topics such as single status, equal pay and the agenda for change could perhaps have been given more prominence. I acknowledge Mike Rumbles's point about female-on-male violence, which is undoubtedly underreported. It takes nothing away from the problem of domestic violence that many women suffer to acknowledge that point. I think that it was inappropriate for Sandra White to comment on staffing issues relating to another MSP. It was out of kilter with the mood of, and other contributions to, the debate. However, I celebrate the diverse speech from Bill Wilson, whom I now see as the main challenger to Stewart Stevenson. I will concentrate on three issues: mental health, age and disability. We have a long way still to go in Scotland on mental health. In any year, one in four people will experience a mental health problem, including stress, depression and anxiety. Around one third of general practitioner consultations, one third of sick leave and one third of incapacity benefit claims are due to mental health problems. The cost is high: the cost of care, lost output and the human cost is estimated at 9 per cent of Scotland's gross domestic product. Too often, it is difficult for people with mental health problems to return to the work environment, so we need to find ways to get those people gradually back into the workplace. In our current scrutiny of the budget, mental health is a difficult issue. As Howat stated, there are no or very few measurable outcomes in mental health—as opposed to the measurement of surgery outcomes in the normal health service, for example. However, that is no reason for not making mental health a priority. It is difficult for people to talk about suffering from depression, particularly in the workplace, not just because they are judged or labelled but because many fear that it may affect their future career progression. Some of the mental health services and attitudes must be modernised and  given a more positive approach, and people must be helped at an early stage before depression becomes severe, chronic and enduring. In fact, many mental health patients get support and treatment only when their condition is chronic. That must change. On a more positive note, I heard about the new facility that was opened in Glasgow this week, which seems to address many of the issues that I am raising today. I hope that such an approach, which is more open and positive, with early interventions and better surroundings, will be replicated throughout Scotland. There is no doubt that there is workplace discrimination in relation to age. A clear signal that age discrimination in the workplace is unacceptable would be the abandonment of a mandatory retirement age. I understand that many employment tribunal cases on that issue are on hold, but they will certainly set the precedent for the future. Employment law has progressed significantly in equality and diversity, but I am not sure that everyone is aware of their own rights as an employee. Less favourable treatment and discrimination are undoubtedly difficult to prove, but I understand that the burden has now shifted to the employer to prove that employees have not been treated less favourably on the ground of age, race, disability, sexual orientation, religion or beliefs, which I think include political beliefs. I was shocked to read in Help the Aged's briefing paper that a 60-year-old widow who wanted to sue an NHS board after her husband died from contracting MRSA in hospital was told that she would have to foot a bill of more than £1,000 in legal aid costs because she receives pension credit. That situation must be examined. I acknowledge the excellent points that Johann Lamont, Bill Kidd and Michael McMahon made about disability. I recently visited Drummond school in Inverness, which people with physical and learning disabilities attend. I commend the school's excellent work, but when school education ends, there is nothing. The briefing from Inclusion Scotland, which highlights that issue, says that many young people with learning disabilities are excluded from mainstream pathways and that further education offers little provision. FE colleges are described as being at risk of becoming "the new day centres" because of segregated provision and a narrow curriculum that focuses on basic numeracy and literacy; students continue to go through a revolving door of repeated courses without any progression. That subject requires more joined-up thinking and I ask the minister to address it.  I have been unable to come up with the right word to replace "tolerance", which almost suggests grudging acceptance. I hope that the minister will come up with a better word.

The minister mentioned the case of a new Government coming in. What is the Government doing to demonstrate tolerance, understanding, compassion and empathy in relation to people in the Parliament who have other political beliefs, in order to set an example to the rest of Scotland?

I thank all the members who have stayed behind for the debate, and those who signed the motion and attended the briefing by Alliance Boots at lunchtime. Sweet gale is a folk name, which is taken from the botanical name Myrica gale for the plant that is better known as bog myrtle. It is a moorland shrub that thrives in damp or boggy soils, and was used by the Vikings to treat depression and poor memory and to give a sense of well-being. For thousands of years, extract of sweet gale has been harnessed for its antibacterial and antioxidant properties. Although the plant grows wild and on cultivated plantations throughout the Highlands, production could expand into more traditional arable areas such as Moray, Fife, Aberdeenshire and the Borders. The background to the debate is the exceptional demand for the plant, with the Alliance Boots development plan requiring many more tonnes of sweet gale oil than is currently available. Alliance Boots researchers have exploited the properties of the plant and utilised its potential as an active skin care ingredient. After five years of research and trials, sweet gale's place in the Botanics range, to improve blemishes and the complexion, is guaranteed. I understand that sweet gale or bog myrtle is six times more effective than tea tree oil and 10 times safer.  The partnership between Highland Natural Products Ltd—which we have to thank for much of the innovation relating to the product—Boots, the Scottish Agricultural College, Cranfield University, the University of Bradford and Kew gardens has worked to research the commercial viability and compounds of sweet gale, which has led to the increased demand. The sweet gale Botanics sensitive range uses all the available oil. Distribution and promotion of the line cannot increase as stocks would run out, because of the limited production of sweet gale. In the drive to establish commercial cultivation, 13.5 hectares of sweet gale will be planted in pilot areas by the year's end, but that will be insufficient to meet the demand, which Boots says could be expanded and developed globally if yield were increased and opportunities were presented. Highlands and Islands Enterprise has approved about 25 per cent of the funding for researching the cultivation and oil yield of plantations, which are in addition to plants that grow wild. The remaining funding is from the Boots Group. It is hoped that the research will translate the sweet gale plant from a wild crop into a farmed crop. The results of that research will enable farmers and crofters to grow plants and deliver sweet gale oil with consistent yields and quality, which will allow further development of the product.

Once a minister, always a minister. I believe that the Minister for Environment will talk about the rural development programme. As an MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I welcome Highlands and Islands Enterprise's input into the product. NFU Scotland says that the commercial cultivation of sweet gale provides a new direction for the farming industry and an opportunity to encourage new rural businesses, as Peter Peacock said. It says that although a large market awaits sweet gale producers, if crucial support for production set-up costs were to stall, that could jeopardise the industry's future. Farmers and growers need to know as soon as possible  whether funding will be forthcoming, as they must decide whether to start planting. The crop is likely to provide an income of between £500 and £700 per hectare, often in remote rural areas where such money would be hugely welcome. Scotland's sweet gale industry is flourishing. It brings new business and opportunities to fragile areas that have traditionally offered few job opportunities. However, no direct financial incentives are offered for the cost of the plants and their cultivation in the first year. After that year, the crop is low maintenance, as it is established. More recognition and promotion are needed of the role in the rural economy of high-value non-food crops. We must acknowledge the innovation of the sweet gale product and provide funding streams to kick-start production and support first-entrant growers. Increased production of the ancient plant sweet gale would bring money into remote and rural areas but, because it is neither a tattie nor a tree, it attracts no funding incentives for growth to meet the guaranteed demand. Could the production of sweet gale be permitted as cultivation under paragraph 13 of schedule 2 to the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993, as amended? Could crofters access support that is available for agricultural production, including the crofting counties agricultural grants scheme? Will the minister confirm that the second tranche of implementation of the Crofting Reform etc Act 2007 in January 2008 will provide that growing bog myrtle is a wider use of crofts and common grazings? I hope that the minister will examine all those opportunities. On behalf of bog myrtle, which is now known as sweet gale, I ask the minister to respond with an assurance that will encourage farmers and crofters to grow a sweet gale crop to yield the consistent high-quality oil that is required from this unique natural Scottish product.

We are indeed fortunate that Parliament has Richard Simpson's expertise on many health issues. The cabinet secretary mentioned the involvement of local partners. What role will local pharmacists play in the case of a flu pandemic? Will others who have medical skills, such as optometrists, be trained to support medical practitioners in a pandemic? Does the minister agree that it could be in the interests of people in Scotland for the Government to stockpile Relenza, which happens to be made in Montrose, at the same level as Tamiflu, so that it does not put all its eggs in one basket? What is the Government's view on the risk of resistance to Tamiflu developing if it is consistently and widely used?

To ask the First Minister how many additional physiotherapists will be employed in the national health service. (S3F-295)

With 70 per cent of this year's physiotherapy graduates still unemployed five months after graduation, and one third of 2006 graduates still unemployed, what does the Scottish National Party's manifesto commitment to "increase the numbers of NHS physiotherapists" mean for those highly trained, unemployed professionals and the 28,000 patients who are on waiting lists for physiotherapy treatment?

I welcome the debate in the name of Bill Wilson, and his Rev I M Jolly introduction.  The research is much more interesting than I found it to be at first glance. Any research that can contribute to the understanding of alcohol intake and the behaviour of young people is helpful. That is particularly the case given that 27 per cent of the population use alcohol harmfully, compared with the 1 per cent of the population who use drugs harmfully—figures that were given in this week's Health and Sport Committee meeting. I welcome the research paper from the University of Paisley by John McAlaney and John McMahon. There is in Scotland a culture of drinking that has to be understood and addressed. Although we could have lifted the American research, there is no doubt that the higher legal age for purchasing and the less tolerant attitude of students and university officials in America means that that research does not wholly apply to Scotland. As Bill Wilson stated, the research found that an individual's perception of normal behaviour in others is a determinant in his or her own behaviour. It is also important to acknowledge the higher proportion of mature students who participated in the Paisley research and that the female to male ratio was 2:1. The significant positive relationship between the individual's consumption and his or her perception of others' consumption appears to be stronger when a person drinks more than seven drinks on a night out. That compares to the individual who has fewer than seven drinks and who perceives that their personal drinking behaviour is greater than the norm in other students. In other words, the lower the individual's alcohol intake, the lower is their perception of drinking in others, and the higher their intake above seven drinks a night, the higher is their perception of what is the norm of drinking among other students. The research paper states: "Heavy episodic drinking behaviour itself may increase how common individuals perceive the behaviour to be in others—possibly as a way to justify their own consumption to themselves". The theory applies also to the frequency of drunkenness. Students who were drunk on fewer than two or three days a week perceived the norms of drinking by other students to be lower, whereas those who were drunk more than once a week perceived the norms of drinking by others to be significantly greater. In my view, those two points represent the core of the issue. The research shows that many students strive—as Kenny Gibson said—to match an inflated perception of what is normal drinking for a student. The report says that 52 per cent of respondents at Paisley university stated that the majority of students got drunk at least twice a week. However, that is more than four times greater than the real figure, which the report says is 12 per cent. That reinforces what I regard as being the  central point, which is that there seem to be genuine misperceptions. The end result is that the alcohol intake of many people is being increased as they try to keep up with their peers, even though their peers are actually drinking less than them. I hope that the research will be utilised to underline public health messages, advertising and information campaigns for students and others. However, the research is confined to the university sector. It would be interesting to find out whether the analysis applies equally to the drinking behaviour of people of all ages and people from all walks of life. Nonetheless, the research is an excellent contribution to the debate on alcohol consumption. I thank Bill Wilson for bringing it to the attention of Parliament.

Diabetes is often underdiagnosed: many people with diabetes do not have a family history of the condition and might not fall into the categories the minister mentioned. What is being done to ensure that such people get an early diagnosis and treatment as soon as possible—particularly on the basis of primary care—to ensure that what David Stewart mentioned is alleviated?

This has been a good debate: members of all parties have contributed positively and constructively on the food issues that will benefit the health and economy of communities across Scotland. Members have talked about local food, but the briefing from the Scottish Parliament information centre indicates that there is no commonly accepted definition of local food. Many think that it should refer to food that is produced or processed within 30 miles of the point of sale. I put it on the record that, in the Highlands, 30 miles is nothing. I hope that we can agree a common definition of local food through the debate. It is a matter of concern that the SPICe briefing confirms that the prices that farmers receive for beef, milk and lamb are below the cost of production. That is hardly an incentive for more local produce. As many members have said, it is recommended that we eat more fruit and vegetables, but they amount to only 1 per cent and 2 per cent respectively of agricultural output. Why should a farmer grow carrots, for example, and be paid £80 a tonne for them when the supermarket price is £700 a tonne? That is nine times more than the farmer gets, and it exemplifies the point Jim Hume made.  If we want to buy more local food, we need more local food to buy; and perhaps we need more incentives to supply—that was not meant to be a poem, but it came out like that. I commend John Scott's commitment to farmers markets in Scotland. I understand that he is now the president of the Scottish Association of Farmers Markets. I also understand that he can be found at his stall at the Ayr farmers market on the first Saturday of every month and that he has been there every month since July 1999. Well done, John! There are farmers markets in many Highland towns. The farmers market in Inverness runs once a month. That is excellent, but it is not enough. We need more farmers co-operatives and local outlets that are open every day, not just once a month. More needs to be done to ensure that there is honest food labelling, less red tape and more procurement of local food by public agencies. There is no doubt that the big four supermarkets are dominant. Supermarkets make it easy for customers to park and shop, and they supply everything under one roof, which suits many people, given their way of life. It is difficult to buy local food, because we have to be sure of getting to the farmers market on the day when it is running. Even when we visit small local shops throughout the Highlands and Islands, it is not easy to buy local produce. Health food and organic food outlets do not always stock a good range of Scottish produce. I know that because I have not shopped in one of the big four supermarkets since May; it has been a good exercise in finding out about the difficulty of local shopping and buying local produce. Instead of constantly blaming the supermarkets, we should focus on getting more local produce into local shops so that we can ensure that they have a year-round supply of locally produced food. As the cabinet secretary knows, an excellent campaign supported local shops in Moray. That approach could be extended to support the supply of local produce in local shops. Clear signage could show that small local shops stock a range of local products. Such an approach would bring the benefits that members have talked about and it would help to retain local shops in many remote and rural areas. I commend the work of the Highlands and Islands local food network, which includes consumers, farmers, crofters and community groups, who work together to ensure that more fresh, locally grown food is available. As members have said, food halls in agricultural shows have grown enormously in recent years. The cabinet secretary and Rob Gibson attended the event at Cawdor estates, which brought together local  producers of organic food. I understand that the event, which was excellent, will be held annually. Food labelling appears to be unduly complex. Tesco—I can mention it because I live in the Tesco capital of the UK—gives the percentage of the guideline daily amount of calories, sugar, fats and saturates, whereas the Food Standards Agency's traffic-light labelling system gives the number of grams of fat, for example, but does not indicate the recommended daily amount. A consumer will therefore know how much sugar, for example, is in their food, but they will not know whether that amount is too much or not enough. Ministers could consider how to bring the two systems together, to simplify labelling and to make it easier for consumers to understand. I commend John Scott—again—and the Scottish Conservatives' vigorous campaign to promote local food, which we ran during the summer. There is no doubt that local food is greener and healthier, or that it supports local jobs. It helps to restore trust in food production, which is important. Given my experience during the past six months, I can vouch for the fact that locally produced food tastes better.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met the Scottish Ambulance Service. (S3O-1030)

An answer to a parliamentary question concluded that "an accident and emergency ambulance should be double crewed, with at least one crew member being a paramedic unless in exceptional circumstances, such as short notice sick absence".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 27 July 2007; S3W-2125.]  That is not the case in many parts of the Highlands, where single-crewed ambulances respond to 999 calls. Last night on the Isle of Skye, all ambulances were single manned. Will the cabinet secretary have further talks with the Scottish Ambulance Service about its approach to single-manned ambulances in the Highlands, to ensure that ambulance crews are supported and valued and that no patient lives are put at risk?

We have had a very comprehensive housing statement today, although the issue would have benefited from a debate, rather than a statement. Nonetheless, I commend Kit Fraser and the BBC's "Good Morning Scotland" for their premonitions about the statement and their thorough and accurate analysis of the content. I hope, as you do, Presiding Officer, that perhaps one day the Government will respect this Parliament by announcing measures here first. I will try to limit my questions. First, the total debt of councils in Scotland is more than £9 billion. Of that, £2 billion is council housing debt. Given the new role of local government in building and managing more homes, how will the Government ensure that the debt will not continue to increase and that council tax payers in Scotland will not have to pay their share of even higher debt charges in future? Secondly, 480,000 families in Scotland fulfilled their aspiration of home ownership through being given the right to buy the homes that they lived in. The policy also increased labour mobility across Scotland. Why should future generations be denied that choice? There is no research base to prove that abolishing the right to buy frees up any more affordable housing. Is it really the aim of the Government to abolish the right to buy for all council homes in future? Thirdly, why is there a need for the Scottish sustainable communities initiative to "encourage local authorities and their partners to bring forward proposals for sustainable new communities"? Does the Government think that local authorities are incapable of doing that without encouragement from an outside body? Finally, why did the SNP campaign against council housing stock transfer in the Highlands, in the knowledge that £153 million of housing debt would be written off—as would more investment in homes as a result—given that Highland Council has sought exemption for 4,250 homes that will not meet the Scottish housing quality standard? Why should people in the Highlands live in substandard housing as a result of SNP campaigning and policy?

I agree that the debate has been a good one in which many excellent speeches have been made. In particular, I commend the last line of the Government's motion, in which it "notes the need for the NHS to play its part in early identification and intervention for those individuals drinking at harmful or hazardous levels." I look forward to hearing further information from the cabinet secretary on that. As many members, including Kenny Gibson, said, help comes only when someone recognises that they have a problem. Often, someone seeks help only when they have lost their job and family and they are in dreadful health. An article in The Press and Journal this week highlighted the problem of drink and young offenders. The article was based on research by the governor of HMP Barlinnie and academics at Glasgow Caledonian University. It was found that, in 1979, just under 50 per cent of young offenders aged between 16 and 21 were drunk at the time of their offence. That figure has risen to 74 per cent this year. Another startling comparison that the study revealed was that, in 1979, 7 per cent of young offenders were drunk daily before they were convicted of a crime, whereas the figure today has rocketed to 40 per cent. Those are alarming figures that alone undoubtedly justify the holding of alcohol awareness week and of this debate. Dave Thompson spoke about the Highlands, where there are particular issues. According to the recent crime figures, the recorded rate of drunkenness in the Highlands is high, and it is rising at a faster rate than anywhere else in Scotland. It is right, during Scotland's first alcohol awareness week, to highlight the fact that the consumption of alcohol has increased by 23 per cent over the past decade. That has a cost for people all over Scotland—in health, justice and social services—of more than £1 billion per annum, not to mention the huge cost on families, with up to 100,000 young people living with a parent who has an alcohol problem. That is why the Scottish Conservatives will continue to work towards our manifesto commitment to invest £100 million in drug and alcohol detoxification and rehabilitation facilities. That is a clear investment to save, not only in public services and health but in supporting families. That point was acknowledged by Kenny Gibson.  Twenty-five per cent of women in Scotland exceed the recommended daily limit, which has contributed to the doubling of alcohol-related deaths among women over the past 10 years. More than half of all alcohol-related deaths have a diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease, and the problems are worsening. The number of patients who have been discharged from hospitals in the Highlands with alcoholic liver disease has trebled over the past decade. In the Western Isles, it has quadrupled. On the subject of labelling, the Minister for Public Health said in an interview on 22 October: "It can be difficult to know how much you are drinking when drinks can vary so much in size and strength." If I have learned something this week, it is that one glass of wine is not the same as another glass of wine—it is not a homogenous product. We sometimes get conflicting messages. We are often told that a glass of wine at night is good for our health, in particular the circulation, but we do not know whether the alcohol content of that glass should be 3 per cent or 14 per cent. The Scottish Conservatives would welcome and support clear information on the strength of drink, which should be more clearly labelled. We acknowledge that many people drink more than the recommended limits and that many people have serious alcohol addictions, but what happens when they ask for help—for detox and rehab? I agree with Paul Martin about the excellent work that Alcoholics Anonymous does. I point out to Ian McKee that Beechwood house in Inverness is a similar facility to the one in Aberdeen that he mentioned. I asked a parliamentary question on detox and rehab. I was initially told that the information is "not held centrally". The answer from the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on 3 August was: "The varied range of alcohol detoxification and rehabilitation services and the different ways of accessing these services has meant it is not possible to collect waiting time information. We will give further consideration to the feasibility of collecting such information in the future."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 3 August 2007; S3W-2338.]  I agree with Ian McKee that, when people need and ask for help, they should not be placed on a waiting list and told to come back after a number of months. That is why I raised the issue of waiting times with the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing yesterday. I look forward to the Justice Committee, the Health and Sport Committee and the Local Government and Communities Committee working together to better scrutinise the budget so as to  understand where the budget commitments lie in this area. Many people with alcohol problems have underlying mental health issues, such as depression, but many treatment establishments will treat either alcoholism or mental health. As people cannot be in two places at once, we need to ensure that treatment centres are fit for purpose. I have recently been supporting a constituent who has bipolar disorder and is an alcoholic. According to him, he could find only one place in Scotland where he could have joint treatment, which was the Priory clinic in Glasgow. I welcome the debate and acknowledge that we still have a long way to go to deal with the alcohol problem in Scotland.

Mental health was a priority of the previous Executive. Is it still a priority? How will the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing ensure that the strategic spending review reflects that priority?

To ask the First Minister what action will be taken following the ruling by Lord Macphail on the provision of free personal care. (S3F-225)

Given that Lord Macphail expressed his disappointment that he was not afforded assistance by the SNP Government to interpret the legislation in the public interest, will the First Minister give an assurance that if a similar circumstance arises in future his Government will assist and co-operate with the Court of Session?

I wish to declare that my daughter is a solicitor with Brodies LLP, which was the legal representative for Argyll and Bute Council. She had no input into this case. Lord Macphail observed that the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 is "unusually complex", so I will start by outlining the background. The case involved a complaint to the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman that Argyll and Bute Council failed to provide funding to cover the personal care costs of an elderly resident, Mr McLachlan. As was the practice of some other local authorities, Mr McLachlan was placed on a waiting list until funding was found. In the interim, his family arranged and paid for care in an independent home. Like many other families, they did what they thought was right and best for their father. The family then sought to be reimbursed from the date of their father's assessment. The ombudsman decided that the council had been obliged by the terms of the 2002 act to provide Mr McLachlan with free personal care. She further recommended that the council should have made payments from the date when he became eligible, following assessment. Argyll and Bute Council challenged that. This brings us to Lord Macphail's Court of Session judgment. He took the view that Argyll and Bute Council was not required by section 1 of the 2002 act to meet the personal care costs of Mr McLachlan, as the act states: "a local authority are not to charge for social care provided by them (or the provision of which is secured by them)". In Mr McLachlan's case, the care was provided through an entirely private arrangement between his family and the care home. Although I have no doubt that it was the intention of the Parliament to provide a universal entitlement to free personal care, the  consequence of Lord Macphail's judgment is that no such statutory right exists in the legislation as drafted. Now we come to the crucial point. Before reaching his final decision, Lord Macphail gave the Scottish ministers an opportunity to instruct counsel to appear before the court to make submissions "in the public interest" about the correct interpretation of the legislation on free personal care, but they declined to do so. Lord Macphail expressed his disappointment that he had not been afforded such assistance and indicated that he had reached his decision with reluctance. His decision stated: "it was not possible to interpret the legislation about free personal care as obliging a local authority to make payments for personal care that was not provided by them." The case has gone from being one in which the ombudsman recommended that the council should calculate and pay a sum equivalent to the payments for care from the date of eligibility, to one in which a Court of Session judge decided that it was not possible to interpret the legislation as obliging a local authority to make payments for personal care that was not provided or secured by it. The judge further stated that the ombudsman's decision that the 2002 act placed a statutory duty on the council to provide funding was incorrect. We now have a judgment that casts doubt on whether councils are obliged to pay for care in the independent sector and which appears to legitimise the use of waiting lists and the rationing of personal care by councils such as Argyll and Bute Council. More than 9,000 self-funders are in care and others are being assessed, and they need reassurance and clarification from Parliament—and, I hope, from this debate—to put their minds at ease. On a matter of such importance, it is deplorable that the Scottish ministers refused to make a submission to the court about the correct interpretation of the legislation, as they were invited to do. The summary of Lord Macphail's judgment stated:  "the matter was of great importance". Lord Macphail himself said: "the Court would derive invaluable assistance in arriving at a decision on that very important issue from hearing submissions on behalf of the Scottish Ministers." I agree with the judge's further comment that the legislation is "unusually complex." All this mayhem happened because the Scottish ministers refused to co-operate. Now there is a judicial review that casts doubt on whether councils are obliged to pay for care in the independent sector. All of us in the Parliament are aware that the court decision is not in line with the  spirit of the free personal care legislation and Parliament's understanding of it. Frankly, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's time would have been better spent providing assistance to the court before the judgment was made, rather than writing letters to the newspapers afterwards. Labour and the Lib Dems are not blameless either—I am sure that we will hear from them. They indicated to the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman in February that they did not intend to intervene.

I do not have much time, and I know that the member will have the opportunity to clarify later. Had the ombudsman been given assistance by the Liberal and Labour coalition, would the decision have been different? Had the judge been given assistance by the nationalist Government, would his decision have been different? We will never know the answers to those questions. While I do not think that the cabinet secretary has covered herself in glory in relation to this case, it is fair to acknowledge the steps that have been taken to deal with the problems inherited from the previous Scottish Executive, as outlined in the Scottish National Party amendment. If the cabinet secretary is prepared to give the assurance that the Scottish Conservatives seek today for people who are in care and for families who are affected by the judgment, we will accept the amendment in her name and lend our support to legislation that may be required to resolve the matter once and for all. Older people in Scotland deserve no less. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern that the interpretation, implementation and funding of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 has been beset by difficulties, many of which remain unresolved; believes that the decision of Lord Macphail on the Petition of Argyll and Bute Council dated 17 October 2007 is contrary to the intention of the Parliament, and calls on the Scottish Government to assure all people over 65 currently resident in independent care homes who have been assessed as eligible for free personal care, and others who may be assessed in future as so eligible, that councils will continue to fund their personal care regardless of whether or not there is a contract to which a council is a party.

I, too, thank the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for her statement. I welcome the Scottish National Party's U-turn and its full commitment to the regional treatment centre at Stracathro, which is an excellent example of the independent sector collaborating with the NHS. I also welcome the inclusion of audiology in the targets. I have two questions. First, the cabinet secretary stated: "All patients will be covered by national maximum waiting time targets." Given her commitment last month to address patient groups outside the guarantee, can she confirm today that that will include patients who require mental health treatment, infertility treatment and referrals for drug and alcohol detoxification and rehabilitation? Secondly, although the role of the Scottish regional treatment centre at Stracathro is acknowledged, will the cabinet secretary today commit to utilise all resources in the independent sector in Scotland where appropriate to meet the waiting time targets in future?

I, too, thank Cathie Craigie for securing the debate on the issues and challenges surrounding young deaf and hearing-impaired people. The briefing from the National Deaf Children's Society was very helpful in providing information. It states that services for deaf children have not been placed at the top of the agenda in the Scottish Parliament. In response to that, I point out that there are MSPs, such as Cathie Craigie, who since 1999 have maintained an interest in the issue and have ensured that it is at least on the agenda. With more than 1,000 deaf children living in Scotland, and given the Parliament's commitment to reducing inequalities, I commend the consultation, and I have supported the motion. MSPs past and present have been critical of consultation exercises. In general, people are unaware of consultations; those who are consulted are not those who are affected; and the conclusions and recommendations are often—allegedly—written before the exercise starts. In this case, however, there is a recognition that barriers exist and that we must understand more about the difficulties that young deaf people face in their daily lives. The consultation exercise is all about asking deaf children to tell us about the difficulties and obstacles that hinder them in achieving their potential. It cannot be better than that. The results of the consultation will inform the strategic priorities of the National Deaf Children's  Society. The question remains how much its conclusions and recommendations will influence the Government's policy developments for deaf children. I hope that the minister will take the opportunity, in winding up the debate, to outline the steps that he will take to work with the National Deaf Children's Society and the proposals that he will make to include NDCS's recommendations in Government policy. I hope that, as we seek to improve services for young deaf Scots, a comparison will be made between children who attend specialist schools for the deaf and children who attend other schools. Schools such as Donaldson's here in Edinburgh have an excellent reputation. I hope that out of the consultation exercise will come an action plan to ensure that deaf children from throughout Scotland, particularly in my area of the Highlands and Islands and in other remote and rural areas, gain the right to the full language, communication and access support that they need to communicate in the most appropriate way for them. It is a matter of concern that schools such as Donaldson's operate below their capacity, given the specialists who are based there. They provide educational audiology, physiology, speech and language therapy, physiotherapy and occupational therapy. I hope that the new Donaldson's, which is due to open in January in Linlithgow with an increased capacity of 120 places, will be fully utilised. It is concerning that information is available on the educational attainment of deaf children in England, but not in Scotland. It would be helpful to measure the academic achievements of deaf children in order to make a comparison and to determine where investment should be focused in future. I was surprised to hear that there is no co-ordinated early years framework for deaf children in Scotland. I hope that the minister will take the opportunity to address that. It would be positive if we could ensure that all families receive the support and advice that they need in order to communicate effectively with their children. The National Deaf Children's Society states that it depends on the good will of audiologists to pass on its details to the families of deaf children. Surely there is a better way—through the education system—to get that information to all families in Scotland, even in the most remote and rural areas. I look forward to the results of the consultation and to the information that is produced being fed into the priorities of local and national Government.

I congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing the debate. When I read about Warm Zones, I wondered what they were, but taking part in today's debate has helped me to learn a lot, as often happens. As Kenny Gibson said, there is no doubt that the warm deal and the central heating programme have made a difference in Scotland, but fuel poverty is still a major problem, with the Scottish house condition survey of 2002 estimating that 286,000 households are fuel poor. That equates to 13 per cent of Scotland's homes. Of those homes, 20 per cent were considered to be in extreme fuel poverty; that is, they were spending more than 20 per cent of their income on fuel. Fuel poverty affects all ages, but we should worry in particular about the old and frail, and the young. Scotland's children's charities believe that 100,000 children in Scotland live in a home in fuel poverty. The negative effect of living in a household with fuel poverty on people's health is an issue. Conditions such as flu, heart disease, asthma and stroke are all exacerbated by damp and cold living. The figures for Scotland are worrying. In the Highlands, the problems are far worse: 18,500 households in the Highland Council area, or 21  per cent, suffer from fuel poverty, making it the fifth-worst local authority area in Scotland. Many problems contribute to that. Fuel choice is limited to the most expensive options. Mains gas, which is often the cheapest energy source, is available only in some parts of Inverness, Nairn, Caithness, Ross, Cromarty and Sutherland. Less than half of households in the Highlands are connected to a gas supply. Many traditional stone-built houses are difficult to insulate. Those problems are exacerbated by the harsh winters that we get up north. Warm Zones schemes have been successfully implemented across England and Wales, as Kenny Gibson said. Warm Zones provides advice on better insulation and other measures. The company also offers advice on how people may claim more of the benefits to which they are entitled but that they do not know about. The Warm Zones website cites two cases where households were not claiming benefits to which they were entitled. They totalled more than £12,000 and £7,000 respectively. Not all the investigations are as fruitful as those two cases, but the average study finds that people who are living in fuel poverty are entitled to around an extra £2,000 in benefits. I take this opportunity to mention a scheme that is being run by Friends of the Earth, under which it has chosen a parliamentarian from each party. I am the energy-efficient person for the Conservatives; Rob Gibson has been selected for the Scottish National Party. Although I welcome the initiative, I think we could all do much more for energy efficiency. Of course, that has a greater impact on people in fuel poverty. I have had my home assessed. I will not go into the details, but I was shocked at the results. I thought that I knew how much electricity I was using. A smart meter was in operation at the weekend. I suggest that it would not be a bad idea to have one in every house, so that we know just how much energy our appliances use. For less than £50, I can make the biggest difference: as Kenny Gibson said, it is to use low-energy light bulbs, which are now much cheaper and much more effective. We can also use reflective foil behind radiators, which can be done using kitchen foil and cardboard. That reduces heat loss from the back of radiators by 70 per cent. Many of us assume that energy efficiency measures are expensive, but that is not necessarily the case. The results of Warm Zones initiatives south of the border are extremely encouraging, and I support Kenny Gibson's motion to bring them to Scotland.

If patients' rights are at the centre of the NHS, and given that the minister bases her model on the Norwegian one, will she give patients the right to choose between a private hospital and an NHS hospital, which is the case in Norway?

Like Margaret Curran, I congratulate Ross Finnie on his speech. It is indeed an historic day. After eights years in government and 147 days in opposition, the new Lib Dems have all the answers on the NHS. I further congratulate Ross Finnie on his explanation of the difference between invention and implementation. It is unfair of members who intervened on Ross Finnie, and did not give him the opportunity to finish what he was saying on the upper limit for waiting lists, to misquote him. I heard clearly what he was saying and I understood it, but there was misrepresentation from the Government benches.

I will not. I have got too much to say in a short time. The Scottish Conservatives are delighted to speak to the motion, which "regrets the decision by the SNP to put political dogma before patient need in ruling out the use of the private sector to reduce waiting times". We welcome converts to the Tory cause, no matter how late and no matter what their previous convictions. Last week, we heard of the abolition of the availability status codes—otherwise known as the hidden waiting lists—which currently total 25,000. Added to the real waiting lists, that presents a challenge within an 18-week waiting time guarantee, let alone an 18-week legally binding guarantee. As I have said previously, many patient groups fall outwith that waiting time guarantee, legally binding or not. Those groups include people with mental health problems, infertility patients, and people with drug and alcohol addiction who are waiting for detox and rehab.  Some patients can wait for years, not weeks or months. There are 28,000 people in Scotland waiting for physiotherapy. Ross Finnie's point was that there should be a clinical judgment rather than a straight 18 weeks for all conditions. Physiotherapy patients have a recommended 18-week wait. However, although the Government insists on an 18-week target, that it is not appropriate for all patients. Given that 33,000 people in Scotland are off work due to back pain, would it not be good value for money to employ more physiotherapists and gain shorter waiting times? Would it not be good for people to get back to work rather than sitting at home for 18 weeks, particularly given that a small problem can become a chronic problem if it is left for that length of time? That would help the individual, help the family and help the economy. Instead of legally binding waiting time guarantees being introduced for certain groups of patients, we suggest to the new SNP Government that more work force planning should be done not only in physiotherapy, but in chiropody, or podiatry as it is now known. The number of podiatrists has not increased since 2003, with the result that many elderly people are forced to pay privately for podiatry care and treatment to keep themselves mobile and independent. It is right to raise the E112 scheme, which states: "Under the relevant rules and European Court of Justice judgments, you are entitled to go abroad for treatment ... if ... you face an 'undue delay' in receiving the care you need in the UK." Given that the Government has specified an 18-week waiting time, any lawyer could fairly assume that any patient whose wait exceeds 18 weeks could be funded by the NHS for treatment elsewhere in the European Union. As I understand it, people can claim reimbursement of the charges for treatment up to the amount that it would cost the NHS to provide the care. As more patients find out about the scheme and we get a definition of "undue delay", more people could receive treatment abroad that is paid for by the NHS. Of course, undue delay and treatment abroad under the E112 scheme are now more likely because the Government refuses to use fully the resources and capacity of the independent sector in Scotland. The First Minister, Mr Salmond, stated: "The system that we have proposed and put out for ... consultation is based on the system that is used in the Norwegian health service".— [ Official Report , 6 September 2007; c 1497.]  He said that the system will be patient centred and will put patients first. Given his endorsement of the Norwegian system, I ask the Cabinet Secretary for  Health and Wellbeing the following questions. Norwegian legislation gives patients a choice of hospitals in which to be treated and an option to change their general practitioner twice a year. What choice will the Scottish Government give patients? The Norwegian waiting time guarantee makes use of available capacity in other countries. Will the SNP send patients out of Scotland to meet the targets rather than using the staff and other resources of the independent sector in Scotland? Will the SNP's legally binding waiting time guarantee cover care at home? Will it include all community care, as is the case in Norway? In 2004, Norwegian legislation was amended to extend the free choice of hospitals to include private hospitals that have agreements with the health authorities. Will the SNP allow patients in Scotland to choose which hospital to attend from a range of independent and NHS hospitals? In Norway, patients have the right to treatment in a private or foreign hospital if the time limit is exceeded. Will the SNP give patients in Scotland that right? In the membership of the Norwegian Board of Health Supervision, the number of doctors, 20, is exceeded by the number of lawyers, 25. Is that really the SNP's model for health care in Scotland? The First Minister recommends the Norwegian model of health care, but even in Norway legally binding waiting time guarantees have not reduced waiting times by a single day.

Will the minister give way?

The debate has been good. It is always healthy when there is recognition throughout the chamber of the issues, the problems and the way forward. It is right and proper to debate the Glasgow housing stock transfer. It is right and proper not only to learn from that experience, but to examine the effect of the Glasgow stock transfer on the overarching policy of stock transfer for the rest of Scotland, which gives me an excuse to have a minute on the Highlands.  I do not understand why the SNP can be in favour of the transfer of council housing in Glasgow yet campaign against it so vociferously in the Highlands, as was covered in two columns in last week's Inverness Courier , if the minister wishes to read it.

So, obviously, the Highlands was GHA mark 2 and the SNP campaigned against that because it could foresee the difficulties. However, we will move on from that. It is rich for the Labour front bench to criticise the five-month-old nationalist Government for blaming the previous Liberal-Labour Executive, given that Johann Lamont's party, after 10 years in government, is still blaming the Tories.

I fully accept what the minister and Bill Aitken said on that. I thank Tom McCabe for a considered, measured and well-informed speech. However—I am sorry, but I must be fair—he and his colleagues had eight years in government and, in setting up the GHA, five years to establish the structures and financing for the second-stage transfer, but they failed. Robert Brown put it well when he said that the old municipal form of housing has failed. Bill Aitken described it as the dead hand of municipal socialism. Kenneth Gibson asked about the writing off of debt with no stock transfer. The real question is why local authorities clocked up hundreds of millions of pounds of debt. If the chancellor writes off Highland Council's housing debt and that of other councils without stock transfer, how can we be assured that those councils will manage and invest in their housing stock effectively and not build up millions of pounds of debt in future?

No, I have given way twice already. The debate concerns the issues that the GHA's situation raises, but I will ask about another  missed opportunity. There is undoubtedly a housing crisis in the Highlands. Highland Council has a housing debt of £153 million—an average of £11,000 per house—which would have been written off by the housing stock transfer. I think that it is the largest housing debt in Scotland next to the City of Edinburgh Council's. Of every pound of rent collected, 41p goes to service the debt. Nine thousand council-owned houses do not meet the housing standard. Highland Council faces a bill of £137 million to get them up to standard and is applying for exemption from the standard for 4,000 properties. That is what happens with a no vote. The SNP group leader on Highland Council has called for the council's housing debt to be cancelled. Will the SNP Government accept that its vociferous campaign against the housing stock transfer left Highland Council with a burden of £153 million in housing debt? The SNP actively campaigned against housing stock transfer in full knowledge of the financial consequences that the council and tenants would face. Now that it is in power, will the SNP Government respond to the issues that face Highland Council and its tenants? They expect the Government to come up with an answer to a problem of its own making.

One of the problems with speaking late in a debate is that many members have already raised key issues. My speech might, therefore, be shorter than I had planned. Rather than going through all of the money concerns in Moray, I will simply thank Peter Peacock for raising them and state that I fully endorse all of the points that he made. I share the concerns that others have raised about financial issues, given that the resources that are needed in Moray are more than the council's annual budget. I appreciate that that situation might change now, but genuine concerns remain. Although we might disagree about the manner in which some members raise those concerns, we should be respectful and acknowledge that we are talking about hundreds of millions of pounds, not pennies.  Many members have mentioned the traumatic effect of flooding on families. In the previous session, a class of nine and 10-year-olds from Elgin came to visit the Parliament. When we had asked them all of our questions, we said, as we normally do, "Do you have any questions for us?" All of them asked, "What are you doing about flooding?", and said, "We are worried about flooding. My mother's worried, my grannie's worried and I'm worried." I was left thinking that that was some legacy to have left that generation. The fact that nine and 10-year-olds are worried about flooding has stayed with me since then. The recent publication by the Government of a detailed national map showing the areas that are most in danger of being deluged by rising water levels demonstrates that around 100,000 homes and businesses in Scotland are affected. As others have said, there is a large number of at-risk communities in the Highlands and Islands, prominent among them being Inverness and Elgin. The cabinet secretary is well aware of the problems in Elgin and Moray and of the devastating floods that hit the area in 1997 and 2002. Other members have mentioned events that took place two or three years ago; I am talking about floods that took place 10 years ago, and we are still waiting for flood alleviation schemes. After people's family homes were destroyed by flood waters or their businesses were ruined, they were subjected to living or working in temporary accommodation for many months. One of the obstacles to progress seems to be bureaucracy. A headline in last week's Northern Scot and Moray & Nairn Express said it best: "Cut the red tape, flood chiefs plead". Officials on the ground who are trying to implement flood schemes in Moray and throughout Scotland appear to keep coming up against red tape at every stage. That adds more delays to schemes that need to be in place sooner rather than later in order to give residents of areas that have flooded in the past peace of mind that they will be protected. I do not suggest that we take away the democratic right of people to object to flood alleviation schemes, but the fact that it is possible for them to object more than once in relation to three different pieces of legislation clearly demonstrates that we need to streamline the process. The convoluted legal process that local authorities have to follow to gain a flood prevention order takes up huge amounts of council time and resources that could be better spent implementing the schemes much sooner. That probably partly explains why Elgin is still waiting for a flood alleviation scheme 10 years after the floods of 1997. John Scott, Des McNulty and others mentioned land management techniques. Paragraph 28 of the flooding issues advisory committee's report mentions promoting rural land-use solutions. We  are all aware that trees are one of the best upstream solutions, because woodlands absorb water above and below the ground and slow the passage of that water. I understand that the previous Moray Council applied for money for forestry as part of a flood alleviation scheme but that money is not granted for such measures under flood alleviation funding. Perhaps the new Scottish Government's more joined-up approach will enable the minister to examine that situation and consider providing money for forestry from flood alleviation funding rather than keeping the budget in a separate silo. Inverness, where I live, had serious floods some years ago. I remember the television news showing a honeymooning couple leaving the Thistle hotel in a boat. The main cause of that flooding was the fact that councils were not cleaning out culverts. We can pass all the acts of Parliament that we wish, but our efforts will come to nothing if we do not ensure that all stakeholders play their part and ensure that drainage work is done. I welcome the motion and the fact that a flooding bill will be dealt with in this parliamentary session. I ask the cabinet secretary and others to work closely with local authorities and help them to move more quickly to put schemes in place. SEPA's flooding website has the slogan: "Flooding: You can't prevent it. You can prepare for it." I hope that the new flooding legislation will mean that we can prepare for it much more quickly than we have done in the past.

Will the minister give way?

The minister has almost answered my question, which is about objectors' allegations that late submissions from them have been refused while many late submissions from the applicants have been accepted. Does he accept that that has happened?

First, I respectfully remind Patrick Harvie that although it is tempting to widen the debate, it is clearly about the way in which the public inquiry has been conducted. I also point out that none of the written objections that I have read opposes renewable energy. I also thank Murdo Fraser for securing this debate and for the points that he has raised. Politicians hear many complaints about the decisions of public inquiries, but I have never heard so many complaints about the conduct of an inquiry as I have about what has been Scotland's longest ever public inquiry. We have to hope that lessons can be learned from the experience, to restore faith in local democracy and to encourage local people to participate in the planning process in future. As Richard Simpson said, it is incredible that SHETL and Scottish Power are claiming £7 million from Ofgem to cover their inquiry costs. The objectors, on the other hand, have paid their council tax to be represented, they have paid their own travelling and accommodation costs, and they will now have to pay the applicant's costs through electricity charges. Why does the directorate for planning and environmental appeals insist on taking down all the evidence in longhand and then ensuring that documents have not been accessible at the inquiry? I have to say that I was proud to hear that even in the inquiry into the Scottish Parliament building, all the documents were fed into the computer, which meant that everyone present had the same access to the same documents at the same time. As a result, there was, apparently, no confusion. The public inquiry on the Beauly to Denny power line has been unable to keep to any timetable. Many people have turned up to give evidence on their appointed day, only to be told to come back the next day. Many others have incurred travelling and accommodation costs and have given up holiday entitlement to attend day after day, only to be called four or five days after their appointed day. Why could we not have had a two-stage inquiry? The first stage could have been given over to a consideration of strategic aspects to reach a decision on the principle of the need for a connection and, as Murdo Fraser suggested, an examination of the costs of overheading and undergrounding the line. All local authorities and community councils, the Cairngorms National Park Authority, Scottish Natural Heritage, the National Trust for Scotland, the Association for the Protection of Rural  Scotland, the Ramblers Association Scotland, the Mountaineering Council of Scotland, the John Muir Trust, VisitScotland, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, landowners, community groups and thousands of others all along the route have raised objections. The public inquiry was an opportunity to get things right, but people lack confidence in it because many concerns have been dismissed and submissions have been ruled inadmissible. SSE has consistently failed to meet submission dates that the reporter has set, but still introduces new evidence. Even while witnesses are giving evidence, SSE has been allowed to change swathes of its evidence and introduce new documents. Objectors, on the other hand, have been refused permission to introduce any evidence outwith the submission dates. Other members have covered many of the points that I wished to make. The applicant's team of advocates and advisers has been accused of filibustering when examining and re-examining witnesses. Their questioning leaves little time for objectors to squeeze in a few questions at the end. Like the director of planning for Highland Council, I request that a summit meeting be arranged for all the participants in what will be a year-long inquiry to thrash out ways of improving the efficiency, fairness and transparency of such inquiries. We cannot turn back the clock, but we can learn from this inquiry and ensure that there is democratic and local participation in future public inquiries, which would restore people's confidence in them.

I, too, welcome Margaret Curran to her new health post, as it means that we are likely to have some feisty and interesting debates about health during the next four years. It is also lovely to see Richard Simpson back on health, although I realise that his appointment is not yet official. On behalf of my party, I welcome the abolition of availability status codes, which will ensure that patients do not fall through a gap in the system and lose out on appropriate and timely treatment. Indeed, as has been pointed out, much of this move has been patient led and is a result of patient choice. Given that today's announcement will lead to there being more people on the real waiting list, how will the cabinet secretary ensure that patients are treated not according to political targets but on the basis of clinical need? Secondly, will she address other hidden waiting lists such as those for mental health patients, patients who are waiting for fertility treatment and patients who are referred for drug and alcohol detoxification and rehabilitation treatment, none of whom comes under the 18-week guarantee?

The minister said that the NHS is not responsible for people who are taken ill abroad. Does that also apply to visitors who come to this country, or do such people receive free treatment from our NHS?

I, too, thank Brian Adam for securing the debate. I also thank Macmillan Cancer Support for its excellent work. The central point that we are here to discuss concerns travel insurance premiums, but the debate offers an opportunity to acknowledge that nowadays many people who are diagnosed with cancer can recover and live full and active lives. As Brian Adam said, the higher premiums for travel insurance that cancer sufferers face also apply to people who have, or who have had, other conditions, such as asthma. I hope that Cancer Research UK and other cancer charities will inform insurance companies of the new statistics on cancer recovery, as there seems to have been a lack of awareness of  cancer as an illness. Macmillan Cancer Support believes that the approach that insurance companies have taken to cancer probably relates to the significantly lower survival rates of decades ago rather than to today's survival rates. I welcome Macmillan Cancer Support's proposal that we urge insurance companies to ensure that their staff receive cancer awareness training. However, such training can be beneficial only if those staff have full knowledge of cancer recovery statistics. When I did my research for the debate, I was surprised by some of the personal stories that I read. For example, a woman who is now in her 40s was diagnosed with cancer at the age of 17 and finished her treatment five years later. She has never had a recurrence of the illness, but was understandably shocked when she was informed that her history of suffering from cancer back in the 1980s would almost double her travel insurance premium. Fortunately, she had worked as a Macmillan nurse and was able to inform the call centre operator that the fact that she had suffered from Hodgkin's lymphoma decades earlier did not represent a risk, with the result that her quotation was vastly reduced. Unfortunately, others are not as lucky or as well informed, so it is imperative that insurance companies are aware of all the facts. There is no doubt that quotations of £3,500 to £4,000 for travel insurance are extortionate. It is unfortunate that people who have fought an often long and painful battle against cancer still face situations in which they are punished by insurance companies for recovering. I am pleased to use the debate to highlight the fact that, according to our briefing from Macmillan Cancer Support, a number of patients have found the good old Post Office to be the best provider of reasonably priced travel insurance cover for cancer patients. Given the threat of closure that hangs over our post office network, I hope that many more people will get a quotation from their post office, not only for their benefit, but to help with the retention of the post office network. I reiterate my earlier point that cancer sufferers often endure years of treatment to overcome a disease that can kill, so when they are given a new lease of life, no further barriers that restrict the enjoyment that they deserve for beating cancer should be put in front of them.

The Scottish Conservatives support the order, which will raise the age for the sale of tobacco from 16 to 18. It is worth pointing out that, over the past 10 years, the number of 15-year-old boys who smoke has decreased by 18 per cent and that the number of girls of the same age who smoke has decreased by 12 per cent. The trend is undoubtedly in the right direction. We are concerned about several matters. How will the Government ensure that under-18-year-olds do not purchase from cigarette vending machines? How will the Government stop family and friends selling on cigarettes to under-18-year-olds? How can enforcement be ensured when the Government has not committed any additional resources for trading standards officers but has given a commitment only to consider that as part of the comprehensive spending review? Finally, how can the Government and the Parliament expect the order to be advertised, publicised and made known to all of Scotland in the two-week period between its being passed today and the implementation date of 1 October? Today, the chief executive of the Scottish Grocers Federation said: "we are dismayed by the failure of the Scottish Government to get the message out to young smokers" given that "the change was first announced by previous health minister Andy Kerr on New Year's Day this year and was put forward by the new Health Minister Shona Robison in June." The Scottish Grocers Federation also states—[ Interruption. ]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. As I was saying, I am quoting from the Scottish Government—I mean the Scottish Grocers Federation. [ Laughter. ]

I would be grateful if Tavish Scott would listen to my speech. If he does not, I will have to start all over again. According to the Scottish Grocers Federation, "the Scottish government has been paralysed by procedure ... Already, retailers and shop workers face intimidation, violence and abuse when challenging some youngsters to prove their age. Now, with 16 and 17 year olds set to lose their ability to smoke overnight, it is shop workers not the  police or politicians, who will be expected to enforce the law." I would be delighted if the minister could respond to that point.

Will the member give way?

I also thank Trish Godman for bringing the debate to the chamber and add my thanks to Jim Devine for the work that he has done on the issue. Twelve years ago, I bought a new-build home in Inshes Park in Inverness. Today, the residents still face problems with the ground-maintenance contract. I set up a residents association and a community council in Inverness south to try to resolve the issues. As Trish Godman said, in the past, the local authority would adopt new roads and open spaces and maintain them for ever. When we bought our homes, the residents, including me, thought that that was what would happen. Over the years, we have asked the local council for help. In its latest response, the council said that it would take on the land for a fee that was 18 times our current annual ground-maintenance charge. That was a non-starter. Many residents, again including me, were not told by their lawyers that we would have to pay an annual ground-maintenance charge. Indeed, the clause in the deed of conditions is so vague that many lawyers either did not pick it up or did not interpret it as an annual payment. In our case, many residents are refusing to pay. The situation has become so bad that, three months ago, the residents association newsletter named and shamed the non-payers, which was not exactly good for neighbour relations. If those residents continue to refuse to pay, the association will be faced with using residents' payments to pursue debt recovery and sheriff officer interventions.

I am sorry, but I am very short of time. I am pleased to say that we now have an excellent factor and contractor. However, my neighbours from Milton of Leys, who I am pleased to see in the gallery tonight, have had no such resolution. Many people have travelled from Inverness to the Parliament for the debate, and I know that the Minister for Community Safety,  Fergus Ewing, is familiar with the issue in Inverness. The members of the Milton of Leys residents association were the first property owners in the United Kingdom to instigate proceedings under trading standards legislation against the Greenbelt Group for its failure to undertake its legal obligations to provide land-maintenance services. Residents are locked into paying for such services as a result of unfair contracts of sale from building developers, who have shown no interest in the matter. The owners of more than 500 properties at Milton of Leys are locked into dealing with the Greenbelt Group—they have no escape route. The problem is further complicated because developers have passed ownership of the land concerned to Greenbelt. Residents face the added worry that that land could be developed in future. At Milton of Leys, there are yet further complications. The housing there has been built by Tulloch, Barratt Homes, Scotia Homes and Cameron and Paterson Homes. Each developer has a separate agreement with individual house purchasers and with Greenbelt. The Inverness trading standards officer—Mr MacKenzie, I believe—has been very helpful, but even he has stated that he is hampered by inadequate consumer protection legislation. Since Barrie Haycock and the Milton of Leys residents commenced their action against Greenbelt, similar problems with the company have been identified at more than 40 other sites in Scotland, England and Northern Ireland, all involving major builders. The residents are looking for action from this and other Governments. The whole business is a complete mess. Current planning law stipulates only the putting in place of a maintenance agreement; it does not stipulate that the contracted company must be fit for purpose or competent to undertake its obligations. We need to protect consumers from such unfair contracts of sale, enable consumers to change to an alternative provider, and force maintenance providers to comply with the terms and conditions of their agreements with individual property owners.

I talked about extending the exemptions list and used the comparison between epilepsy and asthma. I did not talk about our view on abolition.

It would have been the decent thing for the minority Government, at the very least, to have acknowledged the previous Administration's work on cervical cancer, hidden waiting lists and free personal care. Before my colleague John Scott left the chamber, he asked me to acknowledge and welcome the continuation of accident and emergency services at Ayr hospital. I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for acknowledging the excellent record of previous Tory Governments on housing. We welcome the light legislative programme, which means that we can draw breath and concentrate on the implementation of legislation such as the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 and legislation on care in the community. We want better support for mental health services and for the drug and alcohol detox and rehab strategies. I have looked through both "Better Health, Better Care" and "Principles and Priorities: The Government's Programme for Scotland". At first glance, it seems that the only reference to drugs in the Government programme is to drug treatment and testing orders and I have found no mention of them in the health section of the document. I know that the Government is committed to addressing the issue and I look forward to playing a positive role in bringing forward strategies that were outlined in the Conservative manifesto. There was little mention of prescription charges, which are due to be phased out by 2012. Nevertheless, we agree with the Government that there are anomalies, such as free prescriptions for diabetes and epilepsy but not for asthma. We stand by our position of electing a proportion of national health service board members and look forward to receiving the information and research to prove that direct elections to health boards will improve patient care and give us all a better health service.  The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will not be surprised to hear that we will support the review of the Public Health Act 1897. After 110 years, even conservatives with a small "c" can accept that some issues need to be revisited. I have read the Government's discussion document, "Better Health, Better Care", and I note its emphasis on self-care strategies for long-term conditions, yet organisations that I have mentioned—such as Depression Alliance Scotland—are struggling to set up and maintain self-care and self-help groups in the Highlands and elsewhere due to lack of funding. The document contains barely a passing reference to the independent sector, which—as Nicol Stephen mentioned—can provide the capacity to help to achieve the waiting times and targets that the SNP promised in its manifesto. Although the patients' rights bill has been relegated to a consultation paper for a year, there is no doubt that the bill, which will give the patient a legally binding waiting time guarantee, is more of a charter for lawyers than a charter for patients. It is likely to bog down the SNP in courts and legal wrangles and prevent it from concentrating on health centres and hospitals. For example, NHS Highlands recently offered 90 patients the opportunity to go to BUPA in Edinburgh for diagnostic and investigative work and more than 70 of them took up that opportunity. Patients in Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber, Argyll, Moray, Gordon, Angus, Aberdeen North, Dundee East, Dundee West, Central Fife, North Tayside and Perth all enjoy the excellent private health care facilities at the regional treatment centre at Stracathro. Will the SNP set its ideology and prejudice against utilisation of the private sector, which undoubtedly benefits patients?

I thank David Stewart for securing the debate and, like Christine Grahame, I acknowledge the excellent work that Karen Whitefield did in the cross-party group in the previous session. I am not a clinician, so I might have no right to say this, but many of my friends who have diabetes are not overweight. I sometimes think that people are in denial and think that they could not possibly have diabetes because they are not overweight. When we talk about obesity and diabetes, people assume that they have to be obese to have diabetes. I, too, thank Diabetes UK Scotland for providing the information stand in the Parliament this week. I certainly found it to be helpful and it gave some background for this debate. As David Stewart said, diabetes is a long-term, progressive condition that affects thousands of people in Scotland. There  has been a rise of 53,000 new cases in just four years, so this will not be the last debate on the subject. I am not quite sure how an economist can come up with a figure for those who have not been diagnosed. I accept the figure, but David Stewart will understand that it is rather difficult to measure. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I commend the work of Fergus Ewing's friends Munro and Mhairi Ross, who run an excellent self-help group in Inverness. I know that there are many similar groups throughout Scotland. The Scottish diabetes framework was an excellent piece of work by the previous Government and all parties were signed up to it. Like many others, I fully endorse the priority that is given to people with diabetes for podiatry care. However, it was not the intention that, in order to prioritise one group of patients, many elderly patients would not be able to access foot care. Therefore, although I fully support the measure, I ask that, when one patient group is prioritised, the capacity of podiatrists is increased so that others do not lose out. Early diagnosis has been mentioned, and I will give a brief example. One of my hill-walking friends attended the doctor for two years with tiredness and various other problems, and was issued with antidepressants. It was only when he applied for a pension scheme and was asked to take a medical that his diabetes was discovered. Four years later, he is still on antidepressants, although he has never been depressed in his life, and an enormous amount of damage has been done. David Stewart was talking about screening, but I would like to focus on better diagnosis and early intervention rather than a screening programme for everyone. The condition can be self-managed, but people need support to do that. I understand that in some health authorities the test strips for self-testing are being rationed and some people who need to do regular tests are having to buy their own. I hope that the minister will look at that. "Delivering for Health" signalled an intention to shift the balance of care towards preventive medicine and, by increasing anticipatory care, to reach out to those who are at greatest risk. The success of the health improvement agenda is crucial if we are to slow the increase in the number of people who are developing diabetes and reduce the rate of life-limiting complications. I hope that more emphasis will be put on prevention as well as care and treatment.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the allocation of funding for the three island councils. (S3O-371)

Given that Shetland Islands Council and Western Isles Council receive respectively £600 and £700 more per head of population than Orkney Islands Council, does the cabinet secretary agree that, rather than just a constant review or a quick glance, we need a root-and-branch review of that historical disparity in local government funding?

Does the minister acknowledge the problem that 100,000 children in Scotland live with a parent who has an alcohol problem?

I will raise three main issues in this wide-ranging debate. However, I want to start by commending the previous Government on reducing the number of blocked beds which, according to figures that were released just this week, has fallen from about 3,000 to 755. We were very critical of the practice of bedblocking, so it is only right that we commend the actions that were taken to reduce it. However, we also note that it has taken £30 million a year over three years to provide the community and care places for people who leave hospital. I ask the new Government: is that level of funding, which was highlighted in the Howat report, needed to bring down the bedblocking figures even further or does it indicate the extent of underfunding of the personal care package?  My first point is about the independent sector. In that respect, I must acknowledge Andy Kerr's very innovative initiative at Stracathro hospital. Last week, however, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing stated that the independent sector was in conflict and competition with the NHS and that no NHS money would be put into building it up. In response to that statement, I must highlight the work of the Scottish regional treatment centre at Stracathro, which Jackson Carlaw and I visited on Monday. In this pilot project, the private sector neither conflicts nor competes with, but co-operates with and complements, the NHS. Instead of the NHS putting money into the private sector, the sector puts money into the NHS by utilising theatre capacity after 6 pm and at weekends, when the theatres would be lying empty. The facilities are leased to Netcare, which is being stringently quality audited. In this example, patients benefit through reduced waiting times and top-quality investment is maintained within the NHS at Stracathro and Netcare's facilities. There is no building up of private sector capacity—the sector itself is simply more fully utilising existing NHS resources which, as I have made clear, would otherwise be lying unused. The fact is that the private sector is helping to build up NHS access and treatment. As a result, I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that ideology will not stand in the way of improving patient care, greater utilisation of NHS resources or the investment of private sector money in our NHS for the benefit of NHS patients in Scotland. Now that I have got that off my chest, I will move on to my second topic, which is mental health. I am pleased that mental health is on the agenda of the Government and of the Health and Sport Committee. When preparing for the debate, I was shocked to read that, over the past 40 years, there has been no reduction in the number of people suffering and dying from mental illnesses such as depression and schizophrenia. That contrasts starkly with the huge reduction in the number of deaths from diseases such as stroke, heart disease and cancer over the same period, which has been achieved through prevention and treatment. Late diagnosis and late intervention are still issues. The Scottish Conservatives are committed to the inclusion of the voluntary sector—and, when appropriate, the independent sector—in the delivery of health care. In that context, I commend the excellent work of Depression Alliance Scotland, which uses self-help groups to enable people to learn useful skills for overcoming stress and anxiety, to build confidence and, importantly, to learn new ways to tackle difficult situations. Groups also cover problem solving, relaxation and how to overcome reduced activity and to change unhelpful thinking. Given that the estimated social  and economic cost to Scotland of mental health problems is £8.6 million, surely there needs to be even more focus on ensuring that there is more funding for, and greater recognition of and access to, groups such as Depression Alliance. My third topic is alcohol. I appreciate that it is on the Government's agenda and that its importance was acknowledged by Andy Kerr. The recent figures on alcohol-related liver disease are quite shocking. A death due to alcohol takes place in Scotland every four hours and the rate of alcohol-related death in Scotland is double that of the United Kingdom as a whole. There are 100,000 children in Scotland who live with a parent who has a drinking problem—we cannot lose sight of that. Furthermore, drinking by 13-year-olds has doubled in the last decade. The cost to Scotland, from the point of view not only of health and social care, but of the economy and families, is almost immeasurable. I look forward to an extensive debate on the issues that I have raised and many others. I appreciate that we differ from the Government on the independent sector, but I hope that the cabinet secretary will visit Stracathro and keep an open mind about what is happening there. We are supportive of measures such as early intervention and the provision of high-quality support and treatment, and we look forward to working with the Government on the alcohol strategy.

Will the member give way?

I share Johann Lamont's concerns about "Scottish Housing Market Review—Evidence and Analysis 2007", which is an excellent discussion paper. I am just sorry that I did not have the time to absorb it in order to discuss it, so that I could contribute in a more informed way to the debate.

Yes, but I have only four minutes for my speech.

The document is a research paper on the background to housing supply and demand, which informs the debate enormously. I know that because, after I had written my speech, I found that the statistics and analysis in the document were far better than what was in my speech. If the Administration expects to co-operate with other parties, I suggest that it start treating us with some respect. While I am talking to you, Mr Maxwell, I say that I did not think that your rhetoric this morning—categorising anyone who was opposed to your amendments as anti-Scottish—was helpful. I hope that the cabinet secretary will bring you into line because we are here to work positively.

I welcome the Scottish housing support fund. I hope that we can enter into more constructive discussions about it in the future, because it sounds not unlike the Conservative version of the affordable housing trust—but that is for another day. Like others, I am delighted to have a debate on housing, especially affordable housing. As I am already halfway through my time, I will be brief. I ask the minister to ensure that, when we discuss housing, we also discuss planning. I say that as a result of personal experience. Around Inverness, not hundreds but thousands of new  houses are being built. That is an example of building houses but not building communities. A new school that is opening not far from my house is already almost full, although there are still hundreds of houses to be built. When houses are being built, councils should plan for communities, not simply for isolated housing estates. I was just saying to my colleague Jackson Carlaw that I am not sure where the SNP stands on housing stock transfer. I thought that it was against it; now, I think that it may be in favour of it. We are certainly in favour of it. I hope that council tenants, especially in the Highland region, will get an opportunity to vote again, whether on a small scale or a larger scale. There is no doubt that, with the housing debt in the Highland region, the council is unable to invest in the properties. I understand that the £2,000 for first-time buyers will be given to all, from the needy, who are struggling to get a foot on the housing ladder, to those who are well off. I share the view that has been expressed that the grant could be inflationary and could benefit both the landowners and the sellers, while making house prices even higher for first-time buyers. I ask the minister to look again at the single-seller survey. Finally, I ask the minister to reconsider the national registration scheme for private landlords, which was put into the wrong bill. The scheme should have been included in housing management legislation, not antisocial behaviour legislation.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Moray flood alleviation schemes will be implemented in full. (S3O-275)

I thank the minister for that and a previous written reply on the subject. Given the increasing costs of and delays to the flood alleviation schemes in Moray, and bearing in mind the Government's proposed freeze on council tax, will the minister advise members how councils such as Moray will be able to find the additional funds to pay their 20 per cent share of the increased costs of the schemes?

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing this debate during MND awareness week and I acknowledge and thank her for her work on the issue. I thank Dr Simpson for acknowledging Michael Forsyth's input into the hospice movement—it was nice of him to mention that. On average, 120 new cases of MND are diagnosed in Scotland every year. As Margaret Mitchell said, sufferers are faced with the fact that 48 per cent will die within a year of diagnosis. A  smaller percentage of sufferers live for more than five years, but they are exceptions, as Christina McKelvie said. According to information from the web, average life expectancy after diagnosis is just 14 months. MND is a particularly cruel disease, which progressively and fatally disables muscles, affecting movement, speech and eating. It has no cure and can affect any adult, although most cases involve people over 40. I am hesitating, because members have made some of the points that I was going to make. There are no drugs that can cure the disease, so treatment involves a package of care, which is provided in Scotland by organisations such as the Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association. When I was researching the matter before the debate, I was shocked to discover that so much care is provided by a charity—I even checked with Margaret Mitchell that that is true before I stood up to give my speech. We do not expect that to be the case in modern Scotland. I understand that care provided by the association in the Highlands in 2005-06 cost £22,000. The SMNDA relies on the public's support to fund its care, and its request for 50 per cent funding from NHS Highland would cost the board only slightly more than £11,000. It is incredible that patients who are at risk are not receiving proper care and support and are dependent on a charity in this day and age in Scotland. There have been calls for the extension of free personal care to people under 60. I am not calling for free personal care for all people under 60 who have a disability, but an extension of the policy might be appropriate for some patient groups. I hope that the minister will consider the issue. However good the care package is, it is no consolation to sufferers, who know that there is no cure for MND. It is heartening that research is continuing. I was encouraged to learn that, during the past 15 years, similar—although not identical—features have been discovered in neurodegenerative diseases such as MND, Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease. I share researchers' hope that a breakthrough in one disease might have a positive impact on our understanding of another. I support Margaret Mitchell's call for NHS funding for care packages. As Dr Simpson said, MND sufferers are a small patient group. That means that they could easily be forgotten, so it is good that we are debating the issue. Anything that members can do to increase awareness will, I hope, lead to greater understanding of the disease and greater support for sufferers.

Why is the Executive proposing further legislation when the legislation that was passed was crystal clear, as David McLetchie and others have said? The problem was with the guidance that the previous Government issued, which contradicted the legislation, which was further contradicted by more guidance. The legislation was clear and unambiguous.

I, too, welcome Nicola Sturgeon to her post as Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. I thank her for her first meeting with the Tory team last night, which I attended once I found where the ministerial offices are. I wish her all success in her crucial post. I also thank Nicola Sturgeon for the advance copy of her speech in today's Daily Mail , Times  and other publications, as well as for the opportunity to hear it on the radio. I remind Mike Rumbles that his party was in the previous Government—it may not have felt like it at times, but he needs reminding of that. Although I spoke in Des McNulty's members' business debate last week, this is my first speech in a debate in the chamber after a year out. I have therefore resumed maiden status. I want to echo the views and the approach of my party and its leader. We will work positively and  constructively with the minority Government, and with all other parties, to make this Parliament work better for the people of Scotland. On no issue will that be more important than on health. We welcome the new challenges. The transformation of the nationalists from abrasive and confrontational in opposition to fountains of charm in government is quite difficult to believe—especially if, like me, members have recent experience of them in their former guise. Our approach to the new minority Government is in stark contrast to the previous approach of the nationalists, who never called, never wrote. In fact, they went as far as passing a motion of non-co-operation at their conference nearly 20 years ago, confirming that they would never call, never write, never work with the Tories, never liaise with us and never be partners to any agreements with us. However, in the new, reprogrammed, nationalist politics, I trust that the First Minister, a man who recognises an act of unpardonable folly when he sees it, will now persuade the nationalists to embrace the new politics and—who knows—even the Conservatives. The First Minister may wish to call this "Mary's clause", given the high profile he gives me at his conferences. The Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 was the flagship piece of legislation in the first session of the Scottish Parliament, so why—as the cabinet secretary asked—five years down the line, are we still wrangling in councils, in courts and with COSLA over the interpretation of the act? Why is Highland Council spending more than £11 million on free personal and nursing care when it receives only £6.5 million from the Executive? The issuing of guidance that contradicts the act has undoubtedly led to much confusion, and the legal rights of people to free personal care are still somewhat uncertain. Margaret Smith was the convener of the Health and Community Care Committee at the time, and Richard Simpson and Malcolm Chisholm were members of it. The committee worked on the bill and I would argue that the legislation was not flawed; it was the guidance that was flawed. The guidance contradicted the legislation. I stand by the legislation. It was not ambiguous. At all stages of the committee's proceedings, members were told that all care homes would be integrated care homes with nursing provision. We were assured that, as an elderly person's condition deteriorated and more nursing care was needed, they would not be moved from a residential home to a nursing home. We were assured that one integrated care home would provide the appropriate level of care at all stages. Somewhere between the passing of the act and its implementation, something went wrong. In Scotland, we have three categories of care home:  residential care homes, nursing care homes and integrated care homes. All are funded differently, depending on the level of care provided. What happens is that a person is assessed and placed in a residential care home, but as their condition deteriorates, they continue to stay in that home, even though it cannot provide the more complex care that is needed. The spirit and intention of the bill was quite different from what has been implemented under the act. The SNP states that it will provide an additional £6 million each year for care home places. Would that money not be better used to bring some equity into the system, which would ensure that many care homes remain financially viable, open and available for placements? It is likely that there would not be such a shortage of care home places if they were all funded at the same level. I realise that that might require a memorandum of understanding with Westminster, but I do not think that that will be impossible. The basis of this issue lies in a Westminster act of Parliament. With no exceptions, all who gave evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee stated that there should be a single budget for health and social work.

It is my maiden speech dear. [ Laughter. ] Conservatives have called for such a single budget for eight years now, and I hope that the new nationalist Government will take it up. I will address the uptake of direct payments. I know that the previous Government, including Mr Rumbles, supported them, but I am not sure that it did quite enough. Uptake has been slow; it is still less than 2,000 for the whole of Scotland. Surely carers and the cared-for need to know that they can manage the budget, choose the care provider, monitor the care received and ensure that it is in line with the assessed need. Direct payments put them in control of that care, and we all have a responsibility to promote them. That brings me to waiting lists. More than half of all local authorities operate waiting lists for free personal care, but there is another, hidden, waiting list—the long wait for assessment. That back-door method of managing the waiting list is unacceptable and, given the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's promise to rid us of hidden waiting lists, I trust that she will now examine the waiting list to get on to the waiting list. When the 2002 act was passed, we were told that anyone who was assessed as in need of free personal care would get it, but if they have to wait  to be assessed, that delays their inclusion in the waiting list. It also helps councils save money, but it does not fulfil the promise and intention of the act. For the third time, NHS Highland has pulled back from proceeding with the new build at Migdale hospital. The hospital predominantly cares for the elderly in Sutherland, which has the highest increase in older people in Scotland. The existing hospital building is seriously deteriorating, leading to the possibility of closure, and the land that is currently allocated for the new hospital could be sold. The lack of decision is increasing uncertainty and community anxiety. I look forward to working with Malcolm Chisholm, Lewis Macdonald, Ross Finnie, Karen Gillon and others on the Health and Sport Committee, convened by my old friend, the feisty Christine Grahame.

I thank Des McNulty for securing the debate. It is good to be back in Parliament and to be debating health issues.  The first issue that I want to discuss is the role of the SMC and NHS QIS in Scotland. I remember that when those organisations took on their responsibilities, it was made clear that they would not simply tartanise or rubber-stamp NICE appraisals and rulings and that decisions that were made in Scotland would be appropriate for Scotland. In a written answer to Dr Nanette Milne, the former Minister for Health and Community Care wrote: "The Scottish Executive is satisfied that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland ... fully evaluates the suitability of National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence ... guidance for implementation in Scotland based on the criteria in respect of contextual differences outlined by NHS QIS in July 2003."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 7 March 2007; S2W-32032.]  The process that has been outlined by NHS QIS confirms the suitability of NICE guidance in Scotland in the light of the epidemiology, the predicted uptake, and the existing advice from the Scottish medicines consortium. I hope that, on all three counts of contextual difference, NHS QIS will break the habit of its existence and overrule the NICE ruling on Alimta. There is an important principle for the future of the SMC and NHS QIS in the drug and therapy appraisal system in Scotland. As Annabel Goldie stated before the election: "We must listen to the advice given by clinicians in Scotland and always act in the best interests of patients in Scotland. Whilst it is reasonable to keep such matters under review in light of emerging evidence, it is not reasonable to blindly follow rulings elsewhere. The final decision must be made here in Scotland." The matter is of particular interest in Scotland, because, as others have said, we have the highest number of mesothelioma sufferers in the United Kingdom and a third more than England and Wales. Treatment with Alimta involves a one-off course of eight treatments, which in full costs £8,000. However, I understand that 87 per cent of patients do not need the full cycle and benefit after four treatments at a cost of £4,000. Alimta is available in all European Union countries and beyond. It is available in Australia and America. If an alternative were available for mesothelioma sufferers, we would probably not be having tonight's debate. As Des McNulty said, the drug is known to prolong life, to improve the quality of life and to alleviate pain. I hope that the absence of an alternative will also be taken into account in the final appraisal of the drug. Alimta is an innovative drug that can be effective where traditional cancer treatments are not. One point that struck me—along with all the other reasons for prescribing the drug—is that clinical trials are being undertaken on the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer with Alimta. That  research and the potential benefits to cancer patients in Scotland could be halted if a negative ruling persists. None of us—except perhaps Dr Ian McKee or Dr Richard Simpson—has the medical knowledge to say that the drug should be prescribed, but we know the incidence of mesothelioma in Scotland. We know that it has been passed down through the generations as well as affecting those who worked directly with asbestos, and we can listen to the advice of people such as Dr David Dunlop, lead clinician for the patient group at the Beatson centre in Glasgow, who has written in strong support of Alimta. Mesothelioma is relatively rare, but its incidence is rising and is expected to peak in the next decade. If a decision is taken not to prescribe Alimta for mesothelioma patients, we as responsible members of Parliament would expect the people who make the decision to suggest an alternative that is equally effective in terms of patient care.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that she will increase the use of independent hospitals and the private sector to reduce waiting times and improve the health of patients in Scotland?

I will focus on three of the aims that I picked up from the consultation document, "Age and Experience: Consultation on the Strategy for a Scotland with an Ageing Population". I commend Irene Oldfather for her speech and for the short-life working group on dementia. I commend the work that she is doing as a member of that group and the progress that she is making. The first of the three aims is "Effective integrated services for older people", which the minister has mentioned quite often. The second is "Promoting and maintaining health and wellbeing". The third is "People living in accommodation and environments which continue to meet their needs and wishes as they age." As I said to the minister during his speech, the figure for delayed discharges stands at 1,488. The situation in which people who have been assessed for care in their own homes or in a care home are being left languishing in a hospital, where they face the issues that Irene Oldfather mentioned, does not represent integrated care. A hospital is certainly not an environment that suits the person's assessed needs and their delayed discharge from a hospital does not indicate that there is an integrated service.  Recently I visited Dunoon hospital, where there are nine bedblocked patients who are there through no fault of their own. One of the patients—an elderly gentleman—enjoys smoking his cigarettes outside the hospital. He goes out through a fire door near his room. After Sunday, that gentleman will not be able to smoke there because the health board will not allow smoking in the grounds in addition to not allowing it inside the hospital. He has been assessed to go to a care home or his own home, where he could smoke. Does the minister expect that elderly gentleman, who is in his 80s, to stop smoking because he is, through no fault of his own, a delayed-discharge patient? That is a serious issue that must be considered. I have asked a written question on the matter, so I am sure that I will get an answer in the fullness of time. Figures indicate that 26 per cent of Scotland's population will be over 65 in 2031, so surely we should encourage people to save for their old age and they should not be penalised for doing so. When people who are self-funding have to pay more for their care than those who are funded, that is hardly an incentive to save. A case was brought to my attention recently of a lady who pays £143 more per week than other residents in a care home because she is self-funding. She receives exactly the same level of care as everyone else. The care commission might want to consider that issue in regulations, because the situation certainly gives people no incentive to save for their old age. The principle of understanding in the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002—the minister was on the Health and Community Care Committee with me when we considered the bill—was that there would be one type of integrated care home, which would cater for elderly people's needs as their condition deteriorated and they became frail in old age. Ministers gave us a guarantee that people would stay in one home and that, depending on their condition, nursing care and other care would be brought in so that care in the home would be appropriate for their needs. However, that has not happened. I do not know where the principle went wrong, but it went wrong somewhere between the act, the understanding, the guidance and the care commission regulations. I have discussed that matter with the care commission and with members who served with me on the Health and Community Care Committee and who share my understanding of the position. Instead of there being integrated care homes to suit elderly people's needs as their condition deteriorates, the choice is between residential homes, nursing homes and a few integrated care homes. The result is that as a resident's condition deteriorates and they need nursing care or a  greater level of care than that which a residential home can give, they languish in residential care. Again, if we return to the aim, it is clear that people are not living in accommodation that meets their needs as they age. The minister must look again at that serious issue. My final point, which has been raised by Age Concern, Help the Aged and several members in the debate, relates to free personal care for assistance with the preparation of food. I understand that 13 councils still charge for that assistance. The Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 stated clearly that free personal care covered assistance with the preparation of food. Unfortunately, the guidance contradicted the 2002 act. I ask the minister to ensure both that clarity is brought to the issue and that the act that was passed by the Parliament overrules the erroneous guidance. As someone said, there is a postcode lottery because some councils charge while others do not; the Western Isles Council used to charge, but has now paid back the money. The situation is a mess and people simply do not understand it. The Conservatives welcome the strategy for an aging population. I hope that the minister will take on board the issues that I have raised, because they are crucial for vulnerable, elderly people and the understanding of what they are entitled to.

I am listening carefully to what the minister is saying about integrated services and seamless care. Will he explain why we still have 1,488 delayed discharge patients who cannot be cared for in the community?

Poverty is a wide-ranging issue with many causes and consequences, and it is impossible to do justice to all of them in such a short time. However, the Scottish Conservatives are very pleased to support keeping poverty on the political agenda. As Christine Grahame was speaking, she made me think about a letter that I received this week from a lady whose mother is in a care home. My constituent's mother saved all her life so that she could look after herself in her old age but because she is a self-funder, she pays £143 more per week than others in the care home who are partly or fully funded. I have written to the minister about that situation, but if we are talking about poverty, we also have to think about giving people the incentive to save so that they can look after themselves in their old age without being penalised by being ripped off in a care home. Yesterday Christine Grahame, Shiona Baird, Rosemary Byrne and I heard a presentation from the charity Safe Hands, which is raising funds to help and support women in Africa—specifically, Ethiopia—to give birth safely. It is not appropriate to go into detail about that today; I will say only that whatever is said on the subject of poverty  today in Scotland, the situation here cannot be compared to the plight of women in Africa who have to give birth with no trained person to help them and, when complications set in, who have no money to pay for transport to hospital. That leaves many women crippled and incontinent for life, and many stillborn children. My colleague, Nanette Milne, will discuss health issues further. As Dennis Canavan said, last year was clearly an historic year for the make poverty history campaign. There was an unprecedented level of campaigning to end global poverty that gained enormous public support and raised understanding of the many issues involved. On a political note, I welcome the input and involvement of Sir Bob Geldof as an adviser to the Conservative anti-poverty group. The results are already to be seen in David Cameron's document "Built to Last", which states: "It is our moral obligation to make poverty history." The Scottish Conservatives welcome that commitment, as well as the commitments to free and fair trade, to increase international aid and to press for further debt relief. The problem can be summed up in one statistic: although more than 40 per cent of the world's population live in low-income countries, those countries account for only 3 per cent of world trade. Today we can focus on poverty in Scotland. Help the Aged Scotland has highlighted the yearly increase in winter deaths among the elderly, to which Christine Grahame referred. Although the central heating initiative and improved insulation are certainly helping, much more needs to be done to improve energy efficiency in our homes so that the elderly are not frightened to switch the heating on.

I could not agree more, and I do not think that there is a member of this Parliament who has not heard from someone who has had a very bad experience. Elderly people find the experience quite traumatic and I am not sure that all the fitters are fully trained. Poverty has no age barrier and can affect the youngest of children as well as the oldest of people in our communities. Young people are, however, wholly dependent on their parents' lifestyle and choices. We hope that the cross-party review group that was announced by the First Minister recently will help to support the many children with substance-abusing parents.  One group that should not be forgotten is the increasing number of working adults without dependent children who live in income poverty; their number has increased by 100,000 in the past decade. They appear to be the forgotten ones in Chancellor Brown's tax-and-spend regime. In 2004, almost 3,000 young people left school in Scotland with no qualifications—hardly preparation for the world of work. Further education colleges offer a second chance and many come back into education and training in their 20s, 30s, 40s and 50s, but it is unfortunate that colleges such as Inverness College are faced with cutting another 25 lecturing staff, which reduces the number of courses available and thereby the training, education and career opportunities for many in the Highlands.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its role is in the planning process in respect of nuclear submarine facilities in Scotland. (S2O-9182)

I welcome nuclear developments in Scotland, but will the minister clarify why her colleague at Westminster has said that there is no planning veto with regard to such developments when, in fact, there might well be?

If anyone has not read "Curse or cure"—the article on methadone in the Holyrood  magazine—it is well worth a read. I regret the tone of the minister's speech, which demeaned his office and did not add to a mature debate. I welcome the initiatives that Charlie Gordon outlined in his speech. We must examine best practice and I think that we are all big enough to do that. However, I did not welcome all of his speech; obviously, I did not welcome the last sentence. I welcome this debate on drug abuse and the prominence that Annabel Goldie has given to the issue since she became our leader. The media spotlight in the Highlands this week has been on the Danielle Reid case and the failure of the social work department and others to protect a vulnerable child from her own family. Sadly, we seem to hear of children being left in vulnerable situations all too often. An estimated 50,000 children throughout Scotland now live with drug and alcohol misuse problems. In a recent letter to me, Highland Council confirmed that it provides support for 2,017 children, 390 of whom are in  care. It also confirmed that 93 per cent of the 150 children on the child protection register are affected by parents with substance misuse problems. Professor Neil McKeganey suggested recently that there could be up to 630 children in the Highlands who live with parents who misuse substances.

No. Sorry. Those figures are shocking, given the recent cases of Michael McGarrity; the 11-year old who collapsed at school after taking heroin; and the tragic case, which was mentioned by John Home Robertson, of the two-year old whose death was reported at the weekend. When we look round the idyllic surroundings of the Highlands, which are a world away from urban dereliction, it is difficult to imagine that young children could be suffering at the hands of their parents because they are unfit to care for them. One option would be to give parents of young children the choice of detox and rehab. It would be naive to suggest that that is an easy answer for all drug addicts, but it could surely be one option when the well-being and welfare of a child is at risk. As other members have said, many addicts, before they seek help, have led chaotic lives that have impacted on other family members. Addicts have often lost jobs and family relationships have broken down. Unfortunately, detox and rehab is not part of the Executive's waiting times initiative. If it were, many people in the Highlands would be delighted to be seen within 26 weeks, but the truth is that the latest figures that are available, from July to September 2005, show that only nine people in the Highlands were given treatment for their drug addiction, while 89 others waited on a list. Of those 89 people, a third waited for more than a year. A response from Hugh Henry to a parliamentary question indicates that, throughout Scotland, more than 130 people waited for more than a year to get on to detox and rehab. When someone has reached the stage of asking for help, they usually need it desperately. It is cruel and heartless for them to be told to wait for up to and beyond a year, particularly when places are available in the independent sector. We can criticise and condemn parents who take heroin and other drugs and we can justifiably criticise the more addictive substance of methadone. However, what the Liberal-Labour Executive should be ashamed of is that when people seek the help and support that they need, not just for themselves but for their families, it is not there.

I welcome the debate to mark international women's day and I am pleased that so many men have come to support the debate—including that familiar scribe, Rab McNeil, who is in the gallery. I have not seen him for some time.  This is a historic day of celebration of women's achievements and progress and as a mark of solidarity it is right and proper that we mark the event as we meet in this temporary home for the Parliament. I look forward to attending tonight's reception in the garden lobby in the Parliament's permanent home. I welcome the Executive's motion and the international perspective that the minister gave in her excellent speech. The Conservatives will support the motion and the Scottish National Party amendment. The international women's day website—a very modern way of marking the event—says: "International Women's Day ... is rooted in the centuries-old struggle of women to participate in society on an equal footing with men." The pursuit of gender equality and gender empowerment continues in many walks of working and public life and international women's day represents an important milestone. There is cause for optimism but, as the minister said, we still have a long way to go. There are high-achieving women among younger generations, who are excelling in the professions and in the workplace. Some 35 per cent of female school leavers go on to higher education, compared with 27 per cent of male school leavers. Female pupils continue to achieve better results in standard and higher grade exams than do male pupils. Unfortunately, however, those achievements are not yet fully reflected in our boardrooms and throughout the professions. However, there is a wealth of policies and ideas that, if implemented, would go some way towards supporting women of all ages. The ability of women in modern society to make unhindered choices about their lives, work and families is an essential objective if we are to achieve gender equality. Financial support and the expansion of child care options are welcome, whether they come from the public, private or voluntary sector, and my Tory colleagues in Westminster are investigating policies in that regard. To that end, we support the extension of maternity leave and maternity pay. My work as convener of the cross-party group on fertility services has made me well aware that conditions in the world of work prevent women from starting a family when they are young and at their most fertile. Many women who make a lifestyle choice to fulfil their potential in further or higher education and work hard to build their careers put off having children until they are financially secure and in a stable relationship, which can mean that they do not consider starting a family until they are much older. The average age of first-time mothers is 30. Unfortunately, given current provision for infertility treatment, a woman might have to face two years of  unsuccessful attempts to conceive, followed by a wait for infertility treatment that could be as long as five years—that is the case in Grampian. The cut-off age for treatment is 38, which means that couples need to get serious about having children long before the woman is 32, or they might leave it too late. As I mentioned last week—I cannot mention it often enough—I welcome the Executive's response to the infertility debate and the consultation on the issue, which ended in December. The issue is huge, for women and for men. I look forward to the Executive's response to the consultation, which I imagine will be produced soon. As it is almost 100 years since the first international women's day, the pay gap between men and women, which the minister and Sandra White outlined, is unacceptable and morally wrong. While the single status and equal pay measures in local authorities are not specifically about tackling the gender gap, there is no doubt that they affect many thousands of women. I hope that the issue will be resolved soon. I am not proud of the fact that our local authorities, 30-odd years after the Equal Pay Act 1970, have not fully addressed gender and other inequalities in the workplace. Tackling cultural disadvantage is one way of assisting women to break through the glass ceilings that exist in professional and economic life, as well as in the political sphere. At my party's conference at the weekend, Francis Maude, our chairman, described the need for our party to attract, support and select more female candidates.

Alasdair Morgan is making comments from a sedentary position—I am sure that he will have the opportunity to talk about policies later on. The problem is not with the selection process. All of us must do more to encourage more women to come forward and to raise their horizons—

Yes, but let me finish my point. We need to encourage women to come not only into politics, but into all aspects of political life. At the weekend, I was proud to meet the ladies who run the only Tory-run council in Scotland—the provost, the depute provost, the convener and various others are women and are doing an excellent job.

As one of four women in the Conservative group, I have never found any discrimination or bias in the selection process. However, we all need to do more and I am committed to encouraging many more women to come forward. If there is bias and discrimination in the party's selection process, we need to address that. The minister mentioned domestic abuse. It is shocking that the latest figures on domestic abuse illustrate that the level of repeat victimisation rose from 33 per cent to 52 per cent between 1999 and 2004. The minister has done a huge amount of work on domestic abuse, but surely we must consider the rise in repeat victimisation as a priority in addressing domestic abuse, because more and more women are becoming trapped in abusive situations. I ask the minister to address that in her summing up.

I positively and constructively ask the minister what talks he has had with the Chancellor of the Exchequer regarding the planning gain supplement. Is the minister in favour of the proposal?

There are many issues to be discussed in a debate on regeneration, but it is impossible to cover them all in the short time that is available today. However, I say to the minister that it is not just words in glossy brochures that are important.  We must also consider the action that follows and, indeed, the action that the Executive has taken in the past seven years. In speaking to the amendment in the name of my colleague Murdo Fraser, I start by welcoming the inclusion of the private sector. I say to the minister, "Welcome to the real world and to the policies that the Tories have been pursuing for many years." I am delighted that, throughout "People and Place: Regeneration Policy Statement", there is a commitment to engage and work with the private sector. That is welcome. However, the recent figures from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, which are mentioned in the Conservative amendment, make worrying reading. I do not want to give a speech full of statistics, but, for example, the number of working-age adults who do not have dependent children and who are in income poverty has increased by almost 100,000 in recent years. Economic and business statistics show that growth in Scotland remains well below that in the United Kingdom and that the number of business start-ups in Scotland is well below that for the rest of the UK. Such figures do not reflect a business-friendly environment. The minister's foreword to the policy statement refers to growing urban communities, cities and coalfield areas. I assume that the Highlands and Islands are included in considerations, but I am concerned, because I should not need to assume that. Writing the 67-page statement took a lot of time and it should make a commitment to rural areas, where deprivation and the serious lack of access to public services are often masked by the fact that people live in idyllic surroundings rather than derelict urban landscapes. I listened carefully to what the minister said. I may be wrong, but I did not pick up mention of a single penny of investment north of Dundee. That is also of concern. I do not want to be as sceptical as my colleague Christine Grahame was, but it is difficult not to be. The cost of flood prevention measures in Moray totals £132 million and I hope that the minister will give a commitment to that in his summing-up. Moray also has the lowest average wage rate of any constituency in Scotland. Yes—Glasgow and Ayrshire have problems, but we should not forget the remote and rural areas.

The minimum wage has not done much to bring wages in Moray up to the average for the whole of Scotland. Among Government bodies, there is a great need for joined-up working and, more important,  joined-up thinking. I will give just one example. A person may undergo drug and alcohol rehabilitation after many years of chaos and problems. That process can take up to two years. However, at the end, that person is offered isolation and a place in a bed and breakfast, without organised support. If the document is about people, opportunities and chances to get people back into work, which we all support, far greater joined-up thinking is needed. The theme of the debate is regeneration. As a resident of the Tesco capital of Scotland, I ask whether it must always be Tesco superstores that enter communities and offer extra jobs. Planning departments seem to take no cognisance of the jobs that are lost in old towns, for example. In Inverness, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, Inverness and Nairn Enterprise, the Forestry Commission and the primary care trust all moved out to a new out-of-town development while the old town was left to wither on the vine. We support economic development and out-of-town development, but not at the cost of our old towns. When I asked people last week whether any town or city in Scotland has achieved the right balance between old town regeneration and new town development, the example that was given was Edinburgh. I would like to think that more than one city had not allowed its old town to die. We should keep an eye on that. The Westminster Government has just finished a consultation on Gordon Brown's latest stealth tax—the planning gain supplement. That measure will have a significant impact on local authorities' ability to negotiate section 75 agreements. In fact, they will have no power. The tax will go to Westminster and the money is not guaranteed to return to the local authorities that raised it. The supplement will not only weaken local authorities' negotiating power, but mean that any infrastructure improvements that are associated with development will depend on the crumbs that are sent back north through Gordon Brown's latest tax. In the middle of our considering a major planning bill—the first since 1947—why is the Westminster Parliament introducing the planning gain supplement, which will ride roughshod over an element of the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill? I hope that the minister will examine that in his summing-up, because it relates to a major part of regeneration. I move amendment S2M-4024.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the publication of the Scottish Executive's statement "People and Place: Regeneration Policy in Scotland"; further notes that under the Executive's stewardship the gap between the poorest and rich in our society is widening, as shown in recent Joseph Rowntree Foundation figures, and that the number of working-age  adults without dependent children who are in income poverty has increased from around 300,000 in the mid-1990s to almost 400,000 in recent years; believes that the key to tackling poverty is to have a thriving economy where people can find secure employment, and accordingly calls on the Executive to create an environment for businesses to invest in Scotland by reducing the burden of regulation and tax and by investing in our infrastructure."

Will those mixed and vibrant communities include rural communities? In the foreword to the statement, the minister mentions growing urban communities and cities and regenerating former coalfield areas. Can we assume that more idyllic communities such as those in the Highlands and Islands will also be addressed?

I am listening carefully to what the minister is saying. Does he conclude that the concerns that people in the Orkney Islands have expressed about the air ambulance service's new system are unfounded?

Will the member take an intervention?

No, but I am so bowled over by the member's expertise that I want to ask him whether he has offered that incredible advice to the Scottish Ambulance Service.

I too want to thank Jim Wallace for bringing the debate to the chamber. He has given members the opportunity to talk about this crucial service in the Orkney islands. A visit to the ambulance station in Inverness can only leave someone immensely impressed with the level of technology that is used by its highly trained staff. The latest technology, coupled with expert local knowledge and understanding, is an ideal combination for our national health service. I hope that a similar balance can be found in the implementation of the air ambulance service for Orkney. However, like other members, I fear that invaluable local knowledge of the islands will be conceded to centralise the service. The Scottish Ambulance Service maintains that the new service will improve access and medical treatment for patients, that it will be more comfortable and will have wipe-clean and sealed surfaces that will help to reduce the risk of infection. I am sure that everyone in Scotland would welcome more effective ambulance treatment and a more comfortable journey to hospital, by road or by air. Similarly, I am sure that people would welcome an upgrade of the existing fleet of aircraft, to take advantage of new innovation. The concern that the people of Orkney have is that the vital role of the air ambulance  fleet, which the Kirkwall-based Islander aircraft have fulfilled excellently for many years, will be compromised by the desire to improve standards. I respect and commend the views of the elected members of Orkney Islands Council. I welcome the council's convener, Stephen Hagan, who is in the public gallery. The council has provided members with an in-depth report of councillors' views on the proposals and trials, which raises several serious concerns. We must first question the loss of the dedicated Orkney service. Given that the Inverness-based EC135 helicopter will cover a wide area of the Highlands and Islands, it may simply not be available for a large percentage of time to serve the needs of people in the Orkney islands. Although the Scottish Ambulance Service maintains that journey times will not be affected and may in fact be quicker, the reality is that any aircraft that take off from Inverness will have to travel up to 120 miles or further to reach some of the outer islands. In an emergency, that extra distance could be dangerous. I also wonder whether patients from Orkney will be more likely to be treated in Inverness rather than in Aberdeen, as happens at present. The Orkney Islands Council report also expresses concern that the EC135, which will be the focal point of the new service, is said to be of limited use in bad conditions, as Jim Wallace and others have said. It is anticipated that the aircraft will frequently remain grounded during the winter months because of its zero-icing operational requirement. Whether or not that is the case, the use of an aircraft that is difficult to operate in wintry conditions and that must travel almost twice the distance that the current service travels to reach many areas of the Orkney islands is a worrying scenario for patients and their families. We should also remember that in the poor visibility that is caused by high winds and rain—weather that is not at all uncommon on the Orkney islands—the local expertise of the current piloted service excels. The ideal situation would be a combination of advanced technology with the knowledge of residents. Like other members, except perhaps Stewart Stevenson, I cannot judge the performance of aircraft but, following the outcome of the consultations and trials, the crucial point is that the new service must earn the confidence of people who live in Orkney and the Highlands. People must be assured that they will not be left with a poorer-quality and unsafe service. That is the concern that has been raised today and which I hope the minister will address in his summing up.

It is not fair to say that MSPs from all parties that are represented in the Parliament are not interested in health simply because they are not here. I imagine that many of them are following the debate intently on their monitors. The Scottish Conservatives fully applaud the dedication and hard work throughout the NHS in treating more patients in the past 12 months. Many interpretations of selected figures for waiting times have been provided this afternoon, but I would like to quote from the Audit Scotland report, which states: "The total number of people waiting for inpatient and day case treatment has changed little in the last two years. The number of people without waiting time guarantees has increased and most of these patients have been waiting over six months." The report goes on to say that the number of patients who are without a guarantee has increased by 6,699 since June 2003, that just over two thirds of those patients have been waiting for more than six months and that 80 per cent have been waiting for more than 18 weeks. It adds that the NHS could get better value from resources that have been invested in tackling waiting times by making greater use of the Golden Jubilee national hospital, which was previously named the Health Care International hospital and—I say for Des McNulty—was built under the Tories to a standard to match that of the Mayo clinic in New York. I commend Des McNulty for his comments, because there is no doubt that the hospital is of great benefit to patients throughout Scotland. More than 50 per cent of patients who were surveyed for the Audit Scotland report said that they would be willing to go to the Golden Jubilee, but fewer than 5 per cent were offered treatment, as I mentioned to the minister earlier. The minister said that he wanted to empower patients; we fully agree with that, but I say to the minister that instead of his having cosy chats with health board chiefs each month, more action needs to be taken on patient choice. If the minister is looking for a new target, he would do well to consider  increasing the percentage of patients who are offered that choice. I highlight to the minister the many patients whose care and treatment is not included in the waiting times statistics. I give the example of infertility treatment. In Scotland—in Grampian in particular—a person can wait up to four years for treatment. With a cut-off age of 38, many women are age-barred from that treatment while they are on the waiting list. I commend the Executive on its consultation on infertility treatment and care, which closed on 8 December 2005 and I hope that the ministers are positively considering the inclusion of infertility treatment in the waiting times directive. Although infertility is not a life-threatening condition, I am sure that members agree that the wait or the lack of treatment has a serious effect on relationships and individuals.

That is quite incredible because I am the convener of the cross-party group on fertility services and Mark Hamilton is a member of the group. That is a serious issue and I thank the member for bringing it to my attention. I acknowledge Euan Robson's comment that compared the NHS to the private sector. It was an unusually professional and mature comment from a party that is better known for being critical of the independent sector, so I fully welcome the member's comment. As Nanette Milne said, some progress has been made because the national figures on waiting times look very good. Jamie Stone and Rob Gibson spoke about the drastic increase in waiting times when a consultant or key member of staff is off sick, and the time that is taken to fill vacancies. That is a serious issue in many smaller hospitals, particularly in rural areas, and can, as Jamie Stone said, lead to much longer waiting lists, albeit in the short term. Although Rob Gibson mentioned the finances of the Western Isles NHS Board, I remind him that it is paid significantly higher amounts per person than is the case for Orkney and the Shetland Islands or Argyll and Bute, with its 25 islands. Although today's debate is welcome, the real challenges in the future are to make quick diagnoses and to provide greater advice and support for self-managed conditions such as asthma and diabetes. More should and could be done in primary care in respect of there being greater emphasis on diabetes, given the predictions on incidence of diabetes.  As regards mental health, too many patients go to the doctor with mild or moderate depression, but whose wait to see a psychiatrist or psychologist often means that their condition is acute by the time they see a professional. I take this opportunity to commend the self-help group Depression Alliance, which supports people throughout Scotland. I say to Carolyn Leckie that that voluntary organisation is exceptional—it allows people to continue in employment while they gain greater understanding of their condition. I support the Conservative amendment.

Is the minister concerned by Audit Scotland's survey of patients, which found that less than 5 per cent of patients had been offered treatment at  an alternative location such as the Golden Jubilee national hospital?

Highland Council states that it has been given one  third of the funding that is needed to implement the McCrone settlement and that, if it cannot cut back primary education, it will be faced with cutting back advanced higher classes. Pupils in one Inverness secondary school are already being told that the only advanced highers that will be on offer next year will be in Gaelic and maths. Can the minister confirm what statutory obligations councils and schools have to offer the advanced higher and how these cuts will affect pupils from the Highland region in their career and university choices in the future?

I, too, apologise because unfortunately I will have to leave the debate early. However, I will read the Official Report . I congratulate Bruce Crawford on achieving this first debate on the Beauly to Denny power line—I predict that it will certainly not be the last. The upgrade of the Beauly to Denny transmission line has been a controversial issue for some time and for many reasons, not the least of which are its effects on our unique scenery and on tourism, the potential loss of energy because of the length of the transmission line, its environmental impact and its economic impact on businesses. Today we are focusing on an issue that is often raised, which is the line's potential health effects. Before I consider the health issues, I point out that it is incredible that certain areas south of Beauly, such as the Corrieyairack pass and the areas around Laggan and Drumochter, are not  designated as national scenic areas. I am pleased that the Executive intends to lodge amendments at stage 2 of the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill on national scenic areas, which I hope will be used in relation to the transmission line. I hope that the construction of megapylons will not be allowed in national scenic areas. The possibility of ancient-woodland designation, which Bruce Crawford mentioned, should be examined much more rigorously along the route of the proposed line for the areas that I mentioned because such designation would also be likely to disallow the construction of megapylons. The main request from groups of protestors is for undergrounding of the line, not just to preserve scenic beauty and to lessen the effects on tourism and businesses, but to protect health. That takes me to the Draper report, which concludes that there is a risk of childhood leukaemia for children who live up to 600m away from a line. As Bruce Crawford said, that could affect up to 900 homes, which is considerably more than the figure that was given in Scottish and Southern Energy's evaluation of the proximity of homes in its application to Highland Council. The Draper report highlights the finding of magnetic-field studies, albeit that they are disputed, that the effect on the human population is to disrupt night-time production of the hormone melatonin, which is a natural anti-cancer agent in the body. The issue takes me back to evidence that was given a few years ago to the Health and Community Care Committee on the health effects of genetically modified crops, which was similar to the evidence that we face today: there was no proof of harmful effects, but there was also no conclusive evidence that there were no harmful effects. I agree with members who argue that we should adopt the precautionary principle, which was the conclusion that the Health and Community Care Committee reached. It is my understanding that a public inquiry into the upgrade of the line is inevitable. If so, I am not sure that it would be the appropriate place and time to examine evidence that relates to health effects. It is within the remit of the Minister for Health and Community Care to ensure that an independent review of existing information on health effects be carried out so that we have an evidence base on which we can make good decisions. Research must also be done into the proposed huge cluster of pylons around the Beauly interconnector. The issue is not just about the upgrade of the Beauly to Denny line; we must also consider potential upgrades to the north, from Beauly to Ullapool and Kintore.

Will the member give way?

The resources that are being put into social work and the number of social workers have increased, but has the increase been pro rata and taken into account the enormous increase in work that has arisen from legislation  that the Parliament has passed, which requires huge increases in the number of social workers?

We welcome this review of social work, which is the first in nearly 40 years. The Scottish Conservatives hope that it marks the start of a recovery process that will value and support social workers and provide the high-quality service that we all expect. The report may be the first review of social work, but it is certainly not the first inquiry or investigation into social work services in recent years. We can go as far back as the lengthy 1992 Orkney inquiry and on to more recent ones, such as those into the Caleb Ness and the Miss X cases. I ask positively and constructively whether the problems that were highlighted in those cases have led to any lessons being learned. I like to think that they have. In the short time that I have had in which to read through the report, I have noticed that many of the problems that were highlighted previously have been raised again. That may not be a bad thing, but it would be nice to know that they were being addressed positively. I am committed to that.

There certainly seemed to be a pattern of problems, which I note has been highlighted. I welcome the co-ordination of approaches. I would like to know who is responsible for our council-run social work departments. It has been stated for years in parliamentary debates and in written and oral answers that many matters are for councils to decide and that ministers have the ultimate overview and responsibility for allocating resources. I agree with much of what is in the  review, but it is a handbook on how to manage social work departments that have significant staffing and human resource issues. I welcome the review, even though it is full of managementspeak and jargon, and I hope that it will achieve the outcome that we all want. However, that leads me to ask whether Parliament will now tell the council departments that are responsible for roads, education, planning, police, fire and housing how they should be managed. Will they make use of job descriptions? Where the do the lines of authority, autonomy, delegation and power lie in local government? The review's first recommendation states: "Social work services must be designed and delivered around the needs of people who use services, their carers and communities." With respect, I ask whether that really has to be stated. The minister gave me an assurance about the fourth recommendation, which mentions the "whole public sector approach". That should have been corrected because it does not reflect the spirit of the minister's or my understanding. I am pleased to have received the minister's commitment that not just the public sector but the private, voluntary and independent sectors will be covered. The report later mentions a "mixed economy of care". I was a lecturer in economics for 20 years before I came to Parliament, so I know that "mixed economy of care" means using the voluntary sector. Why does the document not just say so? I looked at the Association of Directors of Social Work's response to the initiative. A key issue for it is the need for a national research strategy that will be informed and shaped by the work of academics, practitioners and managers. Such a strategy should commission, validate and disseminate information to enhance professional practice and improve outcomes. That is what it is looking for—it is its number 1 priority. It wants to use the research to gauge best practice and to learn from it. However, in his foreword, Willie Roe says: "We've considered research, evidence of best practice and views from leading opinion makers, people who use services and their carers". Who is right? Is it Willie Roe, the author of the report, or is it the Association of Directors of Social Work? Others have mentioned the 498 vacant posts in social work. That must not only put huge pressure on the people who have to carry out additional work; it also means that many vulnerable people miss out entirely on social work support. At New Craigs psychiatric hospital in Inverness, in the constituency that the minister  and I serve, the recommended complement is four full-time social workers: there is currently one.

Both sectors have something to contribute, but that is a valid point and I thank the member for making it. With nearly half of all senior social work vacancies and 35 per cent of all vacant social work posts unfilled for more than six months, there are huge problems and pressures within the system. To go back to psychiatry, how can we expect the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, which was passed in good faith by Parliament, to be implemented fully, and mental health patients to receive the benefits that we hoped for and for which we legislated, with 25 per cent of the social work workforce? It is still not clear what the role of paraprofessionals will be, although I listened carefully to the minister and understood that they will be under the direction of social workers. However, I hope that it will not be a case of less-qualified people being given tasks and responsibilities for which they have inadequate training. I have been looking for a focus on prioritising interagency working, which Adam Ingram mentioned, and an emphasis on better communication and partnership working between all organisations that are involved in a person's care. Although there is some mention of that, it has not been given the focus that is required, as has been highlighted by the many tragic cases in recent years. Even as far back as the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002, one of the main issues that we heard from many people was that the national health service and social work services simply did not work as a team. It is sad that, four years later, Parliament is still having to recommend that they talk to each other and that they put the person first. The Scottish Conservatives hope that the report of the 21 st century social work review group will make a difference. The acid test will be the safety and well-being of children and adults that should result from social work intervention in future. The day that councillors and conveners of social work accept responsibility for bedblocking and delayed discharge will be the day that we achieve some success.

The minister just mentioned public sector change. Recommendation 4 of the review suggests that services must become part of a public sector-wide approach. Surely that does not exclude the voluntary sector. Will the minister take this  opportunity to ensure that his statement is not misleading?

I had thought that today would offer an opportunity for us to hear an update on the volunteering strategy and the national youth volunteering programme, which would have helped us to make progress in the debate. I welcome, nonetheless, any debate on volunteering and any opportunity to thank all the people who give so much of their time to their communities in order to help and benefit others. I am pleased to hear the minister say that he is not complacent, because we cannot be complacent about volunteering. More than 90 per cent of the people who are involved in citizens advice bureaux are volunteers. They help people in a wide range of areas; for example, by managing their debts or by offering them advice on welfare benefits. A person's debt cannot be managed through one visit to the CAB. I have been a volunteer so I know that it often takes months or even years before we are able to help people back to financial stability. It is disappointing that Citizens Advice Scotland has constantly to penny-pinch. In the Highlands, it has faced cuts year on year, despite the excellent service that it provides. When we think of volunteers, we probably do not think of mountain rescue teams. On Saturday, I met the Cairngorm mountain rescue team, which is led by John Allan and is highly trained and professional. They take to the Cairngorm mountains in all weathers, at all times of the day or night and in all months of the year to rescue walkers and climbers. All the mountain rescue teams in Scotland are highly trained, dedicated and undoubtedly fit for their purpose in every sense. So why—I ask the minister—is it that they must worry where next year's funding is coming from? The previous three-year settlement is almost at an end and uncertainty is creeping in. I ask the deputy minister to commit, when she sums up, to looking into that. A total of £400 million is directed at the voluntary sector, and millions more is directed to the national health service and local councils. However, I find it difficult to advise people when they come to my surgery and say, "My daughter has a heroin problem and my sister is killing  herself with alcohol. Where do I go?". I have to stop and think. People are passed from pillar to post. They go round in circles. It is incredible that so much money is provided for drug and alcohol rehabilitation in the voluntary sector, but that no one-stop shop—a gateway—is provided to advise families and addicts on the best sources of help. Although I am not criticising the minister about the money that is provided for such projects, as an MSP I have found it difficult to help families that are in such circumstances. It is not just down to patient confidentiality. It is an area where the Executive's departments must work together to address the problem. It is also incredible that this year the Highland Council will give no uplift in funding to the voluntary sector. That is equivalent to another cutback that will severely affect smaller voluntary organisations. I am pleased that David Cameron, the leader of the Conservative party, has placed volunteering high on his political agenda. I am also pleased that his initiative was endorsed by the chief executive of ProjectScotland, who said that she is pleased that the power and impact of the voluntary sector is acknowledged across the UK. Although the details of the Conservative party's policy have yet to be defined, we welcome the consultation.

No. I have only a few seconds left. Possible solutions that are being considered in Mr Cameron's policy review at Westminster include offering longer-term contracts for provision of services, such as those I have mentioned, which will allow the voluntary sector to grow. A relaxing of the rules in the tax and benefits system to reward voluntary work is also being considered. It will be for the Scottish Conservatives to decide on our policy for Scotland, but we welcome the priority and focus that has been given by Mr Cameron. The two main problems that are faced by the voluntary sector are the lack of financial stability and the growing lack of volunteers. I listened carefully to the minister on inclusion in volunteering as an integral part of Scotland's culture. I want to highlight several points that are made in the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing notes.

In that case, I will conclude. Volunteering is a route into employment for many people, including people who have mental  health problems and people who are recovering drug and alcohol addicts. It can help to build confidence, particularly in older volunteers.

Well—thanks for that.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive will consider introducing regular NHS health checks. (S2F-2093)

If the Executive is considering the introduction of NHS health checks, why was the annual health check for the over-75s, which was introduced by the Tories, dropped in the new general practitioner contract?

Will the upgrading of transmission lines, such as the Beauly to Denny line, be considered under the national planning framework in future to ensure local and parliamentary consideration and scrutiny?

Like others, I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing this debate. Fergus Ewing referred to awareness raising. I must admit that I, like others, was wholly unaware of the thistle travel card scheme. The more I read of the scheme, the more I realise what a wonderful idea it is. As Donald Gorrie said, it is a model of how national and local government can best work with the voluntary and private sectors in delivering real, practical and  effective assistance to those with special needs or disabilities. The scheme's great strength is that it is a partnership administered by local authorities and the voluntary sector, which, in turn, engage with private transport operators that deliver the service. It is then backed up with financial support from central Government. That the voluntary sector has a lead role is particularly important. Enable, the initial recipient of the start-up grant from the Executive, is the largest voluntary sector organisation that works specifically with people who have learning difficulties. It understands exactly what is meant by social exclusion. Bodies such as Enable are well placed to take the lead in projects such as the thistle travel card scheme, as they offer uniquely tailored solutions to problems in ways that cannot be replicated by Government bodies. That is not to say that the role of the Government is unimportant. On the contrary, the enthusiastic backing that the scheme has received from the Executive has been crucial to its success. Although I am accustomed to opposing most of the Executive's proposals, I welcome its commitment to the travel card scheme. Many voluntary bodies carry out sterling work in their communities, but their activities can be suddenly curtailed because central or local government support is cut off after three years, much to the detriment of the communities they serve. I congratulate the Executive on awarding the initial £50,000 start-up grant to Enable in 2001. Along with Jackie Baillie and others, I urge the minister to ensure on-going and long-term support for such projects. The scheme's success lies in its practical solution to a real and specific need: the difficulties that people with disabilities may face in utilising basic public transport services that most of us take for granted. The travel card works well because it can easily be identified by transport staff, who can then offer additional assistance without fear of causing offence or embarrassment to the passenger concerned. In light of the undoubted success of the thistle card, I hope that more projects will be administered this way, with proven and experienced voluntary bodies delivering specific schemes. The thistle card is a tribute to the ability of Enable and the other charities and I therefore trust that the scheme will pave the way for an ever-expanding role for the voluntary sector in delivering simple, focused and effective solutions that make a huge difference to people's lives. As Fergus Ewing said, I hope that the scheme will be evaluated—if lessons have to be learned, they should be—and, after the evaluation, made  available throughout Scotland, particularly in the Highlands and Islands, where public transport is crucial.

Moray has one of the lowest average wage rates in Scotland. When the minister considers further relocations, will he consider relocating jobs to Moray to give people who live there more career choice and opportunities?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to implement the recommendations of the recent report, "Mainstreaming pupils with special educational needs". (S2O-8761)

The minister will be aware that the report found that almost half of all local authorities have failed to produce guidelines on how to deal with parental complaints and concerns about the implementation of mainstreaming. Is the Executive's mainstreaming agenda going ahead regardless of whether councils are able to provide adequate and appropriate support for children with additional support needs?

Will Bristow Muldoon give way?

Will the member give way?

As other members have said, there is no doubt that the bill would increase demand for prescriptions. I find it incredible to listen to the Scottish Socialist Party proposing that there should be huge increases in the profits of pharmaceutical companies when, not so long ago, SSP members were talking about nationalising them. It is also incredible that the socialists advocate free prescriptions for all those who can afford to pay. Not one single pensioner on a fixed income in Scotland will benefit from the measures that are before us today. What cannot be measured in the financial memorandum or elsewhere is the change in consumer behaviour when something becomes free. The stated saving of £45.4 million to individuals has to be measured against the potential increase in demand for prescriptions. It  will increase the demand for GPs' time, the demand for diagnoses and it will increase paperwork for GPs. We should also remember that the annual increase in the drugs budget for NHS Scotland is currently about 10 or 12 per cent per annum.

No. I am sorry, but I have limited time; Colin Fox had at least double the time that I have. The bill is also likely to reduce the demand for over-the-counter medicines, more of which have become available in recent years. Why would people pay for such medicines when they could get them free? The most dangerous message from the Scottish socialists today is that there is a pill for every ill. If one talks to mental health patients and the many people in Scotland who suffer from depression, one finds that they start with one pill, which often has serious side effects. They then get another pill to counter those side effects. Before they know it, they are on a cocktail of drugs, when all they wanted was someone to listen to them—not a pill, and not free prescriptions. That general theme runs through many cases of suicide in the Highlands. Legal prescription drugs are readily available, but there is no one for people to talk to about their problems. For years the Conservatives, Labour and most MSPs have been trying to encourage people in Scotland to change their diets, their smoking habits, their lifestyles and their health and exercise regimes so that they lead healthier lives. The abolition of prescription charges would not affect lifestyle issues one bit, but that is Scotland's biggest problem. If more free drugs were available, what incentive would that give to people who are looking to make changes to their lifestyles? We should consider providing free podiatry care, rather than more free drugs, for pensioners and others who would benefit from being more mobile. We need more physiotherapists, rather than more free drugs. We need more psychiatric and psychological support, rather than more free drugs. More NHS dentists would also be very welcome. There should be much more support and advice for patients who self-manage conditions such as asthma and diabetes, rather than more free drugs. I say to the minister that we also need greater access to complementary and alternative therapies, rather than more free drugs. The exemption list needs more scrutiny. I had a quick look at the paper that the Executive has issued today. I notice that the options that are being considered include extending the  exemptions under the low-income scheme and extending exemptions for full-time students and others. That is the debate that we need to have—not a debate about more free drugs. Extending exemptions for conditions such as Parkinson's disease should undoubtedly be examined urgently. Removing prescription charges would not alter Scotland's main health problem, which is based on lifestyle, not on the case for free drugs. Quite often, free drugs lead to problems instead of solving them. I agree with the Health Committee that the status quo is not an option, but I do not think that the answer is the abolition of prescription charges. I rest my case.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive is satisfied that dentistry is adequately funded. (S2F-2065)

It is unfortunate that the new measures were not negotiated with the British Dental Association but, as I understand it, determined unilaterally by the Scottish Executive. The result is that many dentists will not get the new allowances, despite the fact that they treat children and exempt adult patients—our most vulnerable national health service patients. Will the First Minister intervene to ensure that the new contract is negotiated in the best interests of patients and ensures future access to NHS dental care in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to give young people the opportunity to participate in football. (S2O-8569)

I am pleased that some progress is being made. Earlier this year, the Enterprise and Culture Committee was told that the current level of training facilities and resources across Scotland are not of a sufficient scale for youth football development. Bearing in mind health concerns about high levels of childhood obesity, will the minister look to increase access by providing more local football facilities, which would improve not only general fitness and health but the prospects of Scottish football?

There have been some excellent speeches in the debate, which have highlighted the commitment and compassion of the Parliament on the issue of contaminated blood and hep C sufferers. The SSP's motion begins: "That the Parliament recognises the dogged efforts of patients, relatives, campaigners and all those who have highlighted the issues around the contamination of blood products".  What a pity that the SSP members did not give a fleeting thought to those dogged efforts when their shameful behaviour disrupted the Parliament on 30 June, resulting in increased hardship for the group that they pretend to care about. I received a Christmas card from a long-term campaigner on the issue. He wrote: "Thank you for your support over the years—pity about the ... SSP". It is a pity about the SSP members. Their antics were disgraceful, and those who have campaigned on the issue over many years are unlikely to forgive them even in this festive season. As Nanette Milne said, in the first session, the Parliament took substantial evidence and spent considerable time examining the issue. As a member of the then Health and Community Care Committee, I confirm that, under the leadership of Margaret Smith, the convener, and Margaret Jamieson, the deputy convener, hep C was constantly on the agenda for the first four years. Since Roseanna Cunningham took over the convenership of the Health Committee and other members have joined it, the issue has continued to be on the agenda. At the time, I did not think that there was a need for a public inquiry, and I do not think that that would be the way forward now. A test case in court, on a no-win, no-fee basis, would set the precedent for future cases and take into account all the available evidence. I declare an interest, as my daughter is a trainee lawyer in one of the largest personal injury firms in Scotland. That could be done quickly, whereas a public inquiry could take months or years. All the information that the SSP claims to have would be taken into account. In her speech, Carolyn Leckie never referred to any of the evidence or the on-going work that Roseanna Cunningham mentioned, nor did she refer to the Health and Community Care Committee's report, the ministerial responses, the statements, the debates or any of the work that has been done in the Parliament since 1999. She mentioned only the few comments that seem to be solely in her domain. It is disgusting and shameful that the SSP does not recognise and give credit to those who have worked on and been committed to the issue since 1999. Given the fact that the Health Committee is still working on the issue, I trust that Carolyn Leckie will work with the committee to ensure that all the information that she claims to have is fully taken into account and presented to the committee. We do not support the Scottish Socialist Party's motion, but we fully support and empathise with all the patients and families who have been affected by hep C and contaminated blood products.

I thank the minister for the advance statement, of which I managed to read 11 pages. I did not receive it enough in advance to allow me to read the 29 pages of additional material, but I will read them after the debate. If, on average, there are 7,000 new builds a year, it will take more than four years to meet the needs of the 30,000 people who are currently classified as priority homeless, let alone deal with future needs and the welcome abolition of priority need. Will the minister re-examine not only his targets for new builds but the resources that are required to meet the new targets? Secondly, this week I visited Caley House in Inverness, which helps and supports people who have been through drug and alcohol addictions. It has a two-year programme to support people. At the end of it, people will get a tenancy if they are lucky, but in general they will not receive any support. If they are unlucky—which is more likely—they will be isolated in a bed and breakfast. I have a constructive suggestion for the minister. Will he consider using the innovation fund, which, as he said, is for preventing homelessness, and perhaps Professor Bramley's housing needs and affordability model to consider those people, as I understand that their demands make up a significant proportion of repeat homelessness demands?

Scottish Conservatives welcome the initiative to reduce energy consumption, emissions, waste, fuel bills and fuel poverty. Will the directive take full account of older stone-built, solid-walled properties in rural and urban areas? I accept that the minister addressed that to an extent in her previous answer. Given that work is currently being done on the purchaser information pack, what will be the likely cost of an energy efficiency certificate to a potential purchaser?

rose—

This has been a consensual debate in which many new issues about domestic abuse have been raised, in comparison with previous debates. I am pleased to support Margaret Mitchell's amendment, as well as the Executive motion and the SNP amendment. Margaret Mitchell's amendment highlights the fact that the best outcome is for women and children to stay in the family home, where they can remain safely with continuity of support from family, friends, peer systems and agencies, including schools. There is no doubt that stability in the family home is welcome during traumatic times in a family. However, in the circumstances that we are debating today, if the mother and children wanted to stay safely in the family home—an idea to which we are all signed up—the father would have to leave. There is a concern that the current housing shortage could be an obstacle to the abuser leaving home. Even if the man were fully aware of his offending behaviour and knew that he needed help and that the family needed time apart from him, where would he go? That is my question to the minister. In the Highlands, the man would join nearly 2,000 others who are designated as homeless. Margaret Mitchell mentioned tenancy. If the man  were to pass the tenancy of the home over to his wife or partner and moved out, whatever the circumstances of the break-up of the relationship, he—as happens to many men—might still be living in a single-room bedsit a decade later with no possibility of access to his children because of the lack of accommodation for overnight stays. Whether the violence is physical, verbal or of any other kind, its effect on the children in the family carries through into their adult lives. The Scottish Executive document "Violence Against Women: A literature review" is excellent, but the point is highlighted throughout that, although much good work is happening in Scotland, it is largely undocumented. More research would provide better evidence on which to base and share good practice. The literature review highlights the need to share best practice in data collection across agencies, as that could provide links between dealing with violence against women and homelessness, for example. The review also says that we need more understanding of interagency response, child protection and substance abuse. Many members today have highlighted the statistics on domestic abuse, so there is no need for me to say much more on that. The increase in the figures in the statistical bulletin could be attributed to more accurate recording and the fact that more women are speaking out, or it could mean that the incidence of domestic violence is increasing. I know that that is difficult to judge, so more research would be useful. Nora Radcliffe spoke about hidden abuse. Like Maureen Macmillan, I commend the work of the Highland wellbeing alliance, which has pointed out that only 36 per cent of women ever tell anybody about abuse and that only between 2 and 18 per cent of domestic incidents ever come to the notice of the police. Nora Radcliffe also mentioned rural areas. We should ask why the figures for recorded domestic abuse in Edinburgh are eight times higher than the figures in Orkney and Shetland. That is food for thought.

To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria are used to determine whether rural primary schools should be closed. (S2O-8255)

Given the unanimous agreement by Moray councillors to support the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Scottish Executive regarding the presumption against closure of primary schools, has the minister firmed up the guidance relating to the presumption against closure? If so, when will the new guidance be available? How can local authorities be supported in and advised on conducting consultations, whether formal and  informal, to ensure that they are genuinely open and objective and that they attract the confidence and respect of communities?

I will be a bit parochial. I realise that the list that the minister read out was not exhaustive, but all those facilities tended to be in the Scottish Enterprise area. I ask again whether Scottish Enterprise has a proper protocol to ensure that if it knows that a company wishes to establish a call centre in Scotland, that company knows that Vertex is looking for such a contract.

Like others, I thank Maureen Macmillan for raising the issue of call centre jobs in Scotland, particularly in the Highlands. It is worth setting the debate in context. There are more than 300 call centres in Scotland, with a workforce of more than 60,000. Despite suggestions two years ago in The Scotsman and elsewhere that Scotland would lose 10,000 call centre jobs, the number of such jobs has continued to rise. As Maureen Macmillan said, many students at Inverness College, including ex-students of mine, work part time, full time and flexibly at companies such as Vertex. The Highlands compares favourably with the rest of Scotland in attracting call centre jobs, mainly because there are no transport costs, but also because of the clarity, warmth and reassuring nature of the lilting Highland voice. It is important to state that the jobs are under threat due to a contract renegotiation with Vertex's  client, Trainline. I spoke with Vertex this week, and I commend it for energetically looking for replacement jobs. We all hope that it will be successful. Trainline felt that the existing contract was not sustainable in the long term and wished to achieve greater operational flexibility while reducing costs. As a responsible employer, Vertex must follow the consultation process. Indeed, it has set up an employee representative forum to work in partnership alongside the trade union, the Transport Salaried Staffs Association. Vertex currently employs about 1,000 people in Scotland. One year ago, it relocated jobs on behalf of Vodaphone from Merseyside to its call centres in Edinburgh and Forres, creating 135 and 255 jobs respectively. The company's commitment to Scotland is not in question. I would like the minister to examine two issues. First, why does Trainline need to go to India to achieve greater operational flexibility and reduce costs? What can be done to make Scotland a more competitive place to which employers can bring jobs? Secondly—this is an important point that has not quite been touched on by other members—when Scottish Enterprise is approached about call centre jobs, does it have a protocol according to which it will instantly notify Vertex so that it can bid for the work and keep the 214 permanent employees in Dingwall? Such communications are crucial. I know that Vertex is doing everything possible to keep the jobs in Dingwall, but it needs the support of enterprise companies throughout Scotland. As Maureen Macmillan said, many Vertex employees are long serving. Some of them have been there from the start, eight years ago. The staff are highly professional and committed and have a modern approach to business. They have helped to set a trend for call centre jobs to come to the Highlands, taking advantage of a can-do attitude and approach. That contrasts with the average turnover of call centre staff in India, which I understand—according to an article in The Scotsman —is around 65 to 70 per cent. Trainline highlighted cost as a factor for taking the jobs to India, so I hope that the minister will recognise and address the burdens of higher business rates and water charges and the greater extent of regulation that are faced by businesses in Scotland. I hope that he will consider creating a more business-friendly environment, that he will help to reduce red tape and that he can help to maintain the jobs in Dingwall and attract further jobs to Scotland.

Before the start of the debate, the Rev Alastair Symington mentioned that it is St Andrew's day and that St Andrew was always ready to get on with work and that he got the work done. I commend everybody who has worked hard to reach where we are with the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill. Members in all parties recognise how difficult the bill's passage has been. In his opening statement, the minister said that the bill will modernise the law in complex and sensitive areas that have raised concerns in the past. He also mentioned bringing clarity to a difficult issue. Susan Deacon mentioned her experience as the Minister for Health and Community Care. I am aware that the issue has been on the agenda since the Parliament was set up in 1999 and, like her, I remember when it was highly controversial. In that light, I commend all those on the Health Committee and elsewhere who have sought consensual solutions. In the past, people were not asked for consent. Obviously, that led to tragic and traumatic experiences for many families. I should say that Margaret Jamieson of the Labour group has done a huge amount of work on kidney donor cards, not only here and in her constituency, but in the cross-party short-life working group. That needs to be said. I want to mention an issue that we should not forget, although it does not relate to the bill. The minister must also consider prevention—I think that Jean Turner mentioned that. It must be continually considered, particularly given the huge increase in those with type 2 diabetes, for  example. We should help to obtain early diagnosis of type 2 diabetes and control it to try to prevent kidney failure and other complex illnesses that can result. I have just remembered what a friend of mine told me at the weekend. He went to the doctor and told the doctor that he was tired. As a result, he has been treated for depression for two years. However, he was still tired and it was discovered that he had diabetes. Rather than anti-depressants simply being handed out, a test should have been done. There is still quite a way to go in that respect. Obviously, living donations—including donations of parts of organs—are welcome and I am delighted that the ministerial team and the Health Committee have agreed to an opt-in system rather than presumed consent and opt-out. I hear what the minister says about the bill increasing the number of donors. That should in itself be a self-correcting mechanism to reduce any requirement for presumed consent and opt-out. In the past, although people gave their consent for organ donation, that could be overruled by relatives. That has caused a lot of anxiety and has been one of the main arguments for presumed consent. It was also the argument that was put forward by Richard Simpson in the previous session. The bill removes that right of veto and allows the deceased's wishes to stand. That is welcome, and I assume that it will increase the number of organs that are available for donation. I have just looked at the draft authorisation forms for both adults and children, which were given to me by Nanette Milne. They are straightforward and clear. Authorisation can be given not only for the removal of specific organs, but for the way in which, after retention for detailed examination, the organs are to be disposed of or retained. The donor can also authorise the purposes for which the organs can be retained. I hope that that will be taken into account, so that there will be no undue delay in funeral arrangements. Authorisation is more likely to be given when the donor can state those requirements in detail and nothing is left to chance. It is crucial that people understand that they can agree to a post mortem and disagree to organ retention. I did not understand that until I looked at the forms. People assume that, when they are faced with a form, they are faced with organ retention. It is important that people can disagree to organ retention but agree to a post mortem. As other members have said, we must raise public awareness and ensure that there is more training for professional staff to ensure that patients' families are aware of all the issues. I  appreciate the difficulties that may arise in some instances because of the cause of death, especially if death occurs through an accident or suicide. The financial memorandum to the bill states that the initial cost of the training for hospital staff will be £100,000 to £150,000. I hope that that figure will be reviewed in the light of experience. Several members have mentioned the definition of tissue. In the past, that was the main cause of concern because parents had agreed to tissue being taken from their children and found out later that that could mean major organs. It is important that we are all part of the awareness-raising campaign and that MSPs take every opportunity to let people know about the clear and precise provisions in the bill. The financial memorandum states: "Very few hospital post-mortem examinations are currently being performed." This afternoon, we are talking not just about organ retention. I hope that the bill will also encourage more post mortems to be carried out for, as Susan Deacon said, the benefit of medical science and to assist us in understanding diseases. Members have mentioned the 52 people who died while they were waiting for a transplant. We should also remember that, in 2004, 111 kidney transplants were performed in Scotland, each of which saved the NHS around £25,000 a year in hospital haemodialysis costs—and that is not to mention the transformation in the patients' quality of life. The Scottish Conservatives support the general principles of the bill and acknowledge that detailed consideration and scrutiny of the bill must still take place at stages 2 and 3.

Tricia Marwick made some excellent points. I could not help remembering that both she and Linda Fabiani were housing professionals in their past lives. If even they have found the bill complex and technical, members can imagine how I felt last night when I looked through the 23 pages of amendments to decide which of them we should vote for. I found that to be an extremely difficult process. Like Tricia Marwick, I thank the clerks and the bill team for their help and co-operation during the bill's passage. I also thank everyone who gave evidence, whether oral or written. I appreciate that a great deal because I do not have a background in housing. I thank my colleagues on the Communities Committee; although none of them supported any of my amendments, their opposition was never mean-spirited. As the minister said, the teamwork of cross-party committees is often underestimated or ignored in coverage of Parliament's work. The bill is interesting in that it covers a range of issues, including housing renewal areas, the repairing standard, new rights for tenants and the repair, improvement and demolition of houses. The main debate today has been on the single seller survey, on which a wide variety of measured, considered and thoughtful views have been expressed. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the main contents of the bill, but it will be no surprise to learn that we do not support the single seller survey, for the reasons that we gave this morning. Last week's stage 3 consideration of the Licensing (Scotland) Bill was much more controversial and did not result in the type of parliamentary proceedings to which we aspire. Today's proceedings have been much more straightforward and ministerial engagement has been good. However, issues arise in terms of timing and consultation. The stage 3 debate is the normal time for issues of this kind to be raised.  During stage 2, 26 pages of amendments were published on the Monday, with members and organisations having little more than a day to comprehend, respond and—in the case of organisations—advise committee members, prior to the committee meeting on the Wednesday morning. I hope that the Procedures Committee will examine that matter, along with other measures. Not only parliamentarians but organisations that are interested in the subject matter of legislation need time to examine amendments. I echo Tricia Marwick's point that, in our consideration, we were dealing not only with the bill, but with its impact on other legislation. We need to consider the context in which the bill is set. Her point is a good one. I enjoyed all the pre-legislative consultative meetings. They were most helpful in assisting committee members to gain an understanding of the impact of the eventual legislation. The Communities Committee is wasting no time following completion of stage 3 of the bill today. Tomorrow, we are back in Parliament to meet planning directors from around Scotland as part of our pre-legislative scrutiny of the forthcoming planning bill. There is no rest for members of the Communities Committee.

I spoke against the similar amendment that Tricia Marwick lodged at stage 2 and I have serious concerns about amendment 66 today. The exercise that the amendment proposes would be hugely bureaucratic and would mean council officials spending time looking into people's personal circumstances. I agree that we should look at the thousands of empty homes under local authority management, because more could be done to bring them back into service. I return to the subject of granny's Hieland hame, which I mentioned at stage 2. Houses are often empty for good reasons and I will give members some of the reasons that I can think of offhand. Serving military personnel may have empty homes, but they want to return to their homes; they do not want council officials to deprive them of their homes by putting them on the market. Many elderly people in residential homes hope that they will one day return to their own homes; they want to keep that lifeline. Many people from the Highlands leave their native land to pursue careers and opportunities elsewhere in Scotland, the United Kingdom or the world, but they want to keep their family homes to return to; they do not want us to interfere in that way of life. Finally, people who work in other countries may have empty homes; many Scots work abroad but still wish to retire in their own land. I could go on. Tricia Marwick's amendment is unworkable for the reasons that I have given.

I am pleased that my amendments have given members the opportunity to debate the issue. I am grateful to members throughout the chamber for the concerns that they have reflected in the debate. I turn to the minister's points, one of which was that every buyer has to buy surveys. That is simply not the case; I made that clear earlier. I also made it clear that the majority of offers, in Edinburgh and elsewhere, are being made subject to survey, with the survey being done within 24 hours. I have never before been accused of being Edinburgh-centric. For some reason, over the past few days, I have received letters from Edinburgh solicitors—I suppose that many other members received them, too. God help us that we should speak on behalf of Edinburgh solicitors, but if solicitors from Shetland, the Western Isles, Jura, Glasgow, Inverness or wherever had written to us, I would have been happy to use their points in my speech. The fact is that I represent the Highlands and Islands. However, as my party's spokesman for housing and planning—dare I say it—I can mention other areas in Scotland. If that is the only criticism that the minister has of me, the Executive is clutching at straws.

No. The member had his say on my Edinburgh solicitors. We will leave it at that. The minister commented on the incentive to carry out repairs. I refer to the conclusion of the Arneil Johnston report, which is that, from the limited evaluation, "it appears that generally sellers carry out only minor/general repairs or improvements and respondents indicated they would have done this regardless of the Single Survey". That is from the minister's evaluation. The minister mentioned the ways in which the seller can pay for the survey, but members have still not been given clear advice on that matter. How can a buyer get advice other than that which  is written in the single seller survey? Many buyers want to discuss the survey—they want to ask about the roof, for example—or to get more detail on this, that and the other. However, with the single seller survey, they can get oral and further advice only by commissioning their own survey. The surveyor who acts on behalf of the seller cannot deal with 100 buyers phoning up to ask for a wee bit more information about the damp patch. That will just not happen. The minister says that the single seller survey will end multiple surveys, but it will not. To discuss the survey of the property, the buyer—and, in many cases, the lender—will be required to find out that information. I am delighted that the steering group stuck with the Executive, but the question is whether it had a choice in that. Christine Grahame raised the issues of valuation shelf-life and conflict of interest. Those are major points that have not yet been answered. Of course, they will also impact on the regulations. Repossession was mentioned. When it comes to bankruptcy and repossession, who will put the money up front for the single seller survey? Euan Robson admitted that additional surveys would be required. I remind him that the financial memorandum set the survey fee at £400 and the valuation fee at £150; it also said that there would be a £120 million reduction in purchase prices. That is all in the Executive's financial memorandum. Scott Barrie said that I spoke about Edinburgh; my response to him is that I am fully aware of the Inverness market. The minister's commitment to work with stakeholders will, of course, be essential. I remind the minister that the Executive set the target base for the pilot at 2,000. Although the figure was amended to 1,200, it ended up as 74. I press amendment 24.

That is a cheap shot.

In addressing the 22 amendments in my name in the group, I am conscious of a comment that the minister made earlier. He said that legislation needs a good evidence base. I thoroughly agree with that, of course. However, the single seller survey pilot started in July 2004, with a target of carrying out  2,000 surveys; the figure of 2,000 was then reduced to 1,200 and, in the end, only 74 single seller surveys were carried out on which to base this legislation. The decision to make the single seller survey compulsory came as a shock to the members of the Executive's steering group on the subject. The group was given no say in the final decision. The three policy drivers for the single seller survey were to improve information on property condition, to reduce wasted expenditure on multiple surveys and to address artificially low upset prices. The Executive's evaluation of the pilot study, which was undertaken by Arneil Johnston, stated that it was impossible to say anything authoritatively about the experience of purchasers. Therefore, the argument behind the first policy driver is not proven. As for multiple surveys, members who have received the many letters from Edinburgh solicitors and estate agents in recent days will know that virtually all properties—especially in Edinburgh—are now bought subject to survey. There has also been a move towards fixed prices, which addresses the charge relating to low upset prices. A conflict of interest also arises. If a survey is the seller's, the seller pays a surveyor who is acting on behalf of the seller. Solicitors cannot act for buyers and sellers, so how can we expect a surveyor to do so? If the potential purchaser wants information on the property, he will be forced to have his own survey carried out in order to discuss the property with a surveyor. That takes us back to multiple surveys. I know of a property in Edinburgh that was one of the 74 that participated in the pilot scheme. By the time it finally sold, the survey was out of date and the purchasers had to have their own survey done. The inclusion of the single seller survey in the transaction has been described as the "kiss of death" by agents and the seller, who now wishes that he had never opted in. In future, buyers and sellers will unfortunately not have the choice of opting in or out, as the bill will make the single seller survey compulsory. As I said, most properties are bought subject to survey and the successful bidder has the survey carried out, usually within 24 hours of hearing that his offer is acceptable. He is then of course free to discuss the report with the surveyor, who has no conflict of interest. If the purchaser refuses to accept the seller survey and opts instead to carry out his own survey, who will then pay for the seller survey? The offer subject to survey and the recently introduced solicitor-led standard style of offer in Edinburgh contracts can bring the binding stage  forward. Sometimes it can take place in the course of one day. Issues also arise to do with the shelf-life of the single seller survey. It is incredible what one can learn as a member of the Communities Committee: I now know that dry rot spreads at a rate of 1m a month. The length of time for which the results of a survey remain acceptable is clearly an issue. We also have to consider the cost of the single seller survey and the purchasers information pack. Every time the issue was raised in committee, it seemed that more and more was being added to the information pack. We have to wonder whether the figure of £100 for legal fees that is given in the financial memorandum is accurate. I doubt it. In the financial memorandum, it is estimated that the single seller survey will reduce purchase prices in the first year by £120 million. The predicted fall in subsequent years is not given. I come back now to Arneil Johnston's evaluation of the pilot scheme. The report says: "from the limited evaluation possible, it would appear that the existence of a Single Survey is not considered by sellers to improve the marketability of properties". The report had nothing authoritative to say about the experiences of purchasers and it was inconclusive about the influence of the single seller survey on non-purchasers and about its impact on selling agents. So much for the good evidence base for legislation. Arneil Johnston's report concluded: "the majority of surveyors ... strongly believe that the Single Survey will not have a positive impact on improving the condition and energy efficiency of private sector housing in Scotland". The whole rationale behind the pilot exercise was that it would lead to improvements in the fabric and energy efficiency of homes in Scotland. Not only do we not have a decent evidence base, but the 74 surveys showed that single seller surveys will not even achieve what the Executive has set out to achieve. The single seller survey will make it very expensive for people to put their properties on the market and it will cause considerable delays. Selling older properties will become even more difficult. The single seller survey will probably put an end to sellers testing the market before the final decision is made to sell. The single seller survey pilot was a failure, but there was also a failure in consultation. In the eyes of buyers, sellers, surveyors and selling agents, the survey has been a failure. As I said at stage 2, if there was a handbook on how not to legislate, the single seller survey would be the leading chapter.  I move amendment 24.

This point is important. I have the utmost confidence in the surveying profession, but will the minister confirm that, when a seller pays for a survey, the surveyor is equally responsible to all potential buyers and can give them the same level of advice that he or she gives to the seller?

I have found this part of the bill quite complex and, at stage 3, the issues are becoming even more complex. Amendments 73 to 76 address issues with the original drafting of section 12 in relation to the application of the repairing standard to agricultural tenancies. The bill as introduced stated that only agricultural holdings under the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991 were excluded, but there is a subsequent act, the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 2003. Holdings under the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993 and the Small Landholders (Scotland) Acts 1886 to 1931 also need to be excluded for the same reasons. Those are all types of agricultural holdings where the house is ancillary to the purpose of the let, which is the land or the farm. My understanding is that Executive amendment 72 will exclude tenancies of a house on a croft or a small landholding. However, the nature of croft and small landholding tenancies is that the tenancy is of the land. In fact, the tenant has usually built the house himself to work the land, so it is incorrect to refer to the tenancy of the house. The minister's amendment will mean that if a crofter wanted to let a second house on his croft under a normal residential tenancy, he would not have to comply with the repairing standard. I do not think that that was the intention—the Executive's amendment was supposed to exclude the actual croft tenancy under which the house is ancillary to the land. Amendment 87 is about tied houses. I raised the issue at stage 1 and stage 2; at stage 2, I lodged amendments to remove tied houses from the legislation. As I lived in a tied house for the first two decades of my life, because my father was a  farm worker, I want the repairing standard for tied houses—whether Bute House or a farm cottage—to be as high as it is elsewhere in the housing sector. The main point in relation to amendment 87 is that a tied house is part of an employment contract rather than a landlord-tenant contract. I understand that the definition of a tenancy includes a person who pays rent. No rent is paid in service occupancies where the occupancy of the house is a contractual requirement of the employment. I give the example of Bute House; it is a tied house and the service occupancy is covered in the First Minister's contract of employment. Some employers provide a house to an employee on the basis of a lease, usually called a service tenancy. In that case, the repairing standard will apply as usual, as rent is charged, although it may not be the full market rent. In the case of service occupancies, whether of the First Minister, farm workers or ministers of the kirk, the provision of the house is secondary to the primary purpose of the contract, which is employment. I ask the Scottish Executive whether it can legitimately legislate in such circumstances, as employment is reserved to Westminster. The terms of a service occupancy are a matter for the employment contract; therefore, it is not appropriate to deal with them under the repairing standard housing panel mechanism. For example, rent sanctions imposed by the private rented housing panel cannot be effective in cases where no rent is paid. If a farm worker refused to live in a house provided by his employer due to its poor standard, there could be a case for constructive dismissal, which would be handled by an industrial tribunal, not a private rented housing panel. Yesterday, the Communities Committee discussed the statutory instruments to implement the national registration scheme for private landlords. It is interesting that tied houses are exempt from that scheme for the reasons that I gave. Why can tied houses be exempt from the national registration scheme for private landlords but be included in the Housing (Scotland) Bill? My amendments address whether it is competent for the bill to cover issues in an employment contract.

To ask the Scottish Executive what concerns it has in relation to the implementation of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002. (S2O-8073)

The act was the flagship piece of legislation in the first session of the Scottish Parliament. I remind the minister that schedule 1 to the act states that "assisting with the preparation of food" should not be charged for. Why can some councils choose to ignore a law that has been passed by the Parliament? Those councils include Dumfries and Galloway, where my colleague Alex Fergusson has many problems. [ Laughter. ] I mean problems with elderly people having to pay for the preparation of food. I am sure that he has other problems as well. In a written answer to a question from me, the minister said: "Only the courts can decide whether a particular local authority has acted in contravention of the law".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 1 November 2005; S2W-19834 .]  He states that local authorities "should not charge" for assistance with the preparation of food, but he should have stated that they cannot charge. When the Parliament passes a law, that is surely the last word. I ask the minister to take action to stop pensioners having to take costly legal action to get their entitlement.

I acknowledge Des McNulty's measured contribution, in which he wondered about the private and NHS sectors working together. He also made another crucial point, which has been lost in the debate. He pointed out that, although Glasgow has the highest number of dentists per head of population, it has the worst dental record in Scotland. On the other side of the coin, Grampian has the lowest number of dentists per head for children, yet the region has the best dental record in Scotland. We have to consider the wider context—not only the number of dentists, but how we can achieve an excellent level of health care, especially for children. Many members have mentioned the BDA. I regret that, after yesterday's long debate, I saw the BDA's briefing only this morning. However, it is worth pointing out some points that the association makes. It says: "This move towards private care is prompted by lack of investment in NHS dentistry and frustrations with the current NHS system, including the lack of time dentists can spend with patients offering preventative advice and the type of materials they are allowed to use." Whether that is right or wrong, we have to work with the BDA. Let us consider partnerships and outcomes and results. The briefing also says: "The growth of private care is also driven by the availability of new clinical procedures and heightened patient demand for treatments such as white fillings and tooth-coloured crowns that may not be available on the NHS." Like every other profession, dentistry is demand driven as well as supply driven. When Labour has nothing to say, it blames the Tories. By May next year, Labour will have been in government for eight years. Labour members have to be a bit grown-up and start taking responsibility for the decisions that they have made.

Yes, it will be nine years. Over three years, £295 million will be invested. However, the central questions that were raised by all sides at the beginning of this debate have still not been answered. How much will the fee for NHS dental services be increased to cover the cost of treatment and to keep dentists in the NHS? I listened carefully to Lewis Macdonald. The  reduction from 400 to 50 in the number of items covered by the item of service fee is welcome, as it will reduce bureaucracy. He also mentioned root canal treatment. I remember being told by a dentist that it cost more than £200 to carry out that treatment, yet the fee for the service at that time was less than £50. I am sure that there are many other similar examples. Are dentists being paid properly or are they having to subsidise the service? The minister cannot guarantee that any general dental practitioners who have moved out of the NHS to the private sector will come back.

Let me finish the point. There has been more investment, but more than half of it is crucial and much-needed funding for work on infection, contamination standards and training. In other words, more than 50 per cent of the investment is to stand still.

I would welcome anything. However, the minister has not come forward with any information so that Roseanna Cunningham and I—and others—can say to people, "Don't you worry. Your NHS dentist is not going to leave now. The ministers have made sure they will be paid. All will be well." We have not been given the reassurances that we have sought. Many members, including Carolyn Leckie, have spoken about the earnings of dentists in private practice—around £120,000. However, that does not take into account the costs of running a business, as Des McNulty said. Those costs cover staff, insurance, heating, lighting, training, administration and borrowing, among many other things. I would have hoped to hear, before £300 million was allocated, some commitment from the dental profession for the measures that ministers have negotiated. The minister said little about free dental check-ups. When giving evidence to the Health Committee, Professor Tim Newton said: "the Executive is unlikely to be able to fulfil the promise to deliver on the check-ups."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 1 February 2005; c 1594.] He had surveyed almost 3,000 dentists. The system much lauded by Mike Rumbles will only give people an assessment of what needs to be done, tell them how long they have to wait to get it done and advise them of the cost of the treatment, which for many will be prohibitive. Six  months later they will get another dental check-up to tell them the same thing again. The dental check-up is welcome, but it is certainly not the whole answer. When the BDA says that it needs an increase of £348 million a year, how much will £295 million over three years achieve?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate the minister on the substantial amount of money that is being invested in dentistry. How many dentists will it bring back into the NHS?

I am not familiar with the decisions that have been made in Midlothian Council; therefore, I will keep my comments general and speak from my experience as a Highlands and Islands MSP. It is interesting that more and more members' debates focus on housing. Last month, we had an excellent debate in the name of John Home Robertson. In the Highlands, there are about 9,000 people on the waiting list for council houses. The lack of opportunity to gain a foothold in the property market or to find an affordable home to rent is forcing many people who grew up in the area to leave. Fiona Hyslop made that point. People in the Highlands used to leave to pursue careers or to get jobs; now they leave because they cannot afford a house. Owning a home remains an aspiration for many Scots, and there is undoubtedly an urgent need for the Executive to work with all stakeholders to ensure that low-cost properties are made available for people who wish to own, as well for those who wish to rent. Changes in one market, particularly the first-time buyer market, impact on other markets, including the social housing market. We have only to look at the Council of Mortgage Lenders recent briefing paper to see that Scotland has the lowest proportion of owner-occupiers: 64 per cent compared with 73 per cent in Wales and 70 per cent in England. The number of loans for first-time buyers has fallen from 50,000 in 2002 to 32,000 in 2004—it almost halved in two years. In 1995, the average purchase price for a first-time  buyer was 2.2 times their salary; now, a first-time buyer has to borrow on average 3.1 times their income. Fewer people can afford to buy their first home, so more people have to rent, which impacts on the market as a whole. As Colin Fox said, Highland Council yesterday received pressured area status regarding the right to buy. I read the minister's press release very carefully, and he admitted that he does not yet have any evidence about the effect of the right to buy on the availability of affordable housing. There seems to be an assumption that if tenants in council houses are not given the right to buy, they will suddenly move out and buy on the open market. That certainly does not happen in Inverness, and it is why many such people have been tenants for 10, 20 or 30 years. It is also a reason why so many tenancies are now inherited—for the first time since the 1950s, we find three generations living in the same house. I wish to say a word about stock transfer. I do not agree with Colin Fox, although I am not familiar with the situation in Edinburgh. In the Highlands, the debt per council home is the highest in mainland Scotland at £11,000 per house. The last figures that I had for income were that 47p of every £1 in revenue goes to pay the interest on the debt. There is no way that the council can invest in properties for families in order to benefit communities with that amount of spending.

To ask the First Minister whether free personal care for the elderly is adequately funded. (S2F-1917)

Will the proposal that the minister is considering also deal with the levels of communication impairment among young offenders? A high percentage of people in HM Young Offenders Institution Polmont were discovered to have a severe communication impairment. Will he consider how that issue might be addressed, particularly in relation to future offending behaviour?

rose—

I point out to Christine Grahame that the Tory amendment would retain the words "fuel poverty" and that the amendment would start to apply from the fifth line of the motion. I hope that that is acknowledged. In the interests of balance, the Labour-Liberal Executive's amendment also includes the words "fuel poverty". It is important to be accurate. The motion is wide ranging and there needs to be a wide-ranging debate on energy policy—or the lack of it. Jamie Stone—I am sorry that he has left the chamber—was right to talk about tidal power. I commend the excellent research on decommissioning that is taking place at the North Highland College. Cutting-edge, worldwide decommissioning research is being done in the north Highlands and more than 17 PhD students are leading the world in that respect. Tidal power is being looked into. In considering energy, we should consider the excellent research work that academics are doing in this country.  Obviously, the race to embrace wind farms through renewables obligation certificate payments results in higher prices for all consumers. Therefore, we should remember that there will be higher prices and more fuel poverty as a result of wind power. I will return to that topic later. Elaine Murray said that any reasonable debate must include the nuclear option. Members could ask the people of Caithness whether they want their county to be covered in wind farms or whether they would like to have the next nuclear station. Those people should know the answer, as they have had Dounreay since the 1950s, and I can tell members what their answer would be. I want to deal with something that other members have mentioned. I note the SNP's commitment to wind farm energy, which Richard Lochhead talked about passionately—I listened to him carefully. However, the member of Parliament for the Western Isles won his seat on the basis that he was opposed to wind farms. That is acknowledged in a paper that I have with me.

Not at the moment. How can someone pursue his opposition to wind farms in a party that is totally committed to wind farms? That is simply impossible. I do not mourn the loss of a Labour politician, but I acknowledge honesty and SNP members must be honest when they debate.

The member should have listened to what I was saying. The SNP MP for the Western Isles won the election on the basis that he was opposed to wind farms, but the party's policy is totally in favour of wind farms. There should be a bit of honesty in the debate. There is no doubt that, to date, the Executive has seen renewable energy predominantly in terms of wind farms. I commend much of what Elaine Murray said. All members need to consider what plans are in place to replace the gas, coal and nuclear power base-load stations when they close less than two decades from now. That is a crucial question that has not yet been answered. Wind-generated power is unpredictable—gales do not always blow in the Highlands—and requires 80 to 85 per cent back-up to ensure consistent supply. In seeking equilibrium in the energy market, we must focus on supply, although it is obvious that we cannot lose sight of demand. I note what Shiona Baird said about energy efficiency, which  must always be part of the debate. The Conservatives introduced the warm deal to encourage energy efficiency, provide warm homes and save consumers money. The Executive's free central heating programme has undoubtedly helped many elderly people to live more comfortably in their own homes, but the Minister for Communities is considering extending the programme to cover people who are in receipt of pension credit. Given the huge cohort of people on pension credit who could be taken out of fuel poverty by the programme, why has the warm deal budget been cut by £12 million over the next two years? The budget will go down from £57 million to £45 million. If we are serious about extending the warm deal, we should realise that that cannot be done through cuts. I am sorry that I did not make an intervention during Nora Radcliffe's speech. I point out to her that, apart from the fact that the planning bill will come before the Parliament next month, the Executive's reason for putting NPPG 6—the planning guideline for renewable energy—out for further consultation in January is that it is not sufficient for dealing with the demands that planning departments, wind energy development companies and local objectors are placing on the wind power sector. The Liberal-Labour coalition is re-examining that guideline because it is not sufficient; I agree, although I disagree with the fact that the guideline will apply in parallel with the planning bill yet lie outwith its scope. I doubt whether those who object to wind power will get the same option to be consulted as those who will be included in the consultation for the planning bill. I welcome the consultation and I hope that it will give equal powers to objectors to wind farms and objectors to other developments.

I will start by disagreeing with Robert Brown: this has been a very productive debate with good contributions from all sides of the chamber. There is one point that no one has raised. The minister mentioned parents battering their heads against brick walls, but—although I am aware only of the situation in Highland—I can tell him that many children are actually excluded from all schools, be they mainstream or specialist, because of disruptive behaviour. Why are children excluded for being disruptive? Because, as Margaret Ewing said, their parents are trying to get a diagnosis but cannot—

One second please; this is an important point that has not been raised. Parents cannot get the diagnosis, so the children are at home. In some cases they not only exhibit violent behaviour but enter into a life of crime after falling in with other children who have excluded themselves from school. Serious issues arise. We are not just talking about mainstreaming and about specialist schools; we also have to consider children who are excluded. They are promised six hours of specialised teaching a week but they certainly do not get that. I agree with points that have been made on all sides that the Parliament must continue to look into education for children with special needs. Scott Barrie made points about the motion in the name of my colleague Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, but I want to remind the chamber of the actual wording. The motion acknowledges that "many children with additional support needs draw educational and social benefit from being educated in a mainstream setting". It also acknowledges that "appropriate resources and support must be available" and that the development of "some children with multiple and complex needs can best be promoted through the concentrated support provided in special schools".

No. I am sorry. I would argue that the motion is a plea to look ahead rather than back. Children with special needs should be placed in the most appropriate  setting for their development, be that in mainstream or special schools. There is another point in Lord James's motion that others, including John Swinney, have raised—to their credit. Parents must have a say in the process and must be able to make a genuine and informed choice.

No. I am too short of time and have too many points to respond to. Fiona Hyslop mentioned a 39 per cent reduction in special school rolls. That reduction is a cause for concern. However, as Lord James said, each child must be treated as an individual and supported according to their needs. Many members, such as Rosemary Byrne and Margaret Ewing, have spoken about their professional life before coming to the Parliament. Before coming here, I lectured in economics in further and higher education for 20 years. Many students fell through the net throughout their whole educational career; they were diagnosed with dyslexia or other conditions only when they reached higher education. We hope that that will not happen in future and that children will be given support in primary and secondary school. Today's debate takes place in the month of the implementation of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004. It is a time of change in our education system. Like Brian Monteith, I remember that many Labour back benchers had serious concerns about the bill. We will have to keep the implementation of the act under constant review. I was pleased to hear the minister say that both special and mainstream schools are required. We would all agree with that. However, will he go a step further? Will he place a moratorium on the closure of special schools until the assumptions behind the mainstreaming policy are reviewed? As others have said, at present parents have to battle within the system to get accurate diagnoses—whether for dyslexia, dyspraxia, ASD or any other conditions. Once parents have achieved a diagnosis, they have a further battle to get the support that is appropriate to the child's needs. It is one thing to pass legislation in this Parliament but quite another to look into the practical implementation of measures and the support that is offered by educational authorities throughout the country. As Brian Monteith said, a child's needs should not be determined by cost or resources. He also spoke of the need for a variety of choices. John Swinney and others said that we should  not simply establish the principle of support—with which we all agree—but that we should work on the practical delivery too. That is what people constantly come to see us about. We would be failing in our duty as parliamentarians if we did not raise the issue of the support that is required by children with special educational needs.

All right, given that Mr Rumbles has not spoken in the debate.

I thank Mr Rumbles for raising that point, but we should be discussing not the bricks and mortar but the actual support that children are given, whether in mainstream or special schools. I am in my last minute so I will move quickly on to the point that Adam Ingram made about disabled people not being well served in the current system. Just a few hours of specialised teaching for children with dyslexia can bring enormous benefits. I know of children in primary 7 whose parents have to pay privately to get a diagnosis; however, because it is a private diagnosis, it is not accepted by the education authority and the parents and children have to wait and wait. I commend Rosemary Byrne for her contribution. Because of her background and her commitment to her profession, she always makes sound contributions to these debates. She and others said that reviews of mainstreaming and of problems with diagnosis and insufficient resources are required. A review is also required into the training of classroom assistants. Such training is lacking. I ask members throughout the chamber to support the motion in the name of my colleague Lord James Douglas-Hamilton.

The Minister for Health and Community Care said that it would take four to six months to produce the flu vaccine once the new virus has been identified. Can that process be speeded up and how does the four-to-six-month production time relate to the potential rate of spread and infection?

I welcome the debate and the post-enactment legislative scrutiny that will be undertaken by the Communities Committee. I apologise in advance for the fact that I will be unable to be here for the minister's winding-up speech. I am sure that every MSP who holds regular surgeries has his or her own homeless list. In the past month, I have worked to help a man who is  sleeping out in the Ness islands in Inverness but who was not considered a homelessness priority; a man who was sleeping in a friend's garden shed, who was lucky enough to be given bed and breakfast accommodation; other men who have been sleeping on friends' sofas; a single mum who was worried about turning down a house because she did not want to live in an area but thought she would be put to the bottom of the list; mental health patients; and people who are recovering from drug problems and alcohol addiction. Probably the biggest group of homeless people are single men who have left their family homes to their wives and children and who subsequently cannot have their children over to stay with them because they are in one-bedroom and temporary accommodation. There are many others. My speech is based largely on the current experience in the Highlands and in Argyll and Bute. We should be listening closely to what the councils have to say there as they struggle to cope with the legislation. Argyll and Bute Council has said that the 2012 target is unachievable unless massive additional investment is given to it. In Highland Council's region, four out of eight areas will not be able to meet the 2012 target. Housing is not just about allocating homes to homelessness applicants although, in some authorities, that sometimes seems to be the case. Argyll and Bute Council allocates 80 per cent of its lets to people who are designated as homeless. In its briefing, the council states: "This is causing a great deal of anger from those on the main housing waiting lists who are aware that their opportunity of being allocated a house is remote, and has reduced greatly since the legislation came in." The council further states that "This legislation is not going to help us create balanced communities." I will come back to that point later. I also find that many elderly single people live in three-bedroom accommodation and I wonder how often councils and housing associations write to all their tenants to ask whether their accommodation is still appropriate for their needs. Given the aging population, some forward planning might be done by considering more types of sheltered accommodation and more appropriate accommodation, particularly for single men. The Bank of Scotland recently stated that there are 87,000 empty homes throughout Scotland. More than 10,000 of them are in Glasgow, almost 9,000 are in Edinburgh and 7,000 are in Aberdeen. Of course, they are not always in areas for which there is high demand, but if we are serious about homelessness, surely an analysis of how to improve the viability of those empty homes would be a first step.  Highland Council sent a not-very-brief briefing paper for today's debate and I will highlight some of the issues that it raises. It is important to understand that housing applicants in the Highland Council area who want to be located near their family in Fort William, for example, cannot possibly accept being housed in Wick. They could not visit in one day by using public transport. The numbers on Highland Council's waiting list continue to rise while the number of lets that are being allocated continues to fall. As an increasing number of people are assessed as being homeless, an increasing percentage of lets is going to homeless households. The year after the legislation, there was a 59 per cent increase in people who were assessed as homeless by Highland Council, with a further 15 per cent increase in 2004-05. The council also states that in an area with no social housing and very few registered social landlord properties being built, the "stigmatisation and resentment of homeless households (who many perceive to be 'jumping the queue') is already not uncommon and will be likely to increase." In my surgery work, I have also become aware of the situation leading to bullying and, in some cases, extreme and persistent antisocial behaviour. The local connection requirement in homelessness applications will be suspended in 2006. That will surely have an effect on homelessness applications. In places such as Glencoe, Ballachulish, Ardnamurchan and the Kyle of Lochalsh, it will certainly result in far greater resentment. Many local people cannot understand why people who come into the area get a house before someone whose family has lived there for generations gets one. That feeling comes through very strongly from the Highlands and from Argyll and Bute. For many homelessness applicants, it is vital that a support system for care is in place for their entry into accommodation. I have also dealt with many mental health patients and people with drug addictions; if they do not get the support of care in the community, their tenancies fail. They end up back in hospital, or the hostels, and they present as homeless within six months or a year. Highland Council has also stated that, given the severe cuts in the supporting people budget, "it is almost impossible to develop the services needed to support homeless applicants across the Highlands, many of whom will have housing support needs." It is a sad cycle in which a lack of support leads to failed tenancies, increased homelessness and rising stigmatisation of homelessness applicants. Even the Salvation Army briefing mentions that people in hostels for the homeless find it  impossible to move on because of a lack of community housing. I have heard about bed blocking in hospitals but never in hostels for the homeless, but that is what the Salvation Army calls it. The number of households with dependent children living in temporary accommodation increased by 18 per cent in the past year—that shows the seriousness of the issue. The right to buy has helped to increase home ownership in Scotland by more than 30 per cent, with approximately 400,000 tenants exercising that right, but according to Scottish Executive research, 21 per cent of properties that have been sold under the right to buy have subsequently been resold on the open market. People are entitled to do so, given their personal and family circumstances. As a result, the argument that right-to-buy properties are lost as affordable housing when they are sold is totally inaccurate. Rather, they are bought by their tenants, many of whom have lived in them for decades.

I am grateful to the minister for giving way and I apologise if I repeat what I said earlier. The minister emphasises chronic conditions. Yesterday, Adam Ingram and I were at a meeting of the cross-party group on mental health, at which it was clearly stated to us that if someone who has mild or moderate depression is treated early, the condition does not become chronic. Will the minister also emphasise early intervention?

I acknowledge and agree with what the minister says. I have not had an opportunity to read all the report; we received the minister's response only this morning. Will there be an emphasis on early diagnosis, referral and intervention so that conditions are not allowed to become chronic?

I apologise for not being here for the start of the minister's statement. Conservatives welcome the forthcoming planning bill, which is due in December. Although it is difficult to debate precisely specific issues prior to the publication of the bill, I put on record the fact that the minister will certainly get the Conservative party's support when he—or whoever, along with John Home Robertson—proposes a new nuclear power station in Scotland. The current planning system is cumbersome. It is slow and fairly negative towards development. We will welcome measures to simplify and speed up the planning process in Scotland as well as to include people and communities in a more proactive, fair and meaningful consultation on the development plans—as opposed to the reactive and somewhat adversarial system that we have at present. We will strive to restore some faith and trust in the planning system. I welcome the minister's announcement of the new planning advice note on community engagement. More advice needs to be given on that. We welcome the five-year development plan cycle, but we note that, in its recent newsletter, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities states that "a 5-year development plan cycle will not be deliverable." COSLA goes on to state:  "No sooner than a development plan is approved, then planning authorities would have to start the process afresh." In a written answer to a parliamentary question, I have had it confirmed that it takes, on average, seven years to draw up a local plan. If it takes seven years to draw up one plan but there has to be a new plan every five years, it does not take a mathematician to work out that that is fairly undeliverable. It is hardly surprising that the Institute of Directors, among others, asks: "What penalties—financial or otherwise—will be imposed on Local Authorities who fail to meet the outlined targets?" So much of the success of the proposed planning bill will rest on up front consultation and up-to-date plans. We need to know that those will be deliverable, especially as 70 per cent of local plans are more than five years old and 20 per cent are more than 15 years old. The Scottish Conservative party wants the bill positively to support and promote economic development. That is surely Scotland's number 1 priority and, hopefully, the Executive's number 1 priority, given the fact that Scotland's performance lags well behind that of more successful small European economies—as is stated in the national planning framework. As illustrated during John Home Robertson's members' business debate last week, the lack of affordable housing is one of the major problems in Scotland. We hope that the planning proposals will embrace the need for an adequate and appropriate supply of housing where people want to live and work. At present, there is little evidence of linkage between affordable housing and planning. I hope that, at the very least, the local housing strategies will be included at all stages of a local authority's development plan. Economic development and regeneration will be hampered if labour cannot be supplied in the right places, and the location of the labour supply will be determined, in part, by the availability of affordable housing. In its briefing paper, the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland stated that the local housing strategy, "through continued development and improvement ... should be the key strategic housing planning document." We must certainly look to more collaboration, which is essential given that the local housing strategy, and the proposed development plan, will be updated every five years. There has to be total co-ordination and integration of those plans. We will not support more measures to centralise planning decisions by overriding the views of local communities and locally elected councillors, but we need to know more about what is considered to be a national development. My committee  colleagues will not be surprised to hear this from me, but if a national development includes pylons and the upgrading of existing pylon gridlines, as well as wind farms, we need to know that the system is open to public challenge and the same level of consultation and scrutiny as applications that are considered locally. The wind farm policy is hardly rural friendly. For example, when urban dwellers face a local development plan, they will be aware of all the planning proposals and the land designations for a five-year development period. People who live in rural areas and are faced with dozens of wind farm applications have no such up front consultation. I do welcome the review of and consultation on national planning policy guideline 6 that will start in January, but it will be running parallel to the proposed planning bill's passage through Parliament, so whenever we raise problems and questions about pylons—

I will finish my point. Whenever we raise issues about wind farms while the proposed bill is being considered, we will be referred to the review and consultation on NPPG 6. The system discriminates against rural dwellers who will not be part of the up front consultation opportunity that urban dwellers will have. My colleague Bill Aitken gave me some information from Pollokshields Heritage, which has serious concerns about listed buildings and the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas Act) 1990. I hope that the minister will consider those issues as well as flooding, but I understand that they are not well represented or responded to in the forthcoming planning bill.

How can the consumer—in this case, the air passenger—be assured that, when the public sector agrees a PFI contract, that contract will not discourage or be detrimental to the expansion of the business or make the service more costly for the customer?

Given the fact that diabetes can lead to circulation, sight, heart and kidney problems, as well as strokes, should not more emphasis be placed on early diagnosis to ensure early intervention for many problems?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether all services and resources will be in place for full implementation of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 in October 2005. (S2O-7595)

Will mother-and-baby, child-and-adolescent and medium-secure units be in place next month as required by the act? Will we have the recommended number of psychiatrists and mental health officers by that time?

I have chosen not to speak about details of the experiences of the families mentioned in the Green party's motion; instead, I will keep to the general issues. We will support the Executive's amendment as we feel that it addresses the real problems that are faced by asylum seekers and their families in Scotland. We will look for action in the fullness of time, not only promises. We support the condemnation of "so-called 'dawn raids', handcuffing of children, and the removal of children by large groups of officers in uniform and body armour."  Although that approach may be appropriate for other police operations, it certainly cannot be justified when, as Robert Brown has said, there is no security threat or serious risk of absconding. Although immigration is reserved to the Westminster Government, we in this Parliament should fully embrace and accept our responsibilities towards children and families in Scotland in respect of child protection, welfare and education. It is surely a matter of concern that the recent report by HM chief inspector of prisons expressed disappointment that the previous recommendation that there should be independent assessments of the welfare of children at Dungavel had not been implemented. The report was based on an unannounced inspection of Dungavel in December last year. Although the report commends some progress at the centre, it highlights the need for urgent remedial action on health care. It may be more difficult to provide appropriate educational provision for all children, particularly those who stay for a short period, but the provision of health care and vaccine protection is essential.

I thank the minister for that interesting information. For educational provision, the extent and appropriateness of addressing a child's unique needs must depend on the length of detention. The inspection report states: "The learning provision for children was deficient and required urgent attention." Perhaps events have overtaken the report, but it is worth quoting because action was not taken as recommended. The report also recommended that there should be "an effective system for assessing and recording children's educational achievements, and for exchanging information with schools." I hope that action will be taken. I highlight the need for child protection training and enhanced Criminal Records Bureau checks for staff who are in contact with children at Dungavel. I seek an assurance from the minister that appropriate action has been taken.  The fact that families stay so long in centres such as Dungavel is indicative of the chaos that the current Government has created within our immigration system. Instead of offering a safe haven to those who are most in need, the current system appears to have increased illegality. Desperate individuals have been forced into the hands of people smugglers and, when they reach Britain, they are open to exploitation in the underground economy. However, as the real and responsible Opposition party in the chamber, we welcome the Executive's response and the action that it has today stated it will take. We will support the Executive's amendment.

Many members have cited the figures for fatalities. I have dealt with many people who have had severe injuries as a result of accidents on the A9. I do not want to go into detail, but in several instances people have been left completely paralysed. We should remember them too and not just consider the fatalities. I was delighted to hear John Farquhar stating the Liberal policy of dualling the A9 from Perth to Thurso. As Andrew Arbuckle says, "If it is Liberal policy, it happens." Well done, John; the campaign was very successful.

I am sure that it has no doubt about getting the member's support. I commend John Swinney, and my colleague Murdo Fraser, for his commitment and persistence in tackling the accident record on the A9 and at the Ballinluig and Bankfoot junctions. Speaking as a statistic after experiencing a car crash on the A9, I have more than a passing interest in the debate. Without wishing to take anything from the prioritising of the A9, I would like, as others have done, to highlight the A889, linking the A9 and the A86 from Dalwhinnie to Laggan, which has been designated the most dangerous road in Britain. That road has an accident rate that is almost four times higher than the next most dangerous road in  Scotland, which is the A99 that links the A9 at Latheron to Wick in Caithness. Other links from the A9 include the A95 into Morayshire, which is Margaret Ewing's constituency, and the A835 to Ullapool, both of which were designated by the AA as high-risk roads. We are talking about not just the A9, but the seriously high-risk roads that connect to it. I support Murdo Fraser's call for the eventual dualling of the A9 to Inverness, but I remind members that the A9 does not stop at Inverness. The road north of Dornoch narrows and that part needs to be given greater priority status than we are giving it today. Jamie Stone did not mention the Berriedale braes, but I understand that the forecast is for a very severe winter and I put it on the record that I find the Berriedale braes quite frightening in good weather; I would not like to risk coming down them in snow and ice. When I spoke in our previous debate about the A9, I highlighted the fact that apart from the three quarters of a mile of dual carriageway at Crubenmore, there was no safe place to overtake for a distance of 44 miles. That has now changed through the construction of the two-by-one lanes that John Swinney mentioned. Those lanes provide for safe overtaking, but because of traffic build-up and frustration, too many drivers try to overtake and that leads to a bunching of vehicles as the road goes back to a single lane. However, I support the increase in the number of two-by-one lanes between Drumochter and Moy because I believe that they can easily be converted to dual carriageway in due course. That change is a step in the right direction, not an end in itself. Given that the two-by-one lanes are a mile longer than the dual carriageway at Crubenmore, I look forward to hearing the timing for the extension of the dual carriageway at Crubenmore. The Executive should be concerned about the fatalities, the horrendous injuries that many people experience on the A9 and the delay in the promised junction improvement at Ballinluig and Bankfoot. Although piecemeal changes and improvements are welcome, the bold step to dual the A9 is needed.

Can the minister confirm that the pockets of crofting land to be allocated for housing will come under pre-legislative scrutiny and consultation and will be included in the up-to-date development plans proposed in the new planning bill?

To continue the theme of learning from mistakes, I will concentrate on two issues: the experience that we have gained from the NorthLink debacle and the part of the motion that deals with the terms and conditions of Caledonian MacBrayne's workforce. Earlier, we heard from the chief rabbi, whose words were pertinent to the debate. He said that we should acknowledge our errors and begin again and that we should say, "I did wrong. I am sorry. Let's work together and try again." He said that we should focus on the future and forgive the past. That view has been stated by every side in the chamber. All parties would respect the minister's points if, for once in his life, he acknowledged that he has made mistakes and learned from them. If he does that, we will support him in the future. The STUC briefing paper referred to Audit Scotland's inquiry into the NorthLink "farrago"; I am not familiar with that word, but I looked it up in the dictionary and found that it means a confused heap of nonsense, also known as a hotchpotch. Although I hesitate to call for more delay in the process, there would be sense in taking time to read the Audit Scotland report before proceeding with the CalMac tender. After all, we have already waited more than six years. The NorthLink public subsidy has more than doubled from the original £11 million per annum to more than £24 million today. Pentland Ferries, however—which is operated privately by Andrew Banks and which built two piers and bought two ex-CalMac ferries—carries thousands of passengers, vehicles and livestock from St Margaret's Hope in Caithness to Gills Bay in Orkney every year and does so without a penny of public subsidy. The ferry is heavily used by tourists, businesses and locals, and is cheaper than NorthLink. Despite the multimillion pound subsidy to NorthLink, which includes a 75 per cent subsidy for livestock, Pentland Ferries continues  to carry around 80 per cent of sheep and a substantial number of cattle out of the Orkney islands every year, as well as shellfish lorries, yet it receives nothing. Now that the Royal Bank of Scotland is pulling out of the management of the NorthLink partnership, surely lessons need to be learned about costs to the taxpayer and the future involvement of the private sector, which we agree should be positive. Should not the subsidy be paid on the basis of usage, rather than on the basis of who is the monopoly supplier? Surely it is now obvious that the NorthLink bid was unrealistic and that the experienced operator, who knew the real cost of operating the service, was undercut, with the taxpayer paying a high price for the mess. I listened carefully to the minister's opening speech, in which he said that the Executive would do all that it could to maintain terms and conditions. If I were a CalMac employee, I would hardly view that as a solid confirmation of or commitment to my future. When Fergus Ewing asked a question on terms and conditions, the answer was that CalMac would ensure that there was no financial detriment to any employee as a result of any changes. However, the minister stated in a written answer to me: "The key changes would be in relation to Statutory Sick Pay and Statutory Maternity Pay, although broadly equivalent arrangements would apply". Why does not the Executive say that exactly the same arrangements would apply? Why must it say, "broadly equivalent"?

The minister asks me to grow up, but I have a few years age and experience on him. He needs to grow up quicker and to uphold the status of his office. Tavish Scott also stated in that answer: "employees would no longer be eligible for Statutory Paternity Pay or Statutory Adoption Pay." — [ Official Report , Written Answers , 25 July 2005; S2W-17433.]  Employees may not be queuing up for statutory paternity or adoption pay, but why is Government-owned and publicly subsidised CalMac changing the arrangements? Why change from state benefits to CalMac benefits or from guaranteed benefits to broadly equivalent benefits? Why cannot the CalMac employees continue to enjoy all the benefits that apply to every other taxpayer in Scotland? Finally, if there is to be no financial change for employees or financial advantage to CalMac in the tendering process, what is the objective of, or reason for, the Executive-backed move to offshore contracts for CalMac staff?

This has been an interesting and wide-ranging debate. I look forward to hearing Malcolm Chisholm championing enterprise in Scotland in his summing up. As Andrew Arbuckle said, many excellent speeches have been made today, along with some that were not so excellent. In particular, I praise my colleague Murdo Fraser for his excellent speech. I also want to put on record officially that that young Turk officially enters middle age this weekend. The Scottish Conservatives believe that, ultimately, a dynamic and competitive economy is the only means of creating wealth and, therefore, of improving living standards and raising the  quality of our public services. We were delighted yesterday to hear the good news on business rates, which followed Tory demands. We hope that the proposed planning bill will be as helpful in supporting business development, enterprise and housing development—an issue that is regularly raised by our colleague John Home Robertson. It must also ensure that there are fair and meaningful consultations. I want to concentrate on the part of the legislative programme that falls within the remit of the Communities Committee, of which I am a member. We support the proposal for local authorities to be statutorily required to update development plans every five years. However, we need to know from the minister what sanctions local authorities will face if they do not keep their plans up to date. In the past, we have seen that the spirit in which the Parliament understands legislation is not always the same as that in which local councils implement it. I do not agree with everything that John Swinburne said today, but he was right to point out that much of what we understood to be included in the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 is not being implemented. A previous Audit Scotland report showed that, of 32 local authorities, only two achieved the Executive's target of deciding on 80 per cent of planning applications within two months. What is being done to address delays in the planning system? If 30 out of 32 local authorities ignore the objective of having up-to-date local plans, what will happen to them? Already, 30 out of 32 local authorities ignore the Government targets on planning applications. There are too many deviations from local plans. In members' weekly surgeries, people constantly contrast the local plan with the proposals that they face. Our newest MSP, Derek Brownlee, has said that planning applications are one of the main problems that he has had to deal with in his surgeries since becoming an MSP. A recent example of the problem is the situation that confronts the Dalfaber action group, which is responding to the latest application to build houses on the outskirts of Aviemore. I understand that the proposal to build 650 houses there in the near future deviates considerably from the agreed local plan. Planning is always a controversial issue, but nowhere is that more true than in the Highlands and Islands at the moment, where there is a proliferation of wind farm applications, as well as the proposal to upgrade the national grid transmission line from Beauly to Denny. Although some of the proposed developments have the backing and support of communities, there is no doubt that many do not. The blight of wind farms  and megapylons that is affecting the landscape is a huge issue. The Executive, Highland Council and the island councils will need to work closely with communities in discussing not only the route of the Beauly to Denny transmission line, but the impact that each pylon will have in the highly sensitive areas south of Beauly and in the Cairngorms national park. Although people in urban areas will be consulted on development plans for the designation of land, I hope that the review of, and consultation on, renewable energy will include the designation of land for wind farm development so that communities will be involved in the consultation process before applications are made rather than have to respond to myriad applications once they have been submitted. In our legislative programme, it is important that we listen to people and respond to them. As many members have said both yesterday and today, the Parliament should be judged on the quality rather than on the quantity of the bills that it deals with. This week, Arneil Johnston's "Evaluation of the Single Survey Pilot" was published. I am sorry that some of my Communities Committee colleagues are not here today, because the single survey has become one of my hobby-horses. The report contains some interesting conclusions. Seventy-four single surveys were carried out—that total is only 1,926 short of the original target of 2,000. Let us listen to what a public sector housing consultancy firm tells us in its evaluation. One purpose of the single survey was to improve the marketability of a property. It is interesting to read that "from the limited evaluation possible it would appear that the existence of a Single Survey is not considered by sellers to improve the marketability of properties". Another purpose of the single survey was to ensure that more maintenance and repair would be done prior to selling, but the evaluation states: "it appears that generally sellers carry out only minor/general repairs or improvements and respondents indicated they would have done this regardless of the Single Survey". On successful purchasers, the report says: "given the very limited sample it is impossible to say anything authoritatively about the experiences of successful purchasers". On non-purchasers, it is stated: "it was inconclusive whether the Single Survey influenced the decision of a potential purchaser whether or not to bid". In the opinion of selling agents, "purchasers were more interested in the valuation ... and ... it was inconclusive as to whether the Single Survey product had a positive impact on the transaction time".  The majority of surveyors who took part in the evaluation said that they strongly believed that "the Single Survey will not have a positive impact on improving the condition and energy efficiency of private sector housing in Scotland", but that was the main reason for having a single survey. I hope that the minister will listen to the evaluation and consultation and to his own consultants when we do further work on the Housing (Scotland) Bill.

He is in his last minute

On behalf of the Conservative party, I welcome the Executive's rejection of the third-party right of appeal. The minister has said that local people will have more rights in statute to express their views, as well as up-to-date development plans. What commitment can he give to local communities that are objecting to the huge wind farm developments that are proposed for the Highlands and Islands? Those communities do not feel that they are being listened to. Will land be designated for wind farm development in the future, and will that land designation be included in the development plans,  so that people are consulted in advance rather than having to respond to the developments?

First, I thank the minister for the manner in which he addressed the main points in the Communities Committee's stage 1 report. It was good to hear him acknowledge the principle of individual responsibility; at least we have one small principle in common. The Scottish Conservatives welcome measures in the Housing (Scotland) Bill to tackle the amount of disrepair in the private sector, the cost of which—as others have said—is estimated at £5 billion. As in many bills that Parliament considers, there are measures that we fully support, measures about which we have concerns and measures on which—as Linda Fabiani said—there is not enough evidence to allow us to feel confident that we can be successful in tackling the problems that are faced. Then there is the single survey. In its written evidence, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities stated: "The Housing Bill is one of the longest and most technically detailed Bills considered by the Parliament." When I was preparing my speech, I soon found myself immersed in the detail of the bill. The purpose of the debate is not to go into such detail,  so I scrapped my original speech and moved on to mark 2. The process that we have gone through to get to this stage has been thorough; the bill has been considered carefully. I hope that the concerns that were expressed in written and oral evidence, which are well documented in the report, will be addressed by stage 2 amendments. I believe that the report that is before Parliament is very good. The committee has reflected the views of disability groups and has acknowledged that there is a great deal more to do on energy efficiency and other issues at stage 2. Like other members, I support the proposed investment in the fabric and structure of buildings and hope that the bill will raise standards and improve the quality of Scotland's private sector housing. There is no doubt that that is needed. Several concerns were raised about the costs—financial and in terms of human resources—of implementing the bill's provisions. More work is necessary on local authorities' grant and loan schemes and on repayment. As the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities said, further clarification should be provided in conjunction with mortgage lenders. The committee is right to ask that it be provided with draft regulations. Too often, Parliament passes bills in blind faith that the accompanying regulations—which provide so many answers and deal with implementation—will fit the bill's original intentions. My colleague David Davidson will highlight the condition of housing in rural areas; I note that the Scottish National Party has allocated a speaker for that purpose. The issue is huge and needs to be addressed separately. In rural areas, maintaining and repairing the many older traditional properties is costly and difficult. As other members of the Communities Committee will know, my main concern has been the single seller survey. As the minister and Linda Fabiani said, the results of the pilot single survey scheme were disappointing. The target was that 2,000 such surveys would be completed. Although that target was reduced to 1,200 only 74 single seller surveys were carried out. A single seller survey steering group—the members of which included the Council of Mortgage Lenders and the Law Society of Scotland—was set up to consider the pilot, which ran from 14 July 2004 until March 2005, when the steering group heard on the news that the new survey was to be made compulsory. The Law Society expressed its disappointment that the Executive had decided to announce and press ahead with enabling legislation prior to the pilot's being closed and data from it analysed, and other organisations on the steering group made  comments about having been ignored. We must acknowledge not only that the Executive's decision was discourteous and demoralising for the organisations involved, it also sent out the wrong signal on engagement with and participation in the political process in Scotland.

No, thank you. The financial memorandum states that provision of better information could mean that, in the first year, house prices will be £120 million lower than they would have been, but it does not mention the projected fall in prices in future years. We need more clarity on how such figures have been arrived at. Although most stakeholders are mentioned in the financial memorandum, tenants are not. Any additional costs to landlords will, however, be passed on to tenants. Alternatively—as Linda Fabiani said—some landlords may feel that it is time to leave the house rental market, which would have the knock-on effect of leading to a shortage of rented accommodation. The fact that the single survey will be paid for by the seller means that buyers cannot ask questions about the survey or query it, so many buyers will have to pay for their own surveys if they want a surveyor's advice on work that they would have to do to protect their investment. I am not convinced that the single survey will mean that multiple surveys will not be carried out; many witnesses backed up that view. Some of the people who gave evidence mentioned the shelf life of a survey. On every committee, members learn something new; I now know that dry rot spreads at a rate of a metre a month, which raises the question of how long a survey will be valid for, which may not be a problem in a hot market in which properties sell quickly, but could be a serious issue if it is taking months or years to sell a property—especially when the property is old. A purchasers information pack will need to be produced, which will include copies of documents that relate to planning, listed building status, building regulation consents and approvals, guarantees for work carried out, land certificates, summaries of common repair and maintenance obligations. Further research is being done, so I assume that more documents will be added to that list. I am delighted to hear that lawyers in Scotland have agreed to provide all that for a legal fee of £100 and I am sure that many buyers will be similarly delighted. Before the seller puts a house on the market, they will need a single seller survey, a purchasers  information pack, a valuation, a hidden defects guarantee and—as of January next year—a European Union energy certificate. In a fast-selling market, large firms of solicitors, surveyors and estate agents might be prepared to make such an outlay and be reimbursed when the house sells, but that is not likely to be the case with small firms or in a slow market, when businesses could wait months or years to be paid for their outlay. I imagine that the seller will be expected to make significant expenditure prior to putting a house on the market. For many sellers, that will not be a problem, but it could be a serious issue for sellers of older properties in slow markets. The bill is extensive, technical and complex. On behalf of my party, I look forward to discussing positively and constructively the amendments that will be lodged at stage 2, which I hope will reflect the concerns that have been expressed at stage 1.

I would like to thank Christine Grahame for giving me the opportunity to speak in this debate on the W8 summit. On behalf of all of us, I extend grateful thanks to Lesley Riddoch for her commitment to women in Africa, for her role in addressing poverty in Africa and for helping to bring us together as a group. Christine Grahame, Maureen Macmillan and I attended the first sessions of today's conference. We were fortunate to hear Hauwa Ibrahim give one of the most moving and memorable speeches that I will ever hear in my life. I also met Alivera Kiiza, who is in the gallery. Unfortunately, I was unable to stay to hear her speak. I would like to talk about Alivera Kiiza and the Cafédirect model of making women farmers powerful in African co-operatives. She has overcome many of the barriers that Trish Godman outlined. We should forget the old days when Scots bought Fairtrade products because it was politically correct to do so and not because it tasted good. Cafédirect and other Fairtrade brands are winning awards for the quality of their teas, coffees and chocolates and creating successful community enterprises that should attract the attention of any passing G8 politician. Cafédirect was created at the height of the coffee crisis in 1991, buying direct from coffee growers and selling the pick of their crops to western countries. A greater market share for Africans means less poverty in Africa, and Oxfam estimates that, if Africa could increase its share of world trade by only 1 per cent, that would generate five times more income than it currently receives in aid and debt relief. However, developing countries face tariffs that prevent them from trading freely in the west, where our own farmers still receive large  subsidies. Fair trade breaks that cycle by giving growers a decent income for their crops while ensuring that consumers enjoy high-quality products. It took 10 years for men in the Karagwe District Co-operative Union to take the radical and non-traditional step of making their wives owners of trees. Karagwe is in the most remote region of north-west Tanzania and the union represents 67 individual co-operatives with more than 17,500 coffee farmers. Members of the KDCU were asked to send three women and three men to Cafédirect producer partnership workshops and the women soon spoke out. Although women do a lot of work on the farms, the coffee crop traditionally belongs to men; women do not often benefit directly from coffee sales. One woman told how she was beaten by her husband when she asked what had happened to the money that he got for selling coffee. During a visit to the district, Cafédirect staff spotted a young woman called Alivera Kiiza as someone with strong views on women's empowerment. She agreed to help to facilitate the workshops and was then chosen to address the Fairtrade conference in London. That made a huge impact on her authority within the co-operative. This is what she wrote when she returned to Karagwe: "I am the first woman from my community here in Tanzania to go to the UK, to go very far from my place. No woman has gone from here representing the women of Karagwe until me. As a result, women farmers are joining their co-operative societies. I tell them it is the women in UK who buy Fairtrade products—I have seen this with my own eyes. I will encourage women to sell the coffee they have in their own names instead of the names of their husbands. They will become leaders of their co-operative societies in the villages ... They will be able to solve their problems at home without asking their husbands every time. They will become more educated by going to seminars and workshops when they are coffee owners themselves and members of their co-operatives. They will be able to buy what they want themselves, they will have power, they will have a say." I ask that, when members buy Cafédirect coffee, tea and drinking chocolate in future, they think of Alivera Kiiza and the women entrepreneurs in Tanzania.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether cancer, mental health and heart disease will remain its health priorities in future years. (S2O-7180)

Given that mental health is a priority, will the minister confirm that all staff and resources are in place for the full implementation of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 in October? Further, I would like to ask that, in future, infertility be given higher priority.

I commend Susan Deacon for her excellent speech and for the fact that, during her time as Minister for Health and Community Care, and since then, she has had a continued commitment to the topic of sexual health. She has been involved in the cross-party group on sexual health, particularly in relation to tolerance, respect and informed choices. I think that that has to be said. I am pleased to speak again on sexual health. As Margaret Smith said, we need only look at the figures to realise that this is an enormous issue in Scotland and we must be big enough and bold enough to address it. My party acknowledges the progress that has been made in implementing "Respect and Responsibility: Strategy and Action Plan for Improving Sexual Health". We had the ministerial statement on the strategy on 27 January, which was the same day on which I had my members' business debate on infertility. Given the subject of this afternoon's debate, it is a coincidence that tonight I will host a meeting on infertility. I acknowledge the importance of discussing both issues in the same debate. Margaret Smith mentioned the embarrassment that is experienced in speaking about impotence, but the same applies to speaking about infertility. In my members' business debate on infertility, one of my colleagues said that they would rather discuss their bank balance than their fertility. Infertility is an issue on which MSPs must take the lead given the stigma that is attached to it. As other members have said, the incidence of chlamydia rose by 39 per cent among under-25s and by 36 per cent among over-25s in the year ending in 2003. I was pleased that the minister mentioned the over-40s because, in the early years of awareness of chlamydia, there seemed to be an assumption that it affected only people who were under the age of 25. In the over-40s, the number of cases of chlamydia and genital herpes doubled in the four years to 2003. The equivalent increases in the Netherlands, Denmark and France were in single figures. I refute the assertion that it is necessary to have multiple partners to contract sexually transmitted diseases. I gained that understanding through my awareness of infertility; it takes contact with only one person to become infected with chlamydia. People are embarrassed because there is an assumption that they must have been promiscuous to have picked up a sexually transmitted disease. The fact that that is not the case must be put on the record. In relation to clinics, the BMA highlights in its briefing that  "there is continuing evidence of increasing problems with access at a time of increasing demand." There is no doubt that the Executive needs to address that issue and to expand screening programmes. I ask the minister whether it is possible to provide chlamydia screening alongside screening for cervical cancer. There is no doubt that resources are needed to reduce waiting times for appointments. I hope that the plans that the health boards have submitted to the minister will make a difference. Other members have mentioned the need for more trained staff and clinics and for opening hours to be convenient to patients. That needs to be addressed because we are not talking about a nine-to-five, Monday-to-Friday issue. Chlamydia is not the only cause of infertility but, given its rising incidence and the fact that people who have it experience no symptoms, there is no doubt that more needs to be done to ensure that women and men are aware of its effects on fertility. I was pleased that Eleanor Scott mentioned school nurses. The school nurses in the Highlands got together and gave a presentation to, among others, Eleanor Scott, Fergus Ewing, Maureen Macmillan, John Farquhar Munro, Rob Gibson and me. I learned an enormous amount that day. It was interesting to hear that, in the Highlands, school nurses can be responsible for nearly 3,000 children; the figure of 2,800 was mentioned. I hope that the minister will examine the role of school nurses in supporting the sexual health strategy. One of the questions that the panel was asked was, "What does a school nurse do?" We had to refer the question to Eleanor Scott because she had working experience of the full remit of a school nurse. When we ask school nurses to do more, we should examine the resources that they have and the shortage of staff. We need to consider whether there should be a particular school nurse-to-pupil ratio and whether pupils should be able to go to the school nurse in total confidence.

I will not address that issue now, but I know what community schools in the Highlands do. I am pleased that section 5, the "Practical Plan for Action", considers rural communities. I endorse the point that Eleanor Scott made. There is very little privacy in a small village compared with the  privacy of the big city of Inverness with its Brook advisory centre. It is difficult to be critical of an action plan that addresses the many serious sexual health issues. However, I ask the minister, in his summing-up, to give an assurance that the proposals will be monitored and audited in future and that health boards and local authorities will say what is meant by reasonable in relation to the timescales for progress on the local strategies. My final point concerns the number of abortions in Scotland—there were more than 12,000 in the year ending 2003. It is worth highlighting the fact that 14 per cent of the women who had an abortion were married; 27 per cent were women over 30; 48 per cent were women in their 20s; and 25 per cent were young women under 20. We tend to think that only pregnant teenagers have abortions. Many complex issues surround the figures and we need to understand more about them, including whether they are the result of a shortage of family planning. No woman makes the decision to have an abortion lightly.

I, too, thank the clerks and—in this instance—the bill team. I also thank my committee colleagues who, except on one issue, all left their political hats at the door so that they could focus on passing decent charities legislation. I must also express my admiration—I am being very sycophantic today—for the way in which the ministers responded in a measured and considered manner to all but one of the amendments. At stage 1, the Scottish Conservatives welcomed the bill's general principles of reviewing and updating charity law. We commend the work of the voluntary and charitable sector, which provides services in a way that the state could not. We wish to encourage people to give to charities in the knowledge that the moneys that are received will be used for the purposes for which they were intended. We also welcome the full role of OSCR in regulating and investigating charities. However, I must express one concern, which is relevant to most bills that we pass in Parliament. My concern is that so much of the spirit of understanding and of the practicalities of implementation and interpretation are written in guidance that is published at a later date, which may be months or more after the bill is passed. We often sign up to amendments and to legislation in good faith and are blissfully unaware of the regulations that will follow. When awkward questions were asked about the bill, the replies were often that the issue would be covered in guidance or that it would be up to OSCR to decide. Unfortunately, the inclusion of the amendment on OSCR's powers to determine public benefit in relation to a charge or a fee is the one aspect that we find, regrettably, to be unacceptable. Therefore, with regret, the Conservatives cannot fully support the bill because of that amendment. We cannot vote against the bill because of the support that I have given it throughout stages 1 and 2 and pre-legislative scrutiny, and because of the support that we have given to the general principles and the main content. We will therefore, with regret, abstain in the vote on the bill.

I would like to press amendment 53.

With amendment 53, I seek to delete the words "including any charge or fee", which were inserted by an amendment moved by John Home Robertson at stage 2. Throughout the bill's progress, I have raised concerns over the phrase "unduly restrictive" in relation to public benefit. Many witnesses, including from OSCR, have explained how the term is likely to be interpreted. That has given some reassurance, although the phrase "unduly restrictive" is open to wide and variable interpretation. However, I have no doubt that the meaning will become enshrined in law as precedents are set. The advancement of education is enshrined in a 1601 statute as a charitable purpose. There is no need for secondary justification for tax purposes. However, the addition of the words "any charge or fee" over and above "unduly restrictive" is a step too far. The issue behind John Home Robertson's amendment was independent schools. It is surely for parents to decide whether they wish to make  financial sacrifices to pay for their children's education on top of what they pay in income tax and council tax; it is surely for parents—not politicians or the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator—to decide whether they are getting value for money. All independent schools operate on a not-for-profit basis. Any revenue surpluses are ploughed back into investment in the provision of high-quality education, so how can OSCR say that a fee is too high? How can OSCR decide whether the education of our children is too high quality? If the overheads of some of our old independent schools, in their historic buildings and grounds, require a higher fee, it is surely for the parents to decide whether the money is worth paying. We are talking about the one chance that every parent gets to educate their child. Section 8 challenges the basic tenet of individuals to exercise freedom of choice on how much of their own money they wish to spend and how they wish to spend it—whether it be on their children's education or to pay for treatment in an independent hospital. The inclusion of section 8 brings the politics of envy and not the politics of reason. The end result could be the loss of charitable status for tax purposes. Fees would have to be raised by up to 5 per cent, meaning that there would be less money to pay for bursaries to support those from less well-off families. The result would be elitism and exclusion, not the choice and inclusion that we have at present. Independent schools should be deemed as charities, as they save the taxpayer £150 million a year. They contribute hugely to the quality of Scottish education and Scottish life. They cannot be deemed to be "unduly restrictive" on the basis of a charge or a fee. As I said, the advancement of education is a charitable purpose and requires no secondary justification. All surplus income is reinvested into serving pupils with the best education. Inland Revenue issues are the responsibility of the Westminster Parliament. Amendment 53 refers to the loss of rates relief and anything else that relates to the Scottish Parliament. I move amendment 53.

Will the minister clarify whether any amendment in the group might impact in any way on the charitable status of private sports clubs?

I am happy to follow my committee colleagues and speak to the amendments, as have others, in a non-party political way. This has been a serious issue for the committee, and I seek further clarification from the minister on amendments 27 and 45. I, too, will be a bit of an anorak. The "Oxford English Dictionary" defines misconduct as: "Improper or unacceptable conduct or behaviour." It defines mismanage as: "To manage badly or wrongly". I am not sure that we have the solution to the problem today. Amendment 27 states: "OSCR's power to suspend a person by giving notice under subsection (4)(a) or (b) does not apply if OSCR considers that the person has acted honestly and reasonably in relation to the misconduct". How can someone honestly and reasonably indulge in unacceptable or improper behaviour? I find that difficult to understand. I understand that a person could act honestly, reasonably and innocently in relation to mismanagement, but could they act honestly and reasonably in relation to misconduct? The definition of misconduct does not sit fairly and squarely with honest and reasonable behaviour. Someone cannot honestly  and reasonably behave in an unacceptable and improper way. If amendment 45 were agreed to, the bill would read, "'misconduct' includes mismanagement". Does that mean honest and reasonable misconduct or downright serious, unforgivable, unacceptable or improper behaviour? I have serious problems with the amendments. It seems that we would be making misconduct acceptable. Amendment 27 states that misconduct is acceptable, as it attaches the words "honestly" and "reasonably" to it. I seek further clarification from the minister on the matter. I would like to support amendments 27 and 45 but, like Donald Gorrie, I may have to abstain on the issue.

In the light of the review of the Arbuthnott formula, I draw the minister's attention to the fact that NHS funding in the Western Isles, where there are 11 inhabited islands, is £691 per person per year more than NHS funding in Argyll, where there are 25 islands. I understand that in the early days Arbuthnott funding took account of road miles but not sea miles. Will that be reconsidered in the review?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is Jackie Baillie speaking to the motion on the Kerr report on the future of the health service or has she chosen to debate the Conservative party's internal structure?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Rhona Brankin for taking the time to meet representatives of the Society of Chiropodists and Podiatrists last week. That was much appreciated. I also thank Carolyn Leckie for reminding us what the SSP is all about. If the party is looking for a new slogan, I suggest, "Remember Trotsky and forget the patients." That would be most appropriate. In his report, Professor Kerr outlines the dominant issues that are of concern to the national framework advisory group. He is right to raise those issues again, as for the past six years we have been promised that they are being addressed. The report refers to "Maintaining high quality services locally", but we face current threats to downgrade hospitals in the Highlands and elsewhere. It also mentions "Improving waiting times", but waiting times have got worse. I say to Mr Rumbles that the waiting list has increased by 22,000 since the Parliament opened in spring 1999. Another issue that Professor Kerr highlights is "Supporting Scotland's remote and rural communities"— tell that to people in Argyll and the islands. He mentions "Using new technology to improve the standard of care", but we still do not have joined-up information technology services. Also of concern is "Reducing the health gap between rich and poor". If someone can pay for a dentist, podiatrist, hip operation or care home, they get the service instantly. If they cannot, they wait and wait and wait.  This is an excellent report. However, as David McLetchie said, it cannot be implemented using the existing approach—the past six years have proved that. Over the six years of the Parliament's existence, we have been told by three health ministers that, if something can be done in primary care, it should be done there. The problem is that, under the Tories, things were being done in primary care. The advent of GP fundholding was the driver for more care, more treatment and more services to be offered as near the patient's home as possible. Dr Richard Simpson, a Labour MSP during the previous session, often acknowledged that. When the Labour Government ended fundholding, nothing was put in its place to drive forward care and treatment in the primary care setting. The Kerr report also focuses on patient choice and seamless care across health, social work and all sectors. We all voted for free personal care and more care in the community. However, that is a major thrust of the Kerr report, because it is simply not happening. Either the Labour-Liberal Executive is not giving councils sufficient resources or councils are using money that is earmarked for care of the elderly to fund other services. This week a lady in the Highlands came to my surgery regarding her mother's move to a care home. Like many others, her mother has fallen into the category of bed blocking, or delayed discharge, through no fault of her own. The figures for delayed discharge are higher now than they were at the inception of the Parliament. In a letter to the lady, Highland Council social work department states: "Unfortunately the situation at present is that all funding available for the purpose of addressing delayed hospital discharge is fully committed, and therefore we have to operate a waiting list for care home placements." There used to be a waiting list for people to get into hospital, but now there is one for them to get out. The letter continues: "I have ... reviewed both the current waiting list and the amount of resource released", and "I am sorry to have to reply to you that I see no immediate prospect of being able to provide funding". The concerns of the patient in this case are certainly not being put first. I would understand the council's inability to provide funding if we were at the end of the financial year, but the letter is dated May. We are two months into the financial year, but the social work department has no money.

No, because there has been no such reduction. The Highland Council has an enormous waiting list. The information and statistics division figures do not prove the minister's claim. Funding for a bed in the NHS is about three times greater than funding for an independent care home place, but people cannot be moved on. Of course, if someone can self-fund they will be placed immediately. Those who can pay get the place and care that they need, and those who depend on council funding must wait and wait and wait. We are all led to believe that there is a national shortage of dentists, but this week NHS Highland informed me: "There are also 10 dentists who have expressed an interest in joining the service as soon as further opportunities arise." However, those dentists have no premises. We have 10 dentists with nowhere to go, at a time when thousands of people across the Highlands are desperately waiting for treatment.

No—I am in my final minute. Let us consider the issue of investment. The previous Conservative Government's real-terms spending on capital equipment was £65 million per annum, on average. In Labour's first seven years, average spending on capital equipment was £48 million—a fall of 35 per cent. Professor Kerr is right to highlight that issue.

Absolutely. Is it not sad that the eminent professor must tell the Liberal-Labour Executive to "establish a clear policy about what patients in Scotland want in the way of choice." That is sad, but it is necessary. I hope that this time the Executive will listen to Professor Kerr and the patients. I support the motion.

Will the minister give way?

It is sad indeed that we are discussing problems relating to the elderly, given the number of debates that we have held in the Parliament and the amount of legislation that we have passed in the past six years. I agree with Eleanor Scott that we are discussing two issues today. Age discrimination occurs when elderly people are bypassed for surgery or care in favour of younger people. In addition, we have been examining the alleged abuse and neglect of elderly people. I support Nanette Milne's amendment to extend the Health Committee's investigation into community care legislation. As others have said, problems in the provision of community care by councils ultimately cause problems in hospitals. The bedblocking—or delayed discharge—figures are higher now than they were in 1999, although it is important to put on record the fact that the figures also include people with mental health problems and other disabilities. The Kerr report appears to acknowledge and address the needs of elderly people. We have debated care of the elderly and passed legislation to set up the care commission, yet the problems that have been outlined today have not improved as expected or intended. The Parliament does not hold local authorities to account on implementing legislation. When did any of us last hear our local councillors take responsibility for bedblocking? The Kerr report recommends that more care be provided in the local community, and I make no apology for saying, "Why not start with podiatry checks and, if appropriate, a care plan?" Healthy feet keep elderly people mobile and independent, improve their circulation and aid social inclusion. By continuing to cut back and neglect podiatry or chiropody care and treatment, more elderly people will continue to end up in hospital following a fall, spend months in hospital waiting for care in the  community, and become more frail and dependent on care and support. On the vulnerability of our elderly folk, only last week, a middle-aged professional person attended my surgery to make awful complaints about her mother's care in hospital, including about a lack of food and hygiene—we have heard such complaints today. She felt not just upset but guilty that she was letting down her mother after all that she had done for the family. Once I listed all the complaints, the constituent said, "Now you won't use my name, will you? My mother is scared she'll get picked on." After discussion, she asked me to do nothing, as she had already raised the issues in the ward and, if I wrote in, they would know who had complained. Once again, alleged abuse and neglect passed off without investigation and, sadly, are more likely to continue in future. If we are serious about ensuring that elderly people get appropriate care and treatment in accordance with their needs, we must ensure that all care homes cater for residential and nursing care, in line with the intent of legislation; we must not have elderly people languishing in residential care when they need nursing care following the likely and predictable deterioration of their condition. Given that the remit of the care commission—which I commend; it is doing a good job—covers care homes for the elderly, should not it be tasked with ensuring that high-quality care is provided while people are waiting for care in the community? I support the amendment in the name of Nanette Milne.

I am very pleased to be speaking in this debate, not least because it is my birthday. My youth becomes more of a distant memory as time goes on. I had thought that I was falling into Scott Barrie's categories of being both a Conservative and of middle age.

I think so, but I would not like to count by how many years. On a serious note, I am delighted that young people today have more opportunity to engage in such international debate than they would have done in the past. Such events as the world youth congress were not on offer to my generation and certainly not at the school that I attended.  On behalf of my party, I, like others, welcome the world youth congress in Stirling. This summer, Scotland will enhance its reputation on a global scale, with both the G8 summit and what we might call the junior G8, which will play no small part. When Frank McAveety was speaking, I was reminded of when I was a lecturer taking a student trip to Prague. Because I had received funding in the Highlands, I had to set some of the agenda. I forced the students to visit the former Nazi concentration camp at Terezín, not far from the Polish border. The students were not very happy about that. They complained and complained, but I said that they had to do it. I still see students in Inverness who retain the memory of their experiences there. In looking to the future, we should never forget our past, good and bad. I strongly support the role that young people, including young Scots, will play in the world youth congress. It provides a great opportunity for them to broaden their minds, forge lasting relationships and make their voices heard on the international stage, on which Scotland has historically played a major role and spoken loudly. The young people, from more than 150 countries, will have opportunities to get involved in planning and implementing the event's agenda and to spend some of their three days on action projects, including environmental projects, from Durness to inner cities. I welcome the fact that the participants in the congress are to produce documentation drawing attention to the activities of young people throughout the world in support of the UN millennium goals, particularly on providing universal primary school education for all boys and girls. Those documents will be presented to the General Assembly of the UN. We can be confident that the visitors attending the congress, as well as the G8, will take away with them a positive image of our country, of which each and every one of us here is very proud. As Adam Ingram has said, this is the year of the volunteer, with young people becoming involved in various voluntary projects. We must hope that the projects that are undertaken by the young people attending the congress stimulate a range of views and opinions on world issues, equipping them with facts and experience and allowing them to debate both sides of the argument. It is important to promote an enterprising and entrepreneurial culture among our young people in order to drive Scotland's economy and the world economy forward. Historically, Scotland has played a role in invention and enterprise; Scots have taken their ideas round the world. I am sure that the congress will do everything to promote that.  As others have said, the congress is an opportunity to advertise the role of our Youth Parliament, which discusses issues affecting young people throughout Scotland. We hope that the Youth Parliament will expand and engage its membership within the broad spectrum of our younger population in debating issues, expressing opinions and composing policy as an exciting activity by which people should be stimulated. I welcome the change 05 campaign, which is linked to the congress, through which young people from throughout Scotland complete a personal action plan. I note the examples of pledges to build a better world, to which perhaps we could all sign up and which include pledges to not waste water or electricity; to buy fair trade where possible; to donate clothes and compact discs to charity; and to challenge discrimination wherever it is seen or heard. Questioning how our own actions impact on others gives us a much broader vision of society. The campaign is an excellent way to promote action and achievement and to sell the idea that each individual can make a difference not only to the future of their community and country but to the wider world. We support and encourage free enterprise and free trade as the basis on which our commitment to increasing international development support would be built. The world youth congress cites as one of its aims promoting active citizenship and stimulating ideas on how young people can be involved and be an integral part of any system of active citizenship and good governance. We in Scotland do well. I know that we can learn from others, but I am sure that others can also learn from us. Good governance entails equality, fairness and peaceful resolution, which is undoubtedly the basis for development out of poverty.

I note the role of the north of Scotland planning group in agreeing a list of core services for rural general hospitals. Can the minister confirm that the Belford, Oban and Caithness hospitals, as well as the three island hospitals, will be designated rural general hospitals, or will they have to meet some set of criteria? Given the emphasis on providing care close to home, can the minister explain how the referral management scheme will make it easier for patients to see a podiatrist rather than be put on a long list to see a consultant?

I am pleased to speak in the debate, both as an MSP and—like many others here today—as a former volunteer in organisations ranging from Child Support Agency tribunals to citizens advice bureaux. There is no doubt about the value that volunteers bring to a service, or of the enormous personal benefit that volunteers can gain from volunteering. Scottish Conservatives support the principles and the commitment in the motion, just as we support the broad measures in the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill. However, like others, I will be raising some issues at stage 3 of that bill. I cannot claim to be an expert on the voluntary sector. However, I note that in recent years we have had the volunteer strategy, the Scottish compact, the United Kingdom-wide millennium volunteers and the project Scotland partnerships, among other initiatives. Today, we heard about the development of a detailed strategy. I welcome this mother of all strategies and I hope that it will give us one point of reference, because we all know that mothers know best. We also support the encouragement of people from all backgrounds—disabled people, young people, pensioners—to participate in volunteering. Voluntary sector funding is always a problem, which was highlighted in the briefing that we have  received from Barnardo's Scotland, so I support the principles in Linda Fabiani's amendment. The briefing from Barnardo's states: "Short term funding packages, and the continual need to look towards the next reviews and applications, constantly undermine the good work of voluntary sector service providers." I find it difficult to understand why an organisation such as the citizens advice bureau in Inverness has to struggle and penny pinch to provide its excellent and first-class services on debt counselling, support, benefits reviews and a wide range of other issues. This is happening at a time when the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has been given more than £1 million to purchase plush new offices on a greenfield site on the outskirts of Inverness. I am sure that the minister can clarify such funding issues.

I would welcome it, if the member would let me develop my point. I am trying to point out the difference between the funding for front-line services and funding for organisations that make policy. I am sure that the minister will clarify why we have a funding situation whereby the part of the voluntary sector that provides much-needed front-line services is strapped for cash, while the part that determines policies has no such worries. I highlight the high cost of regulation and inspection by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care for organisations such as Crossroads, which has about eight groups in the Highlands and Islands, each of which pays more than £2,000 to the care commission. In some cases, that is more than the groups can raise in a year. The organisation is considering the issue to see how it can be dealt with in the future. I commend the futurebuilders plus initiative, on which my colleagues will expand, and I acknowledge the commitment to the social economy. One of the best examples of the social economy in the area that I represent must be the Shetland Soap Company, which I note from the briefing papers has received further funding from the Executive to fit out its new shop in Orkney, to develop new products and a new furniture recycling unit and to establish markets in Europe. The company confirms Patrick Harvie's point about the importance of organisations' business initiatives as well as their social responsibilities. I helped the company to get its products into our Parliament shop, which has added to its success.  The Shetland Soap Company does not just make a good product; it employs people who have disabilities, which promotes social inclusion, self-confidence and independence and helps take people off benefits and reduce dependency. The company provides jobs in which such people are valued and supported for their contribution. In other words, social firms can help people to help themselves. We support the Executive's motion.

Given that Highland NHS Board benefited greatly from the Arbuthnott formula whereas Argyll and Clyde NHS Board did not, will the Executive reassess the per capita spend on patients in remote and island communities in Argyll as part of the consultation process to ensure that NHS Highland is not faced in future with the severe financial pressures that NHS Argyll and Clyde faces at the moment?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it supports the retention of auxiliary fire units. (S2O-6729)

Will the minister ensure that any downgrading of or changes to local auxiliary fire units throughout the Highlands that relate to road traffic accidents, heather and moor fires and other community-safety issues are met by the support of the other emergency services and ministers? We must ensure public safety and we must recognise the commitment of volunteer firefighters and the time that they give to support and protect neighbours and other people in their communities.

Given that Highland Council charges 40 times the annual maintenance fee to adopt ground maintenance, may I just put on record my view that it would be helpful if details of ground maintenance charges and responsibilities were included in the purchasers information pack under the Housing (Scotland) Bill?

I say at the outset that I regret that I cannot stay for all the speeches because I have a family duty to carry out tonight. I thank Sandra White and Inclusion Scotland for the debate. Like others, I note that there are many  issues in the motion and I am sure that I will be forgiven for picking out just one or two. The motion states that the "Manifesto for Inclusion" promotes "independent living for disabled people ... the right to live in the community with appropriate support and not in an institution...advocacy services ... and ... housing". I have a particular interest in advocacy services in relation to the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. On housing, I am pleased to say that at this week's meeting of the Communities Committee we took evidence from a panel of representatives of disabled groups, who highlighted many issues and discussed whether or not they should be covered in the Housing (Scotland) Bill. Another issue that I have picked out from the manifesto concerns the needs of disabled job seekers and employees. Sometimes, we get so focused on the care and support of disabled people that we forget that if they are to be socially included and lead independent lives, we should also encourage them into employment. There is no doubt that much is happening to address many of the issues in the motion. As Nora Radcliffe said, we are looking for steady progress, and change will not be achieved overnight. However, I am reminded of the implementation of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 and of one of my favourite glossy brochures from the first session of Parliament, "The same as you?" It is an excellent document and only one of its recommendations is still to be implemented: the closure of all long-stay hospitals for people with learning disabilities. I welcome the manifesto from Inclusion Scotland and appreciate its value, particularly as it represents—as Nora Radcliffe said—the collective voice of those whom it plans to help, which gives even more weight to its conclusions. It represents a diverse group of people and its theme is that disabled people should be allowed independence and self-determination. Inclusion Scotland clearly seeks to aid and encourage everyone to accommodate the distinct impairments of disabled people and allow them a leadership role in that. Manifestos such as the one that Inclusion Scotland has produced help to give a voice to people who are prevented from participating fully in society as a result of their impairment. I welcome that, and no organisation should think that the manifesto or debates such as this one do not carry significant substance. The debate has forced us to read the manifesto and think about it, and as we go about our parliamentary business in the two years until the next election we will think about the aspects that we are talking about tonight. That applies not only to MSPs who are in the chamber but to others who are listening in their offices. It is clear from organisations and  individuals who contact MSPs and cross-party groups that one of the most infuriating aspects, which many people talk about, is the feeling that people in positions of power are not listening or paying attention. Tonight we are undoubtedly listening. I will pick up on one or two comments from the manifesto. One aspect that we discussed quite often during the first session of Parliament is unmet need in care in the community. We know that there is unmet need in the health service and it is time for us to consider how long people wait for home care or the care package that they need. Another aspect is independent advocacy and the fact that disabled people should be recognised as the real experts. They, and not the need to fit into existing services and budgets, should be the focus of support. We have often heard that disabled people have to fit into what is provided rather than the service fitting their needs. I will read just a couple of quotations from the manifesto, which says: "charging disabled people for services which they rely upon to achieve a basic degree of social inclusion is fundamentally unfair." We must consider that in future. The manifesto also says: "Means-testing also effectively double-charges those who have already paid national and local taxes." The argument about that will continue. The Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 is to be implemented in October. I still have concerns about staff shortages and whether we will have enough social workers, mental health officers, psychiatrists and psychologists. When the 2003 act was passed, we needed an additional 57 psychiatrists and the national health service had 58 vacant posts. Perhaps that need will be met by October; I sincerely hope so. I have already mentioned the evidence that we heard on the Housing (Scotland) Bill this week, so I will move on to direct payments. I could not agree more with what the manifesto says about the low take-up of such payments. It also says: "Direct Payments are potentially the most significant statutory measure ... since The Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 and The National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990." I have advocated direct payments and have probably asked more questions than anyone about them. I know the Executive's commitment, but the facts about the very low take-up speak for themselves. I could talk for another five minutes about the merits of direct payments, but I am sure that listeners to the debate know about them.  However, at a recent meeting of the cross-party group on autistic spectrum disorder, I was shocked to find that many parents had not heard of them. The issue is not just that local authorities are reluctant to implement such payments; a huge communication exercise is required to inform carers of them. My final point is about advocacy. We might not be totally there yet, but I commend many of the services that are up and running and particularly the Highland advocacy service, with which I work regularly and which provides wonderful support to many people who are in need.

I commend Christine Grahame for her very moving  account of family and friends. How does one acknowledge, as the motion states "a debt of gratitude to all Scottish veterans who served their country in World War II" and recognise "the ultimate sacrifice made by 57,000 Scots" who, as the minister said, gave their tomorrows for our todays? No words are enough to acknowledge our debt to the war veterans of world war two. However, in our daily lives as MSPs, we all meet war veterans and their families, and we can help to ensure that they, and all elderly people in Scotland, receive the public services that they deserve with the respect and dignity that they deserve. About a year ago, a war veteran called Alex Bochel from Nairn came to my surgery to say that his chiropody appointments had been cut from once every three months to once every six months. Indeed, hundreds more people throughout the Highlands had their appointments cut in the same way. When Alec dared to complain that his feet needed professional podiatry treatment every three months, he was offered the alternative treatment of having his toenails removed. Now he pays for private treatment twice a year and receives NHS treatment twice a year. However, he is in a better position than many people, including other war veterans, who used to receive free podiatry and chiropody treatment and who are now forced to pay the full cost of that care. How many of our old soldiers or their widows now reside in care homes? When the Parliament came into being, there were 1,724 incidents of bed blocking—which is better known as delayed discharge. The latest figure is up by 61 to 1,785. Despite the millions invested in care in the community by the Government, too many people—mainly elderly people—are still not being given appropriate care in line with their assessed needs. Many of those people are waiting for a place in a care home. How can we sit back and let councils such as Highland Council pay £600 per person per week for residential care in one of their own homes while paying only £450 per person per week for the provision of more costly and complex nursing care in the independent sector? Many veterans' families and others have asked me that question for six years, and I cannot give them the answer. They also ask why it is that they have saved all their lives in order to self-fund their care, only to find that they are paying more per week than other residents who are funded by the council are paying. Is that fair?  As a member of the committee that passed the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill, I know that it was commonly and generally understood and stated at the time that every elderly care home would be—

In fact, the motion states: "That the Parliament acknowledges a debt of gratitude to all Scottish veterans who served their country in World War II".

I think that we will acknowledge our debt of gratitude if we ensure that war veterans get the excellent high-quality public services that they deserve. I finish by saying that it is unfortunate that the strong and fit men who fought for our freedom are now becoming old and vulnerable. We owe it to them to ensure that they are at least given dignity and respect in their old age as an acknowledgement of this Parliament's debt of gratitude for their fight for our freedom.

Will the minister show his commitment to partnership working when relocating jobs from Edinburgh? Will he speak to the Minister for Health and Community Care about the review of NHS 24 call centres and will he consider setting up smaller call centres throughout the Highlands, given that many nurses have to leave their home areas to find a job?

Can the minister guarantee that sex offenders will get access to rehabilitation programmes when they are in prison, to ensure that some help and support is given?

I do not normally participate in debates on justice, but I asked to speak in this debate because of a local problem in Inverness that was recently brought to my attention. I say at the outset that I do not wish to discuss any of the matters in the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Bill, given that the Justice 2 Committee has just started taking evidence on it. Although the rehabilitation of sex offenders will always be sensitive, challenging and difficult, the balance must always be in favour of public safety and minimising the opportunities for reoffending. Like Paul Martin, I urge the minister to give careful thought to giving guidance to councils, the police and the Prison Service about the physical relocation of a sex offender. I hope that housing allocation policies take into account the proximity of not only a school or nursery, as Paul Martin said, but someone who is a registered child minder. During the Easter recess, parents in an area of Inverness kept their children indoors because of their fears about the presence in the community of a sex offender. If the Minister for Justice and the Executive do not take the necessary action, parents might resort to vigilante tactics in order to address the problem.  Angela Prosser from Inverness asked me to use her name in the debate. She has lived in the same house—her parents' house—for 27 years. When she was young, her parents allowed her to go out and play at any time of the day with no problems. She is now a registered child minder and found herself worrying about her children's safety, so she kept them inside for the full two weeks of the Easter holidays. She told me that 35 children live in close proximity to her home. Although the Conservatives support the idea that sex offenders should serve their full term, we want to ensure that appropriate rehabilitation measures are available in prison and that regular risk assessments are carried out. The system needs to be monitored, audited and managed not only in prison but in the community, without the buck being passed between the Prison Service, the police and the social work department. I noted from Margaret Ann Devlin's petition to the Parliament that she mentions Megan's law in America. That law is used to give house purchasers information about any known sex offenders in the area. I mentioned the law at a recent Communities Committee meeting in connection with purchasers information packs, as those would provide an opportunity to introduce such a measure. I do not have information on how successful or otherwise the scheme in America is, but it is worth examining. I note that the Minister for Justice will resist calls for people to be told if a sex offender is living in their area. It is a matter of concern that, as stated by the head of child protection in the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the sex offenders register records only one tenth of the likely total of sex offenders. Many have committed offences prior to 1997 when the register came into force; in other cases, prosecutors failed to secure a conviction. I was very concerned that the Social Work Inspection Agency acknowledges that the Scottish Prison Service did not provide the sex offender James Campbell with access to rehabilitation while he served his sentence. I was also concerned by the lengthy delay before he was interviewed on his arrival at prison and by the six months that it took to appoint a new prison social worker after the original one left. How often have we heard of poor communication between police, other services and social work staff? That certainly was the case with Mr Campbell's assessment. I hope that we can learn from today's debate.

It was interesting to hear the Minister for Health and Community Care welcome the bill and speak of the degree of urgency that he attaches to the legislation. I have to say that, when Kenny Gibson and Nicola Sturgeon introduced bills on the subject during the first session of Parliament, those bills were not welcomed and there was no rush to legislate. I was also surprised that the Minister for Health and Community Care allocated only two minutes of his speech to measures in the bill other than those that relate to smoking. I hope that, throughout the next stages of the bill, a bit more time will be allocated to those important measures.

Fair do's. We will see how the minister performs at later dates. I would like to pay tribute to Duncan McNeil, who made an excellent and balanced speech. Members who are not on the committee that has dealt with a bill are always at a disadvantage in stage 1 debates, because committee members have heard all the relevant evidence. However, I read the Health Committee's stage 1 report on the bill and I would hardly say that it is a ringing endorsement of the bill, or that it expresses much confidence about the success of the measures that are proposed. For example, the committee states that free oral health assessments and eye examinations have the potential to improve standards "if properly implemented". On dental services, the committee states that the policy could work "if properly funded and implemented". On pharmaceutical care services, the committee again states that the measures could ensure a wider range of services "if properly implemented". That is hardly a ring of confidence.  It is interesting that the voices on the Conservative benches are speaking in support of the late Donald Dewar who, when he was in Westminster, worked with the industry and responded to consumer and health needs by introducing the voluntary code for better signage, better ventilation, smoke-free areas and other measures that provide choice for consumers. We want to work with the licensed trade sector to enhance choice for smokers and to provide practical help, support and encouragement to people who want to stop smoking, with the ultimate goal being—as Dr Nanette Milne said—of achieving a smoke-free environment for everyone. I welcome the measures and the increased resources to assist people to stop about which the minister spoke. Sylvia Jackson constantly talks about the BMA. If she looked back to the BMA's stance on—

From memory, I can tell Helen Eadie that something like £132 million was spent in one year on ventilation alone. I do not accept the view that the licensed trade was not co-operative. According to a poll in January this year, 75 per cent of Scots believe that smokers have the right to smoke in public, provided that they do not inconvenience non-smokers. I regularly visit Donegal, as does Jamie Stone, and I can say that the licensed trade industry has been affected by the smoking ban. Many publicans have tried to increase food sales, but many others have at the back of the pub built the equivalent of bus shelters, which have three walls and one side open to the area and which serve as the smoking areas. The ban is hardly stopping smoking in Ireland. At the heart of the bill is the effect of smoking on the health of smokers and the effect of passive smoking on the health of non-smokers.

Certainly not from Mike Rumbles—no way on earth would I take an intervention from him. We have heard enough of his—oh; there are no words for what we heard from him today. There are many measures, short of the draconian ban on smoking in public places, that can help people to stop smoking. If the aim is to  stop people smoking, surely it is better to try tested methods that are known to bring success rather than to risk making more people smoke in their homes, where young children are present.

I am sorry, I have only one minute left and I have quite a lot of ground to cover. I think that we dealt last week with dental checks. However, given that £7.7 million is being allocated for free dental checks and that the minimum cost for a dental check, at least in the Highlands, is £25, that means that only 308,000 people could get a dental check. We constantly forget about chiropody and podiatry. Recently, the father of a 12-year-old footballer came to me and said, "If he is to keep playing football, my son needs an orthotic fitment costing more than £200. I can pay for that, but many others can't." If the Executive is going to be generous in relation to eye and dental care, it should re-examine the needs of podiatry and chiropody, because much has to be done in that regard. I would like to have said more about the disciplinary provisions in the bill. It is surely an error that no reference is made in the relevant section to the General Medical Council. General practitioners raised concerns during the passage of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill but were ignored. I am glad that the situation is being rectified in this bill.

I congratulate Des McNulty, not only for bringing forward the debate, but for the persistence and commitment he has shown on this issue in the six years since the re-establishment of the Parliament. I also congratulate Margaret Ewing on her leadership of the delegation to Africa. My colleague Ted Brocklebank found the visit moving and interesting, given that it was his first visit to the area.  It is important and appropriate that the Parliament highlights our concerns on this issue following last week's world poverty day. The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank were mentioned in an article in The Economist of 23 April last, which made reference to "the exasperating charade that is the debt relief debate." The article noted: "behind the general pledges are deep divisions about what debt relief is really for." A further article on page 89 of the same issue, referred to the American millennium challenge account, which is a good subject for debate. The Americans try to find out whether countries have high trade barriers, misaligned exchange rates, unstable prices and other indicators such as honesty, soundness and freedom from corruption, before giving them money. While I am not sure that that is entirely the correct way to proceed, it is a topic for much-needed debate. Wealth can only be redistributed if it is first created. As Ted Brocklebank said earlier, it is the profits we make and the tax we pay that contribute to debt relief. The make poverty history coalition has been successful in drawing renewed attention to this cause. The YouGov survey states that 72 per cent of Scots believe that they have personally taken action on the issue since the previous general election and that 79 per cent expressed their concerned belief that politicians and parties should do more to end extreme poverty. Conservatives support and encourage free trade. We will continue to press the European Union to reduce tariffs and protectionist measures on imports from poorer countries so that they can participate in trade as equal partners, rather than having to trade with the fortress Europe that currently exists. Although, as Des McNulty said, this is not a party-political issue, I put on record the fact that, like his party, my party is committed to increasing international development support by £800 million over the next three years and to working towards the United Nations target of spending 0.7 per cent of national income on aid by 2013. Given that time is short I will move on. My son is a qualified civil engineer with a masters degree and a specialism in providing clean water. He applied to VSO over a year ago and was prepared to give two years of his life to earn £20 a week because he wanted to help people. Despite the great need throughout the world and despite his going through all the courses and getting all the injections, VSO has not got back to him for 12 months. I do not mind naming and shaming, because when young people come forward to  make such commitments, they should be accepted. My son spent nine weeks in Ethiopia at the tail end of last year and I was surprised to hear from him that the clothes that we send from the UK are not given out free of charge to people who need them, but are on sale in local shops and markets. An end to global poverty can be achieved only by good governance, free enterprise, free markets and fairer trade. The growth of free markets will do more to lift people out of poverty than many of the aid programmes throughout the world. The most obvious example to give is the European Union's common agricultural policy, which I think I have mentioned before. Given that the Presiding Officer is knocking his microphone to get me to finish, I will do so now.

If the threat that 20 lecturers will be made redundant were realised, does the minister agree that that could reduce Inverness College's ability to gain additional income in future? Will he consider abolishing capping for students of construction and health and social care, for which demand is exceptionally high? Will he examine the funding of UHI courses by colleges in the network?

I say at the outset that it is obvious from my interventions on him that Mike Rumbles is totally unaware of the postgraduate centre of excellence in Edinburgh and its responsibilities for postgraduate education and training. As Duncan McNeil said, there has been no shortage of debates on dentistry in recent months, in addition to which we have also had a ministerial statement on the subject. I welcome the dental hygienists and therapists who are coming through the colleges. I think that the first cohort is due later this year. I welcome it and all those of future years. The Conservatives are fully aware of the problems in this area, many of which have been highlighted in the debate. People in Nairn can wait up to four years to see an NHS dentist. Many dentists no longer take NHS patients. That means that pregnant women and pensioners have to pay for dental treatment because they cannot find an NHS dentist. For many people, having to pay £250 a year for a private dental plan is simply outwith their financial capability. "Good Morning Scotland" reported that some people in Wick were pulling out their own teeth.  However, today is different. Today, we are debating a report that examines the causes of those problems and confirms why the Executive simply throwing money at the problem is not the full answer and will not work. Unfortunately, instead of examining the problem and focusing expenditure accordingly, the Lib-Lab Executive tends to measure its performance by the millions of pounds that it spends on a problem. The report by Professor Newton, Professor Williams and Dr Bower that is the subject of today's debate is thorough and extensive. As other members have said, the bottom line is contained on page 1 of the executive summary, which refers to "no information on adult oral health ... a lack of information on the numbers of Whole Time Equivalent (WTE) NHSScotland dentists working in all fields of dentistry at a Health Board level ... little information at a Health Board level on ... the numbers of dentists accepting new NHSScotland patients, distances travelled by patients for primary and secondary dental care, the availability of evening/weekend appointments, and access for groups with special needs etc. This applied to all sectors of dentistry." It continues: "More information was also required at a Health Board level on the demand for access to general dental services. Data on the need and demand for community dental services at both a national and a Health Board level was also lacking. In the hospital dental sector, more information was needed on the utilisation and need for services at both a national and a Health Board level. There was a need for data on the recruitment and retention of all dental staff." I understand that there was one month between publication of the report and the announcement of the Executive action plan. How was it possible for the minister to gather all the information in the report and put it forward in the action plan just one month later? We know that the average waiting time for routine treatment in Glasgow is the lowest in Scotland, yet Glasgow has the worst record in Scotland of five-year-olds who have missing, decayed and filled teeth. Kate Maclean raised that point when she spoke about the situation in Dundee. We know that, over the course of their working life, women work on average more than six hours a week less than their male colleagues do. Therefore, having more women in the profession requires more dentists in the profession. The problem that we are faced with is that the minister has pledged £150 million over three years—not each year for three years as Mike Rumbles suggested—to solve Scotland's dental problems, yet the report confirms that information about the country's dental problems is simply not known.  The report confirms on page 106: "The pledge of free check-ups for all by 2007 is going to be difficult to fulfil without a significant increase in the number of dentists providing NHSScotland treatment, particularly in areas of low access. Furthermore, very few dentists anticipate increasing their NHSScotland provision of services."

I will finish the point, because Mike Rumbles did not listen to what Eleanor Scott had to say. I have included the point in my speech so, with my teacher hat on, I ask Mike Rumbles to listen when I say again that it is not enough to provide a dental check-up when there are not enough dentists to provide the treatment. What is the point of having a dental check-up every six months if people cannot afford treatment and we have an insufficient number of dentists to provide it? Surely we must learn from this exercise that ministers should work with committees and wait for research and reports to come out before they make decisions. Ministers should make decisions that are based on findings instead of making announcements about spending money when it is obvious that the information to enable them to make rational choices about the optimum allocation of resources was not available. Instead of demonising the dentists who choose to go private, the minister and others should listen to their reasons for not continuing to provide NHS treatment.

She did not say that.

Will the minister give way?

Mike Rumbles mentioned the Edinburgh dental school. Does he acknowledge  that the Conservatives recommended the postgraduate dental institute in Edinburgh, which is a centre of excellence for postgraduate education and training?

How can the Executive ensure that the £150 million of resources that have been allocated will meet the priorities, given the distinct lack of information that the Executive was working on, as is confirmed in the report?

Given that many nurses in the Highlands are being given short-term contracts and others are moving out of the area to find work, will the minister consider setting up smaller NHS call centres in the Highlands? That would benefit patients and nurses alike.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to address the impact on the local economy of the loss of 1,000 jobs at the Moray air bases. (S2O-5899)

Given that it has the lowest wage rate in Scotland, Moray already faces serious problems. Will the task force address those underlying weaknesses in the area's economy as well as the loss of the 1,000 jobs at the air bases?

Will the new fees for oral assessment and other dental work take account of the six-minute infection control period between each patient? I also remind the minister that she has not answered the second part of Nanette Milne's question on training.

Christine Grahame is talking about couples. Does she support compulsory coupledom, which Donald Gorrie proposed as a means of reducing the housing shortage?

As a Highlands and Islands representative, I probably do not understand this situation but, given that Susan Deacon is a local member and given her comments on the effect of housing problems on the Edinburgh economy, why does she think that, according to Bank of Scotland research, 8,700 homes in the city are empty?

Will Donald Gorrie give way?

I welcome today's debate on one of the most serious issues that people in Scotland face. I congratulate Margaret Jamieson on being part of the environmental hit squad and getting her photograph into "Homes for Scotland's People". Like other MSPs, I find that not a week passes without my being asked to help single people and families to find suitable accommodation. In the  Highlands, there are 9,000 people on the council's waiting list; I am told that that is a genuine figure. Many of those people have little hope of ever getting the rented house that they are looking for. I found out last week that one guy had been on the list for 17 years. The average age of first-time buyers is 37, which is three years higher than the average age in England. Recent Bank of Scotland research concluded that four out of every five towns in Scotland were unaffordable for first-time buyers. That said, we welcome much of the new Housing (Scotland) Bill, although we have reservations about part 3, which deals with the single seller survey. My colleagues and I will return to that. We acknowledge the fact that 400,000 families in Scotland own their own homes as a direct result of the Tory right-to-buy policy. Most of those families who achieved their aspiration of home ownership were first-time buyers. I am pleased that the Liberal-Labour Executive states in paragraph 2.18 of "Homes for Scotland's People" that it has no plans to change the right-to-buy policy. We welcome any policies that will build on the fundamental principles of the right-to-buy scheme, because that maximises the opportunities for tenants to become home owners. We propose—when we win the election—to make shared ownership more flexible and affordable to more people. We will announce our rural and urban housing strategy tomorrow, ahead of our conference in Dumfries this weekend. In the interests of consensus, I should say that we agree with what the Executive says in section 2.6 of the policy statement: "More people want the opportunity to own their home." That said, I acknowledge the minister's point that renting has to be an option for many. The choice to rent or to own a home must be made by the individual. It is interesting that the Executive shares the goal of home ownership, given that there has been only a 4 per cent increase in home ownership since the Scottish Parliament was established. I endorse what the minister said today about the need for more ambitious plans for spending to encourage home ownership—I think that the figure mentioned was an increase of 60 per cent. When we look at the number of new dwellings that are completed year on year, we see that the figure was more than 24,000 in 1995 under the Conservatives and that Labour has reached that level in only one year since coming to office; it did so in 1999. It is often stated that Scotland does not function as a single housing market, but the same is true of  many local authorities. If someone has a job in Inverness, for example, a council house in Wick or Kinlochleven is of little use to them. With Glasgow having more than 10,000 empty homes and plans to demolish more than 100 tower blocks, and Edinburgh having 8,741 empty homes, further research is needed into why those homes are empty. We need to know whether it is because of the poor condition or poor management of the property or because of poor investment in the housing stock. In that respect, we welcome the plans in section 3 of the policy statement to improve the evidence base as a foundation for future housing, planning and investment. It is not only the type of housing stock that is important; occupancy figures need to be looked at. There has been a dramatic increase in occupancy by single people, particularly single men; I think that the figure for single males increased by more than 60 per cent last year. I hope that the evidence base will identify not just how many houses are empty and where they are, but the type of housing, which is also crucial. I have raised my next point, which relates to the Highland Council housing strategy, on previous occasions, but I make no apologies for raising it again. The council said that, although it wants to offer a home to as many people as it can, to do so without the appropriate care and support can be detrimental. The council referred in particular to the hidden problems of alcohol and drug abuse and mental health problems. Highland Council has also said that the cut of £2 million in supporting people funding over the next three years is likely to make it very difficult for it to provide housing support or to provide the increased services that are required under the legislation on homelessness, for example. The council has asked the minister for a commitment that the funding that the Executive is making available to support the introduction of that legislation will be continued. I have time only to mention my support of stock transfer before addressing the single seller survey. There is no way in which the minister can say that the return of 74 surveys from a target of 1,200 was a success. Several people who were on the single seller survey steering group have told me that they were not consulted before the announcement was made on the mandatory nature of the survey. If we are talking about open and honest consultation and about including people, it is quite shocking that those people were not consulted on such a major decision. I move amendment S2M-2585.4, to leave out from second "acknowledges" to end and insert: "and supports extra funding to be given to other low-cost home ownership schemes; is concerned that local authorities are unable to meet the requirements of the  Homelessness etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 and the Homeless Persons (Unsuitable Accommodation) (Scotland) Order 2004; acknowledges that, under the Conservative's right to buy policy, home ownership in Scotland has increased from 35% in 1979 to over 65% today, with around 400,000 tenants exercising the right to buy since 1980, and believes that the right to buy should be protected for the next generation of homeowners in Scotland; supports recent announcements and ongoing work to develop water and sewerage infrastructure for new housing and boost the availability of land, and welcomes some parts of the Housing (Scotland) Bill published last week which will bring improvements to private sector housing but is opposed to Part 3 of the Bill, the introduction of the Single Seller Survey."

To ask the First Minister how many people have opted out of the national health service to take private health cover in the last year. (S2F-1508)

I thank the First Minister for not answering my question. I advise him that figures from a private health analyst show that 1,000 Scots leave the NHS and pay for private health care every week and that thousands more are forced to seek private treatment in dentistry and chiropody. Does he acknowledge that, whereas the Tories would offer people the choice of paying for private treatment, the Liberals and Labour are forcing people into private care?

I am pleased to debate dentistry—or the lack of it—this week, next week or any time after that. As Jamie Stone said, dentistry is one of the main issues in the Highlands. If members focus only on the closure of the Edinburgh dental school, they are missing the mark. The retention of dentists is a real problem. Members should be asking how many trained, qualified and experienced dentists are not working in their own profession. One of the points that John Swinney made took me back to the time when I paid for my two children to have fissure sealing. Although at the time it cost £8 per tooth, my two children are now in their 30s and neither of them has any fillings. As  fissure sealing can now be provided free of charge, I hope that it will be made available to more children. I point out the fact that a million more people in Scotland have their natural teeth than was the case 30 years ago, but in Caithness alone, 15,000 people are on the waiting list for NHS dentistry. In the town of Nairn, people face a wait of almost four years if they want to see an NHS dentist. Dentistry is not just about fillings: an extensive dentistry check-up will pick up the early stages of and the problems that are associated with oral cancer, which is one of the fastest-growing cancers in Scotland. That takes me to the £16.8 million that Tom McCabe has allocated for free dental check-ups for everybody by 2007. Like Shona Robison, I want to know whether the check-up will be the £7 quick look round the mouth; the more extensive £9.95 check-up; or the full case assessment at £20.80. That point is important. If the free check-up is to be only the basic check-up, 2.5 million people will get it; if it is to be the £9.95 check-up, 1.68 million will get it; and if it is to be the all-singing, all-dancing full case check-up, just over 800,000 people will get it. By any account, we are not talking about free dental check-ups for every person in Scotland. Whatever check-up it is, it is certainly not what was promised in the partnership agreement. Apart from the question of which check-up is on offer, I would like to know how many dentists the Executive has signed up to provide them. I understand that not many dentists have signed up—certainly not enough. The question of how many dentists do so will naturally depend on the payment that they receive from the Executive. Although many people in the Highlands can afford the check-up at a price of between £25 and £32, they cannot afford the treatment. Every six months for four years, the free check-up will tell people what dental treatment they need, but all the while they wait to be treated. If people want to shop around for treatment in Inverness, they have to pay £25 to £32 for every estimate. When we read the Government jargon, we learn that pregnant women and others are entitled to free dental treatment. However, they are only entitled to that treatment if they can find an NHS dentist. I return to another of the points that John Swinney made. Under an MEL—management executive letter—all children should be given three free check-ups during their primary and secondary education. That does not happen in the Highlands and I doubt if it happens elsewhere. And now for the good news. I attended the dental think tank meeting in Thurso recently with my colleague Jamie Stone. I commend Cathy  Lush of NHS Highland and Professor Bill Saunders, dean of dentistry at Dundee dental school, for their innovative approach to outreach clinics for the training of advanced undergraduate dental students. Although the initiative is not the full answer to the lack of dentistry provision in remote and rural areas, I have no doubt that it will help. I also hope that it will help in the recruitment of local dentists who will act as trainers. The advanced undergraduate students will provide a better integration between our community dental services and the dental school in Dundee. I have one final point to make, which has not been mentioned so far in the debate. I hope that the Executive will take account of the six-minute clean-up time that is required for infection control, which now takes place between each patient appointment. Naturally, those clean-ups will reduce the time in the working day that is available to treat patients.

Where is the Executive going to get all the specialist lecturers from to lecture at the school of dentistry in Aberdeen when there is a shortage across the whole of Scotland?

Does the minister acknowledge that education, whether it is provided in the independent or the state sector, is none other than a public benefit?

Will the member take an intervention?

At stage 1, the Scottish Conservatives welcome the general principles of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill, which will review and update charity law in Scotland. We believe that the focus of the bill should be on promoting volunteering, charitable work and giving. There is no doubt that charitable organisations offer solutions that are uniquely tailored to local problems in a way that could never be replicated by Government agencies. Like many bills that have been introduced in Parliament, many issues will be dealt with not on the face of the bill but in the subsequent guidance, which will need to be interpreted and implemented. We must therefore hope that our understanding of the spirit of the bill will be  identical to OSCR's when it decides which organisations will retain charitable status and be regulated accordingly. First of all, I will deal with the two amendments that have been lodged. I simply ask the SSP and the SNP to tell us the number of independent schools that they have visited. For example, have they ever visited Gordonstoun, which was set up in the 1930s by a Jew fleeing Nazi persecution? It provides more than 200 jobs in the Moray constituency and is absolutely central to that community.

I want to finish this point. Has Tommy Sheridan ever visited St Aloysius' College in Glasgow or, in Edinburgh, Stewart's Melville College and the Mary Erskine School, which is the largest independent school in Europe? Has he spoken to the many parents who make considerable financial sacrifices to pay for their children's education? Many of the pupils at those independent schools are from military families; as their parents are sent on duty to different parts of the world, boarding school provides the only continuity of education that those children can get. I declare myself a class warrior for every parent who works hard and makes serious sacrifices to give their children choice, freedom and the best education, as they see fit. As Murdo Fraser has pointed out, independent schools also provide valuable jobs for local people in rural small towns. In fact, when he and I visited Morrison's Academy in Crieff this week, we heard of research that shows that more than 8 per cent of all employees in Crieff work in the independent school sector and that it brings millions of pounds into the local economy.

That response shows that Tommy Sheridan has a greater lack of understanding of the situation than I thought he had. I should also point out that, when Rannoch School in Perthshire closed, 57 jobs were lost in a local rural area. Many teaching staff left the area and the school was turned back into a private home.  If the SNP communities spokesman had wanted to know more about independent schools in Scotland, she might have chosen to attend at least one of the three pre-legislative briefings that Communities Committee members received, particularly the one that was held in Perth. Taking all the children in independent schools into the public sector would cost the taxpayer more than £150 million. Those who have lodged amendments to the motion should tell us where that money will come from.

I look forward to Linda Fabiani's explanation.

I chose my words carefully and referred to the SNP communities spokesman; I was not aware that Linda Fabiani was the communities spokesman. As for her question, it is not for me to decide whether Fettes College should lose charitable status. That is a decision for OSCR.

I thank the member for reminding me of that. The SNP should have chosen to attend the informal briefing, which we all found extremely helpful. Although I do not agree with him, I understand why Tommy Sheridan lodged an amendment. After all, he is not a member of the Communities Committee. However, I do not know why Christine Grahame lodged an amendment, given that she had every opportunity to amend the stage 1 report. Her amendment shows that the SNP would restrict freedom, choice and diversity in Scotland only to promote intolerance through its ideological lack of understanding.

No, I have taken enough interventions. Education is a public benefit; it needs no secondary justification. It benefits the pupil, their family and society. I say to Tommy Sheridan that it is a pathway out of poverty and that parents should be able to choose to make sacrifices to pay for their children's education. If we removed  charitable status from independent schools, fewer bursaries would be paid out and fees would have to rise, making those schools more exclusive and beyond the reach of many of the working-class families that he pretends to support. Let us remember that the independent sector was educating Scotland's young people before the advent of the local authority-controlled network of today. My children received assisted places to go to the High School of Dundee, which is more than 750 years old. I did not put them there because I wanted them to be elite; I put them there because the discipline and the management were better than at their local school. We should be considering ways of expanding the sector rather than crowding it out. I say to Tommy Sheridan that all the money that goes to independent schools is reinvested back into the schools and their facilities. If he knew more about the schools, he would know that. Others have mentioned section 7(3)(b) of the bill and the effect that it will have on certain bodies. I heard what the minister said and accept that the Executive will consider the issue. The provision would affect the Church of Scotland, where the third party would be the General Assembly. For the Catholic Church, the third party would be the Vatican. Groups such as the girl guides would also be affected. Most of the problems that people have identified in the bill have been in sections 7 and 8—on the charity test and public benefit respectively. I agree with the committee: these matters should be left to OSCR. Two words in section 8 that gave me considerable concern are "unduly restrictive". As a Campbell, I could not join the MacDonald clan. Does that make the MacDonalds unduly restrictive? When the Scottish Council of Jewish Communities says that it raises money within its communities to benefit people within its communities, does that make it unduly restrictive? The committee discussed the issue a lot. The arguments came back to the question, "What does 'public' mean?" Can something benefit one person, or a dozen people, or does it have to benefit every single person? Issues to do with added bureaucracy have been very well covered by the bill. At the committee, several witnesses gave the example of a children's charity that raised money in Scotland but spent nothing in Scotland. However, I would not like money raised in Scotland to be restricted to Scotland, in the same way as I would not like the enormous amounts that the cancer charities raise in the rest of the United Kingdom not to be spent on cancer research  here—research from which we benefit enormously. The bill will have failed if it does anything that hinders charities in carrying out their work. As the bill moves forward today, let us ensure that it does so positively; that it reduces rather than increases administrative demands on charities; that it does nothing to discourage ordinary Scots from giving their time and money for charitable purposes; and that it does not place existing charities and their volunteers in a state of undue uncertainty over their future status.

On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I too am pleased to support the bill. As Nanette Milne has said, the bill updates and extends the Prohibition of Female Circumcision Act 1985, which was one of the many excellent pieces of legislation that were passed by the Conservative Government. The contents of the bill have been outlined very well by all speakers today, with the broad consensus that female genital mutilation is a form of violence against women and children that  should be eradicated internationally. I will highlight just one of the many short and long-term health problems that are a consequence of the procedure—chronic pelvic infection. That can lead to infertility, which is tragic in itself. In many of the cultures in which FGM occurs, infertility in women is not always viewed sympathetically. In that regard, I endorse everything that has been said about the need to improve communication, awareness and training. It is a matter of concern that in 20 years there have been no prosecutions under the 1985 act, although the General Medical Council has struck off two doctors, one of whom performed FGM and one who offered to carry out the procedure. There have been several prosecutions relating to FGM in France where, although there is no background law on the matter, there is a penal code that punishes those who perpetrate physical harm. The lack of prosecutions in this country raises concerns not only about the effectiveness of the legislation but about awareness of the prohibition of FGM. In that context, the Equal Opportunities Committee's stage 1 report is right to recommend that the Executive take steps to develop methods of collecting data and to review the guidance, education and training that are available for the full range of professionals who are likely to have to deal with the consequences of FGM. I note that the committee also recommends that the relevant penalties should be given prominence in information and guidance material that is circulated to communities that are likely to be affected. Elaine Smith raised that point.

That is an excellent point to make. It is essential that the relevant penalties are highlighted if both the current and the new legislation are to be effective. As a relatively new Parliament, we can learn from the problems that can occur during dissolution. Although the 1985 act was repealed in 2003, that did not extend to Scotland. In other words, the matter was not Sewelled, as the Scottish Parliament had been dissolved ahead of the 2003 elections. I hope that in future the  Parliament will examine the legislation that passes through Westminster during dissolution and, if appropriate, have it brought before the Parliament without delay. That said, having listened to Nanette Milne and Elaine Smith, I realise that we have had the opportunity not only to carry out further scrutiny but to strengthen the legislation. In this case, the fact that the Parliament had been dissolved may have been an advantage. I hope that the bill will be effective in meeting the aims that it sets out to meet. That can be done only if there is greater communication with the communities that carry out the practice. My concern is that FGM will continue and I hope that women who need help—medical or otherwise—following the procedure will not be frightened to come forward to receive it for fear of being seen to be disloyal to their own community. That would be most regrettable. As has been mentioned, for many women the reporting of FGM would result in a prosecution being brought against a member of their family or their community. The young woman whose experience the minister described in her opening speech said: "I had been butchered with my mother's permission." The Scottish Conservatives share the concerns that the Equal Opportunities Committee has raised and will support the progress of the bill through Parliament.

How many councils are currently pursuing the housing stock transfer process? Is it the Scottish Executive's objective to transfer all council stock in Scotland on time?

I commend Alasdair Morrison for his excellent speech, which I feel reflected accurately the mood in the Western Isles and conveyed the support that people there have given to one another. His whole speech was excellent, but I want to highlight his point about the need to take stock and plan for the decades ahead. What we are doing tonight is taking stock of where we are so that we can plan for the decades ahead. Jamie McGrigor sends his apologies for not speaking in the debate; he has suffered a family bereavement. The Bellwin scheme, which was drawn up in 1983, was seen as being a model scheme and a starting point. According to the scheme's guidance notes, it was set up as a discretionary scheme. I hope that ministers will consider the Bellwin scheme as a starting point and that they will use their discretion. The scheme uses a formula that was agreed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to set thresholds for financial  assistance for each council. Many of the authorities that have been affected are island authorities or authorities that have significant coastlines, such as Highland Council and Argyll and Bute Council. If those authorities are more likely to be affected by climatic conditions in the future, perhaps it is time for COSLA and the Executive to review the existing thresholds. If we consider roads, for example—as John Farquhar Munro mentioned—under the Bellwin scheme only costs that relate to patching up and instant repairs are eligible for consideration; repairs to causeways and other work involving capital costs are not covered. The scheme relates only to costs that are incurred in the immediate aftermath of specific events. We must ask ourselves whether that is sufficient for current and future needs and, given the weather that we face, we must consider whether more extensive arrangements are necessary. Like John Farquhar Munro, I want to highlight the impact of the storm on the Highlands. Damage was caused to 161 schools, 20 culture or sport properties and various other buildings. The total cost of remedial works in the area is likely to be more than £5 million, more than half of which will be accounted for by repairs to roads. The problem is that Highland Council cannot accommodate that £5 million sum in the near future without causing significant disruption to its capital programme. My point is that if the council has to take the money from other budgets, the areas that have been affected will suffer and there will be a severe opportunity cost. Alternatively, there could be an impact on council tax payers throughout the Highlands and Islands. As John Farquhar Munro said, Highland Council stands to receive no financial assistance from the Bellwin scheme, which applies strict criteria, because the council's qualifying costs are thought to fall below the £520,000 threshold. Although we in Scotland are used to harsh winters and storms, there is no doubt that fear is growing that we will face more hazardous and extreme weather conditions in the future. I ask the ministers to consider more proactive initiatives to prevent severe flooding, which may help us to avoid reactive situations such as that which we are debating tonight, in which council funding is not adequate to repair damage to local infrastructure and in which we send our condolences to the families that are affected.

Does the member agree with the Conservative's proposed points system, which is based on the Australian system? If the system were endorsed, it would address the shortage of workers and as a result many of our hospitals might not face downgrading and closure.

I certainly welcome the debate on the anti-racism strategy in Scotland. Scottish Conservatives are vehemently opposed to racism in all forms, both direct and indirect, and we will always be willing to participate in any initiatives that we believe will eradicate the problem. The positive features of the many diverse cultures in our one Scotland with many cultures must be the focus of any campaign. It is that attitude that could be celebrated and admired as the trait of a maturing and confident small nation. However, we need to be clear about the messages that go out from Parliament and we need to be equally clear about the strategy for tackling problems in Scotland. At the outset, I want to mention school bullying. It may not always be racist in nature, but it can breed behaviour—and the acceptability of a culture of behaviour—that is unacceptable when directed at any person. I think that more needs to be done to address bullying in schools. The Executive motion acknowledges the "commitment to tackling racism and promoting race equality". We certainly should not lose sight of that commitment, particularly given that 56 per cent of Scots feel that there is a great deal, or quite a lot, of prejudice towards minority ethnic communities in Scotland. Also, 46 per cent of people said that they would prefer to live in an area where most people are similar to themselves. As others have said, the number of racist incidents that are recorded by Scottish police forces continues to rise annually and stands currently at 3,801 for 2003-04. Of course, that could be attributed to more incidents of racism, to more recording of incidents or to a combination of the two. It would be interesting to have a breakdown of the figures, both geographical and numerical. For example, it would be interesting to know how many incidents related to people from New Zealand, Australia, Canada or America, how many to people from other European Union countries and how many to people from Africa, India, the Middle East and the Far East. I note in that respect the minister's point about people from Bangladesh and India earning less than other immigrants in Scotland.  We believe that a fair system of immigration control is necessary to promote good race relations—not the chaotic system over which the Labour Government has presided in the past eight years.

Stewart Stevenson should just give me a second. As Michael Howard said yesterday: "Instead of offering a haven to those most in need, our asylum system has created a twilight world in which people-smuggling flourishes. The vast majority even of genuine refugees are forced to enter our country by deception, often at the hands of criminal gangs." In Scotland—

I am not forgetting about Stewart Stevenson—he need not worry. Scotland has a proud tradition of giving refuge to those who flee persecution, and we are a stronger country because we have offered a home to families who want to come here, to work hard and to make a positive contribution to our society.

If Stewart Stevenson did not bother wasting my time by intervening, which means that I have to cut short my speech, and if he gave me a chance to work the argument through, the answer would be as clear as crystal. Conservatives were the first to propose a rational points-based system for economic migrants, so that we could maximise the benefit to our country from new workers. We were also the first to propose a 24-hour security watch on points of entry. We view control of our borders as a grave responsibility: Tony Blair sees it as a hot polling issue. Michael Howard wrote that even the Labour Government's own community cohesion panel has pointed out—Stewart Stevenson should listen to this—that "when it comes to securing public assent for new migration, 'the pace of change is simply too great'". The panel also pointed out that "The pressure on resources in those [disadvantaged] areas is often intense and local services are often insufficient to  meet the needs of existing community, let alone newcomers."

The amendment in my name would remove the reference in the Executive motion to the fresh talent initiative because the fresh talent document makes no reference to race, racism or ethnic minorities. As the First Minister states in the foreword to the document: "The single biggest challenge facing Scotland ... is our falling population". Sadly, time constraints mean that I will have to cut back on the quote. We are experiencing a net loss of young people to the rest of the United Kingdom. Given that people can afford to buy their first home only at the average age of 37, and that there has been an 18 per cent drop in the number of first-time buyers in the past year, that is hardly surprising. Many people even have to travel to England to get a dentist and, in Scotland, waiting lists and waiting times are rising, as are infertility rates. Indeed, infertility treatment is an area that we need to prioritise within the national health service in Scotland. Apart from making people feel welcome, we need to ensure that incoming workers are given the proper support that they need. For example, when doctors are recruited to posts in the national health service, they should be given appropriate and adequate support in administrative procedures and NHS protocols. My final statement is—

A fair and just system of immigration control is essential in order to promote good race relations and an entrepreneurial low-tax nation with value for money high-quality public services—

That is what will bring in fresh talent. It will also encourage people who were raised in Scotland and graduates of Scottish institutions to stay in Scotland. I move amendment S2M-2402.2, to leave out from "and flagship" to end and insert: "supports the continuing need to raise awareness of, and tackle, racism in Scotland and to celebrate our diversity; supports the range of Executive activities and actions to promote race equality including work in health, the police and education; is committed to eradicating racism in Scotland in whatever form it takes to ensure that we create an inclusive and prosperous Scotland, and believes that a fair system of immigration control is necessary in order to promote good race relations."

Given the wonderful value for money that the CABx provide, will some of that generous allocation be made available to the CABx as well as to local authorities?

I, too, thank Brian Adam for the opportunity to speak in the debate, which is on a reserved issue. It would be wrong to assume that the proposals have no impact on the current provision of the service, on the voluntary sector, on other sources of advice and on people who seek benefits advice. I do not measure the proposals by the number of offices that are to be closed or the number of staff who will, I hope, be redeployed elsewhere in the civil service. Any assessment of the impact of the proposed benefit office closures should relate to the quality of advice that is given and the accessibility of that advice for people, including the many vulnerable people whom the motion mentions. If the consequential increased workload falls on local authorities and voluntary sector money advice services, it will be crucial for the Parliament to acknowledge that and to put such centres on a secure and stable financial footing. In the interests of fairness, and given that the First Minister cannot participate in the debate, I will quote what his colleague Frank Roy said in a Westminster debate on 26 October 2004—given what Richard Baker, who has left the chamber, said, there may have been an update since then. Frank Roy said: "the jobcentre roll-out programme in Lanarkshire has been renamed the jobcentre wipeout plan". As no Liberals are present, I will quote John Thurso, who asked about the office in Wick. He asked the Secretary of State for Scotland to "explain to those employed there why their jobs are under threat, in an area that is already economically depressed and where, because of the distances involved, that threat will make it more difficult to deliver a good service".— [ Official Report , House of Commons , 26 October 2004; Vol 425, c 1276.]  Having done my bit for old Labour and the Liberal aristocracy, I will move on to the fully justified concerns of Citizens Advice Scotland, which says: "The increased remoteness of the ... network will make it more difficult for those in an emergency situation to access ... support" and that more claimants will turn to citizens advice bureaux, which will  "create additional demands on an already under-resourced service." As Brian Adam said, the organisation asks the Scottish Executive to make representations to Westminster to require the need for additional advice to be taken into consideration as part of the planning process. It also says: "For many benefits, clients already experience delays of two to three months and many millions of pounds of benefits go unclaimed every year", as Tommy Sheridan said, "because people lack the help and advice they need to make a claim."

Yes—I am absolutely, totally confident. I would be happy to debate that with the member at any time, but tonight I am addressing Brian Adam's motion. Citizens advice bureaux provide an excellent service. They give advice on a range of issues, of which benefits are one. More than 30 per cent of those who approach citizens advice bureaux are looking for social security benefits and £35 million in financial gain was won in the past financial year in Scotland alone for people who visited citizens advice bureaux. CAB support for debt management is first class and debt clients can have regular appointments over many years to tackle and manage debt, which is at an all-time high in Scotland. Will local advice bureaux be given the resources to advise those who will be unable to access benefit offices in person or by telephone? Such services are under threat, particularly those that require home visits, as many do in the Highlands, given the time that is required. I put on record the commitment of the volunteers and salaried staff at citizens advice bureaux, the excellent training that is provided and the fact that their experienced staff give the highest quality of benefits advice. The commitment to invest in and build on that service with consistent long-term funding is crucial to the debate and falls within the responsibilities of the Parliament and the minister who is present.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many in-patient psychiatric beds for children and young people will be provided by October this year to comply with the implementation of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. (S2O-5226)

I have an update from Children in Scotland, which states: "A new report by the Child Health Support Group recommends that a minimum of 60 inpatient psychiatric beds are required". Will the additional beds be in place by the time the act is implemented in October?

Thank you, Moireach. In welcoming the bill at stage 1, I note that little has been said about our links with the Irish Gaeltacht. There is much more that we can do to forge links between the Scottish Gaidhealtachd and the Irish Gaeltacht. My mother came from Donegal and my grandmother did not speak English—she spoke only Irish, or Gaelic. My mother was a native Irish speaker and her second language was English. It is to my shame that I speak only English. In my family, as in many  others, the language has been lost within three generations. I often asked my mother to give me some words in Gaelic—or Irish, as she called it—but she was reluctant to do so. She said, "You'll do better in life, lass, if you learn English and forget about the Gaelic." She would tell us that it was seen as a dirty language, and the language of tinkers and the lower classes in Donegal. It is therefore understandable that my mother was reluctant to teach me any Gaelic. However, I am very pleased that I can stand alongside my blue-blooded, aristocratic colleague, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, the Earl of Selkirk, and that although I have descended from very working-class roots in Donegal where my mother and grandmother spoke what was known as the language of the lower classes, I can support him and the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill.

I am not quite sure what that was about. We can talk about that later. I hope that the bill reverses the process of decline by promoting the language through education. That would be very satisfactory to the 80 per cent of the people of Scotland who want the language to continue. When Wendy Alexander says that education is the key to the future of Gaelic, I totally agree with her. However, it is not only about teaching in schools. In the Highlands, many people sing in Gaelic choirs, but they are certainly not fluent Gaelic speakers. It is about the culture of Gaelic and not just education, although that is a key to progress. Gaelic and its related culture are among Scotland's greatest treasures and both have had a profound influence on our nation's history. For example, during the past 130 years, the Inverness Gaelic Society has collected a mass of historical information celebrating Gaelic scholars and poets. That information will prove to be a rewarding study aid for future generations that are interested in the culture. Gaelic culture is not dead and the vigour with which the bill has been pursued by the Education Committee proves its vibrant renewal and development during the past two decades. I pay tribute to my party, which did much to invest in and revive Gaelic prior to the establishment of the Scottish Parliament. Lord James has mentioned his ministerial generosity to Sabhal Mòr Ostaig and others have mentioned Iain Noble. Directing the resources appropriately makes much sense. It is always better to put resources into the areas where they will have the greatest  outcomes. That does not mean that other areas should be starved of resources, but a proper economic assessment should be made. Rosemary Byrne mentioned the national education plan. On reading Highland Council's submission, I suddenly realised how difficult it is to be a Gaelic teacher. An English teacher can take a lesson plan off the shelf because such teaching materials are well developed. That is not the case in Gaelic teaching and many teachers have to write a full plan before they can start teaching. That does not encourage the teaching of Gaelic, even if the teachers are trained in it. My final point is about Highland Council and what constitutes reasonable demand. Although the council has set a figure of four, I am pleased that there is some discretion under the bill for other authorities.

The minister speaks about resources being available. It is my understanding that, following the EAGISS report in 1999, health boards were expected to implement its recommendations but were not given additional resources. That is part of the reason for the increase in waiting times. Is the minister committed to taking resources from elsewhere in the NHS in order to earmark funding for infertility services in future?

I am grateful to secure the first debate on infertility in the Parliament and I thank those members who have stayed on for it. Coincidentally, there was an adjournment debate on infertility this week in Westminster Hall, led by the Labour MP Kevin Barron. He is chair of the all-party group on infertility, and its vice chairman is the Conservative MP Andrew Lansley. In that debate, Kevin Barron stated that 80 per cent of infertile couples in England have to pay for their treatment, the cost of which can run to tens of thousands of pounds. I do not have the figures for Scotland, but they are worth seeking. It has been said that, in Scotland, we are more likely to discuss our debts and our bank balances than infertility. Infertile people naturally do not like to talk about their problem, not even to close family in many cases. Consequently, many will not even come forward for treatment. A recent article by Kate Foster in Scotland on Sunday states: "This is the debt generation. It's not just about delaying childbirth to have a career, it's about being able to afford a home." In The Scotsman , Gillian Bowditch says: "Get the economy right and we'll get breeding". The issue is complex, but I will concentrate on infertility treatment. Recent research in Aberdeen shows that the average sperm count has fallen by 29 per cent in the past 13 years. I have not read every word of the sexual health strategy that was launched today, but I would like sex education to be more about getting pregnant and not all about preventing girls becoming pregnant. One couple in four in Scotland will need assistance to conceive at some point in their reproductive lives—that is equivalent to 32 MSPs. In a year, 5,062 couples present to their general practitioners and some 4,657 of those couples will be referred to hospital care. Members might not know this, but I understand that the commonest single cause of infertility is defects in male fertility, not in female fertility. That is followed by problems with ovulation, and disease of the fallopian tubes. According to Infertility Network Scotland, births in Scotland could be increased by around 2,000 a year if all current attempts at in vitro fertilisation  were successful, and more if present limits were removed. Infertility can have a profound effect on individuals, couples and relationships and is associated with high levels of depression and marital break-up. The Infertility Network describes the feelings that are expressed as fear, guilt, anger, shock, shame, isolation and inadequacy. That is not to mention the issues of femininity and machismo, which are too complex even to start to talk about. Although we do not treat it as such, infertility is a public health problem as defined by the World Health Organisation. It is often described as a lifestyle, rather than a medical issue. It might not be life threatening, but it is life affecting. Modern infertility treatments exist, and they offer an excellent chance of success. After three cycles of IVF or intracytoplasmic sperm injection—ICSI—treatment, a couple stands a 50 to 65 per cent chance of having a child. Well, almost: the cut-off age for the treatment currently stands at 38, when the success rate for treatment is about 25 per cent. However, it drops to less than 20 per cent after the age of 40. In Grampian the waiting list is nearly five years—I see Margaret Ewing nodding. In the Lothians, it is two to three years, and it is about 12 months in Glasgow. Many couples end up paying the full cost of treatment themselves. Someone from Edinburgh e-mailed me last week to say that there was a seven-month waiting list for an initial test in Edinburgh. In order to get in before the deadline, she paid for it herself, through BUPA. Poorer couples clearly cannot afford to do that. At a time when there are concerns about Scotland's falling population, as mentioned by the Registrar General for Scotland in his annual report, it makes sense to provide those who dearly wish to have a child, but who are experiencing difficulty, with every assistance, particularly given that the total number of births registered in Scotland in 2002 was the lowest figure ever recorded—and 2002 was the sixth consecutive year in which the total number of births reached a new low. The raising of the upper age limit for IVF treatment to 40 has been mentioned. That is welcome, but unless it is accompanied by more prioritised resources, the waiting lists and waiting times will simply lengthen. As everyone knows, the earlier that treatment is available and the younger the age, the greater the success rate. I ask the minister why infertility treatment sits outside the waiting time directives and why it is acceptable for infertile couples to wait for up to five years for treatment, while waiting list targets for other treatments are six months.  In March 2003 a meeting was held, in the presence of the Executive, involving all the key players in infertility in Scotland. The meeting produced consensus and I hope that the minister will accept its recommendations in her winding-up speech. The current criteria disallow infertility treatment for couples if there is a child from a previous relationship living in the home. That means that many women and men could be barred from treatment despite not having their own biological child. The options for such couples are to fund treatment themselves, or to return the child from the previous relationship to the former partner. What a choice. Sperm donation legislation passed at Westminster comes into force in Scotland in April this year, from which time sperm donors will give on a willing-to-be-known basis. That means that information about the father will be kept, so that the child, at 18 years old, can trace his or her father. That will undoubtedly reduce sperm donation, which, in Scotland, is already critically low. We bring in a large percentage of sperm from England. In Glasgow, much of the sperm is imported from Denmark, but sperm from outwith this country will stop when the legislation commences in April. The removal of anonymity is a huge issue, and we need to plan now for how to recruit donors with the awareness that they are willing to be known. Scotland is now classed on an international scale as a very-low-fertility country. On that ground alone, we need to do more. Women are choosing to start a family later. The average age for first-birth mothers is now 30. Unfortunately, two years of unsuccessful attempts to conceive and a five-year wait for treatment—which applies to many women—with a cut-off age of 38, means that women need to get serious about childbirth earlier than age 32, or they might be too late. I will finish with a quote from Lord Winston, which was cited by the Infertility Network: "The infertile deserve compassionate social, not demographic consideration of their problem." I am grateful for the debate, and I look forward to the minister's response.

Does the First Minister acknowledge that more than 350,000 families in Scotland achieved their aspiration to be first-time home owners through the Tory right-to-buy policy? Will the First Minister give a long-term commitment to the policy, to assist families in the future?

I appreciate the minister's comments. When he sat beside me as a lowly member of the Health and Community Care Committee, was it not his understanding that every single elderly care home would be an integrated care home? I have to say that that has not happened. Secondly, I should point out that, when an elderly person's condition deteriorates, they do not receive funding for nursing care as early as they should.

First, I congratulate Christine Grahame on her miraculous recovery from her ill health, which prevented her from attending this morning's meeting of the Communities Committee. She is certainly in good spirits this afternoon—well done. One of the most urgent problems facing Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom is the threat to our pensions. Personal savings in Scotland are close to a record low and people live in fear that their savings may become worthless. Debt is also at the highest level ever. The dire situation in Scotland is compounded by the possibility that our tumbling birth rate and aging population may lead to an insufficient working-age population to fund viably our pensions and other services. The period of the Labour Government has been characterised by means-tested benefits, the latest of which is the pensions credit. As Christine Grahame said, the process is now so complicated and demeaning for pensioners, who are reluctant to disclose their personal information, that one in four pensioners in Scotland does not claim their entitlement.

No. I am short of time and I think that we are almost in agreement on that issue. The report by Adair Turner's Pensions Commission confirmed that "there are clearly many people for whom means-tested benefits do create a significant disincentive to save individually". Given that the take-up of such benefits is very low, it would be much fairer to increase the basic state pension. A Conservative Government would reduce means testing by linking the basic state pension to earnings rather than to prices. That would take 1 million pensioners out of means-tested benefits.  According to Help the Aged in Scotland, four out of 10 pensioners also fail to claim council tax benefit, which could help to lift them out of poverty. Last October, Sheila MacKay and the Highland senior citizens network conducted a survey, which highlighted the fact that, since Labour came to power, the council tax in the Highlands has risen by 50 per cent, whereas the basic state pension has gone up by only 27.5 per cent. It also highlighted the fact that council tax and water and sewerage rates are taking a higher proportion of the income of lower-paid pensioners. The Conservatives would focus on reducing the level of tax for the benefit of all. Less than 20 per cent of council funding is raised from council tax; the rest comes from income tax and business rates. Furthermore, another £293 million is paid in council tax benefit to Scottish council tax payers, including 40 per cent of pensioners. Therefore, it would certainly not be appropriate to look at an alternative to the council tax that was based on income tax. My colleague, David Davidson, will speak at length on care and bedblocking.

No. I desperately want to get this point over. There is no doubt that the Executive's opposition to care homes that are not run by the state has resulted in an unfair financial bias against voluntary and independent homes. We have spoken about bedblocking for almost six years, but the number of beds blocked is higher now than it was in February 1999, despite the fact that £30 million has been targeted on the problem. In the Highlands, people frequently come to me and say such things as, "There is a space in a care home and my mother has been in Raigmore hospital for nine months, so what can I do?" There is still a shortage of funding. It is time to come clean and be honest about whether social work has inadequate funding or whether its funding is being used for other services. I am fed up with the buck being passed between councils and the Scottish Executive. Malcolm Chisholm will be familiar with my next point. When I was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, we talked about integrated care homes, in which elderly people would not have to move when their condition deteriorated—a residential home and a nursing home would be together in one home. I ask the minister why people are now coming to me to say, "My mother has had a stroke and needs nursing care, but she is in a residential home. She cannot get funding for a nursing home and the home she is in has chosen to be only a residential home."  That is not what was in the legislation that we passed in the Parliament. I checked the matter with the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care and I know that my facts are right. In the Health and Community Care Committee, we agreed on a single budget. We did not agree who should hold that budget, but I still say that my point is crucial. The Highland senior citizens network has also raised the issue of podiatry and chiropody. I remember that one of our first briefings in the Health and Community Care Committee was from Andrew Walker, who pointed out that, although members were complaining about access to beta interferon, beta interferon at a cost of £10,000 a year might benefit just one person with multiple sclerosis; however, £10,000 would pay for chiropody and podiatry care that would allow 1,000 elderly people to be mobile and independent. If we consider that simple opportunity cost, we can appreciate that investment in such services would save money elsewhere. We are always being told that women over 60 and men over 65 have access to free national health service dentistry. However, people have access only if they can find an NHS dentist. In the Highlands, insurance through Highland Dental Plan Ltd to cover access to a private dentist costs £257—that is £5 per week for every pensioner. The NHS is free only where it is available. The other points in the amendment in my name will be covered by Nanette Milne and David Davidson. I move amendment S2M-2298.3, to leave out from second "recognises" to end and insert: "acknowledges that substantial progress needs to be made to meet the needs of older people which achieves a sustainable funding agreement to reduce bed-blocking and to end the inequality in funding between council-run homes and independent homes; calls on the Scottish Executive to ensure that all elderly people assessed for free personal and nursing care are given the appropriate care in the environment which suits their needs, either at home or in residential care; acknowledges the central heating programme and free bus travel anywhere in Scotland; looks to the Executive to propose policy initiatives that benefit older people by promoting volunteering and lifelong learning and tackling anti-social behaviour, and calls on the Executive to build on these by recognising the diversity of older people and tackling ageism and encouraging the greater involvement of older people through the Older People's Consultative Forum, and in other ways, in the development of policy across the Scottish Executive."

Christine Grahame's party's constitutional policies are an absolute non-starter, but I commend the member's passion. As Wendy Alexander said, people are not daft, which is why they voted out a quarter of the SNP MSPs at the most recent  Scottish Parliament elections. Linda Fabiani and Patrick Harvie, two of my colleagues on the Communities Committee, made excellent points about the monitoring and measuring of targets. It has been difficult for the committee to examine targets in the budget process, as I think that the Deputy Minister for Communities will acknowledge. The headings tend to change year after year and different budgets appear under different headings. I lectured in economics for 20 years, but even I find it very difficult to scrutinise the figures in the way that is needed. Jamie Stone talked about Caithness. Given the booming housing market and job opportunities in Inverness, where I live, I commend the member's point, because quite often the focus is on Inverness; Caithness, Sutherland and Moray are the forgotten counties. We should not assume that the Highlands means only Inverness. We can close the opportunity gap only by giving people choice and the opportunity to use all their talents and by giving people access to high-quality public services. We do not make the most of people's skills and access to public services is not as good as it could be. The motion identifies a target about "improving the confidence and skills of the most disadvantaged children and young people", so that they can avoid poverty when they leave school. Work is the best route out of poverty, but we must not always assume that debt is a problem only for the unemployed and other people who are on benefits. Many people who are in full-time employment have serious debts. We need only consider the fact that students who leave university have average debts of about £15,000.

Certainly, access to credit must be considered and those in employment must not be forgotten. I thank Tommy Sheridan for raising the point. We can have equality of opportunity only when all children are assessed, diagnosed and given the learning support that they need at school. In my 20 years as a lecturer, I found that many students were diagnosed as dyslexic or as having other problems when they came into further and higher education, having fallen through the system throughout their education. That happened all too often and still happens. On my recent visit to Porterfield prison in Inverness, a prisoner spoke of learning to read and write and said that he learned  more in prison because he could progress at his own rate. The education system needs to be much more cognisant of those issues and readier to assess children and give them more support in primary school education. We tend to assume that secondary school is important because that is where our children get their qualifications, but if they do not have what they need before they leave primary school, they will not be taught to read and write in secondary. Teacher shortages are an issue. At Nairn Academy, a teacher is absent—that happens—and there is a shortage of supply teachers. Departments have been merged and principal teacher posts lost. A supply teacher called me last week and told me that there is a private organisation in Doncaster called Timeplan Education Group through which he could offer much-needed teaching to students at a salary of £7,000 less than a normal teacher's pay and no pension. Many teachers are willing to provide supply teaching—which offers continuity, stability and consistency in education—but they are not given the incentive to do so. In Nairnshire, when a teacher is absent and pupils are worried, many parents pay for private tuition. For those who cannot pay, that is not an option, so closing the opportunity gap in passing examinations in the state sector often depends on payments to the private sector. The same happens in the NHS. Those who want fertility treatment have to wait seven to nine months for tests before treatment will be considered, but for many, the only way to get the treatment, for which there is an age limit, is to go private. It is not an option; it is a necessity for those who want the service. Citizens advice bureaux provide an excellent service on a shoestring. There seems to be an assumption that volunteers come free. They might give their time free, but they do not come free because significant costs are involved in providing training, computers, desks, offices, travel expenses, heating, lighting, rental and office equipment. We need to do more to encourage volunteers and to secure the funding for them. Over the five years of this Government, bed blocking has increased from 1,724 to 1,908. However, if a patient is self-funding, that is not a problem. I acknowledge the point that John Swinney made about the lack of continuity of care. I will leave it at that.

Does the member commend Labour's big idea of 66 tax rises in the past seven years as a means of closing the opportunity gap?

I appreciate that Jamie Stone's motion focuses on nutritional health in sustaining employment and rural communities. Will he also consider plants such as bog myrtle, which is undergoing pharmaceutical trials and is being proved to have superior qualities to tea tree? That could be used as a wonderful benefit in sustaining employment and communities, although it would need some inducements from the Executive.

Does not it make sense to ensure that Scottish Water is fully included at all stages in local authorities' local plans for housing and other developments, so that Scottish Water's long-term investment plans concur with those of local authorities? That would get rid of the blame culture that we have at present.

Listening to Kenneth Macintosh's remarks, I am reminded that one of the unintended consequences of the current legislation concerns situations involving a single parent trying to take, for example, a boy and a girl swimming. In contributing to any committee debate, it is always an advantage to be a member of that committee, given the framework of reference and research. I take this opportunity to commend the Education Committee for its thorough and excellent report. In particular, I commend Robert Brown for reminding us of people such as Danielle Reid, who lived in Inverness. I would not want there to be any negative impact on voluntary activities involving children and young people. I would highlight the need to maintain a balance between protecting children and avoiding an overcautious or bureaucratic approach. I noted Kenneth Macintosh's comment that there is a role for the Executive in sending out the message that, although the subject and the offence are serious, our measures are not aimed at penalising or criminalising members of the voluntary sector and in particular those volunteers who give up their time to work with young people. The inherently complex issues of disclosure requirements, insurance and eligibility may well deter some people from supplying much-needed and valued volunteering. That would be ironic, given that 2005 has been proclaimed the year of the volunteer by the Executive. I note the comment that the director of Community Service Volunteers Scotland made in The Herald last month. Referring to the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill, she said of ministers: "They want to make it easier for people to volunteer but ... it seems they are going to slow it down and make it far more complicated." At the heart of all our deliberations should be a desire to strike the right balance between the protection of children and the encouragement of much-needed volunteering. I received a copy of a letter that was sent from a water-sports facility in the Highlands, which is quite a small employer. It seems that many issues are still unclear. Those at the facility, like others, regarded the previous system as inadequate. The letter states:  "I have found the whole system so far to be quite poor in identifying persons we should not employ." The person writing on behalf of the facility asks whether it is necessary for existing staff continually to reapply. One of the issues that has been raised in the Highlands, which I dare say applies elsewhere in Scotland, is whether we can be sure that the checks on the recruitment of staff from other European countries under the fresh talent or other recruitment initiatives can be as thorough as the checks that we will be carrying out in this country. That is an important point. Could such organisations and residential centres be informed fully of their responsibilities in the near future? That is particularly important because, given that the great majority of people who are employed in such areas have good intentions, the reputation of the many should not be tarnished by moves introduced to identify the few. In the remaining couple of minutes of my speech, I will refer to the Education Committee's report to raise points that I do not think have been covered today. I have been crossing off quickly the points that other members have raised. Paragraph 15 states: "The Committee is concerned that the momentum behind the child protection reform programme may be lost if there is not cross departmental commitment to supporting the Minister's commitment to child protection." I certainly hope to get a reassurance about that. Paragraph 16 notes that Unison raised the thorny problem of the lack of resources. It is obvious that little can be done unless there are adequate resources. I turn, as Christine Grahame did, to the shortage of social workers. We have been considering and discussing the battle around that for five years. We should remember that we in this Parliament have passed significant legislation, which I fully support, including the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, requiring an enormous number of additional social workers and experienced social workers who might go on to become mental health officers. The shortage of social workers could be compounded by the legislation that we are passing. When I was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee we worked on the Scottish Social Services Council. When I read in paragraph 20 of the Education Committee's report that it was concerned about the "review of the recruitment criteria, training, remuneration and career progression available to social workers", I wondered what part the council was playing in all this. On a point that Christine Grahame raised, last week when I was working on a case to do with  child safety, a social worker asked me, "What is your opinion?" In that moment I realised the critical judgment that social workers have to make day in, day out, which I do not envy, and I was extremely hesitant. We have to be sensitive to that and emphasise the point. I support the committee's excellent report and I was pleased to hear from Elaine Murray that the committee will audit and monitor the recommendations.

Will the minister give any directions or guidance to OSCR on the interpretation of the term "public benefit" for public schools? Moreover, will each school be judged on its merits in that respect?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to help prisoners enter the job market on release. (S2O-4612)

Does the minister agree that there should be better co-operation and  partnership with further education colleges so that courses and training that are started in prison can be continued on release? Will the minister acknowledge the overcrowding in prisons and agree that FE facilities have a role in reducing both that problem and reoffending?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will include measures in the school curriculum to encourage more school leavers to work in the construction industry. (S2O-4673)

I am very pleased to hear that response, because it almost answers my supplementary question. I was going to ask how the Executive intends to build better partnerships with further education colleges, give pupils aged 14 and upwards the opportunity to gain an insight into the construction industry and help with the training of apprentices, all of which will help to tackle the shortages that exist or are likely to arise in our building industry.

Will George Lyon give way?

I will raise a point that came from the minister's speech. As I understand it, no staff will be poached from the NHS by the private sector for diagnostic and treatment centres. Unless the minister has some kind of derogation, I think that he will find that he will be in breach of our current employment legislation if he bars an NHS doctor who has the same training, qualifications and experience as a private sector doctor from applying for a job in the private sector. My second point was also made by Margaret Jamieson: rather than simply look at the health sector as it is, I ask the new Minister for Health and Community Care to look seriously at referral protocols, at co-operation between the different health authorities, including social work, and at early intervention. At the moment it is easier for people to get on a waiting list for a hip operation and to be treated for a condition that they have suffered from for months than it is for people to get a referral to an NHS podiatrist. In the early days of the then Health and Community Care Committee, when Margaret Jamieson was a member, we received a briefing from Andrew Walker during our discussions on whether beta interferon should be made available to patients at £10,000 per patient per year. He pointed out that, for £10,000, 1,000 elderly patients could, with chiropody and podiatry care, become mobile and independent. All too often, we are too busy looking at the big structure of consultants, acute hospitals and operations to take into account the fact that referral protocols from GPs are insufficient and do not utilise the excellent professionalism of, for example, podiatrists and speech therapists. Those people have much to give, but are often left out of the loop. I ask the new Minister for Health and Community Care to examine that. I also agree with Margaret Jamieson's point about audit. As for the shorter waiting times and the targets that the minister announced today, I have to say—as someone who has participated in almost every health debate since 1999—that we have heard it all before. In fact, we have heard the same news from three health ministers. I am afraid that I must tell the minister that despite his aims, objectives and targets, waiting lists are up by 25 per cent and waiting times are up by 10 days.

I am sorry; I have too many points to make. As far as bedblocking is concerned, I looked at one of my old parliamentary questions last week after hearing the news about the patient at Carstairs state hospital. When I asked that question, I was told that there were 28 bedblocking patients at that hospital; now there are 43. Things are getting worse, not better. If the Executive wants improvements, it must examine the referrals system and the issue of co-operation. I draw the minister's attention to the lack of co-operation and co-ordination between the NHS and social work departments. Although the situation is improving, it is still not good enough and there is far too much buck passing between departments. I also ask the minister to examine whether there should be more co-operation between prisons and communities. For example, the detoxification, rehabilitation and psychological treatments that many prisoners receive in prison are superior to the treatments that they get in the community. Indeed, when they get back into the community, they often go straight onto a waiting list. That is not good enough, because it wastes the investment that has been made in the prison treatments. The suicide rate in Scotland is twice as high as that in Northern Ireland and 8 per cent higher than that in England. This week, we have heard about patients from psychiatric hospitals being discharged into the community. I have worked closely with families in the Highlands who have lost people to suicide; indeed, in a recent case, a suicide victim's family discovered among his belongings a letter that showed that, although he had just left Newcraigs hospital, he went straight on to a waiting list for a community psychiatric nurse. He did not live long enough to see that nurse. Such things do not cost money, but the minister has to knock heads together to make sure that the system works. Similarly, people who receive alcohol and drugs detox and rehab treatment at an NHS residential establishment do not get any help in the community when they leave those establishments. I draw the minister's attention to depression. I am setting up a group in the Highlands for the Depression Alliance, because MSPs must not always expect the NHS to do everything. Self-help groups have been shown to work; however, although it is still easy for people to go to the doctor and get very expensive drugs for a condition, it is still very difficult to get someone to listen to them.

As an over-50, I am pleased to speak in tonight's debate. Although I am not looking for work at present, come the day when I retire, I would be delighted to do some voluntary work. I have previously worked as a volunteer prison visitor and I have done voluntary work for a citizens advice bureau, for a Child Support Agency panel and for the Red Cross. It was all absolutely wonderful fun. Perhaps one message that I would like to go out from tonight's debate is that people do not need to be over 50 to volunteer. The strong message is that one can volunteer at any age. We should encourage older people from all backgrounds and areas of Scottish society to become involved in volunteering and charitable work. For example, most of the people whom I asked to be on the community council that I set up recently in Inverness south had not done any voluntary work before. They were delighted to be asked and we now have a successful community council that is full of volunteers. However, if I had not asked those people, we would still have no community council. Many people do not realise that their talents are needed because we are not good at valuing them. Many people are also unsure how to participate, so we need to make the opportunities and access to volunteering known to people of all ages. Retirement is often the perfect phase in which to consider volunteering, in particular for non-profit organisations. However, precisely because volunteers receive no wage or payment, they should be even more valued than those who do. There should be no assumption that those who receive no salary do not make a valuable contribution. As Sarah Boyack said, voluntary work can have beneficial effects for older people. It can benefit their physical and mental health by providing ways in which they can keep active and continue to learn new skills, to meet new people and to face new challenges. Volunteering can help to overcome the loneliness and isolation that are felt by many people, not only in remote areas but in big cities such as Edinburgh. It can also help to maintain a sense of time and give structure to the week. Volunteering can give a sense of purpose to those who feel cut off from social networks since retiring from their paid occupation. Volunteering provides other benefits apart from the benefits to the individual. We need to work  harder to identify those mature and experienced potential volunteers who could contribute a lifetime's worth of skills, knowledge and wisdom. Given the introduction of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill, there is no doubt that local voluntary organisations will soon be required to administer and present more information. That will mean that they will have a greater need of retired people who have experience in life. As I am running out of time, let me simply point to the many opportunities that exist for volunteers, especially in advocacy work. Like Christine Grahame, I welcome the fact that Euan Robson has scrapped the age limit for children's panel members. When the issue was raised, the minister promised to look into it and I am delighted that he has taken action.

I endorse the points that Des McNulty and Fergus Ewing have made. I find that some of the questions that I had for the minister are answered in the document, but because I was not at my desk at lunch time I did not have time to peruse it. It is unfortunate that the minister did not provide the information in time to allow members to contribute more to an informed debate. However, I am proud to represent the Conservatives—masters of the free market and of competition, where appropriate and when appropriate. The previous Conservative Government examined the cost of subsidising Caledonian MacBrayne and found that the unit costs were, in fact, lower than those for the then P&O service to the northern isles. I would like to use some of my speech to compare some of the  tendering process now with the tendering process that we have already gone through for the northern isles with NorthLink. We welcome genuine competition, which will yield benefits for passengers and enhance social inclusion and opportunities on west coast islands, as well as encouraging tourists to visit. On the comparison with the northern isles, I would like to use the example of Andrew Banks of Pentland Ferries Ltd. That man built two piers, at St Margaret's hope in Orkney and at Gill's bay near John o' Groats. He runs a service across the Pentland firth, which takes an hour, and his passenger and freight numbers have grown enormously year on year, yet he does not receive a penny from the public purse. In fact, he states that, if he received the kind of subsidy that is given to NorthLink, he could run the service free. Last year, Pentland Ferries carried around 80 per cent of sheep out of Orkney and a substantial number of cattle, as well as shellfish lorries and liquid petroleum gas tankers. Moreover, Pentland Ferries' fares are cheaper. NorthLink receives a 75 per cent subsidy on livestock and, since its inception two years ago, its public subsidy has gone up from £11.5 million to almost £24 million. That can hardly be said to meet the criteria of value for money. Would the minister continue to meet the demands for a higher subsidy for the west coast operators, whichever company wins, on the same lines as he has with NorthLink? Will he consider giving the subsidy to the operator chosen by the people and by businesses to convey passengers, livestock and freight, rather than simply giving it to someone who carries a smaller percentage? We want the changes to the ferry services to be made for the right reasons, with an assurance that the price paid for tendering should not fall on CalMac employees. That issue was raised by the trade unions at a meeting that many of us attended last week. The unions have also raised issues relating to the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations and pensions. I note that the consultation document—which I have not had time to read—states, on page 13: "The tender process will also include questions about bidders' employment policies to allow these to be assessed ... As with the transfer of staff we shall ensure that our proposals on this issue are as robust as possible." I wonder whether CalMac employees will sleep easily in their beds tonight knowing that, because to me it is as clear as mud. Will any new company offer the final-salary pension schemes for CalMac employees and make the additional payments that have been required from time to time because of fluctuations in the equity market? Will the financial burden to the Scottish taxpayer increase, as it has  done with NorthLink, or have lessons been learned from NorthLink? Finally, I ask the minister to address the concessionary fares scheme.

Is this a question on the ministerial statement?

Would Mark Ballard also exclude from support services males who were the victims of males?

There is no doubt that male violence towards women is the most prevalent form of domestic abuse and rightly deserves the prominence that it is given. However, the debate is welcome, because it allows us to talk about all victims of domestic abuse. Our social culture does not allow men to be vulnerable or weak and it is hard to encourage dialogue between men and health professionals when it comes to physical, emotional or mental health problems. Some 20 per cent more women than men visit their general practitioner. Men are more likely to suffer in silence and tend to ignore symptoms of  illness or delay seeking medical attention until a crisis point is reached. Suicide rates for men are more than three times higher than those for women. It is rare for me to agree with Mike Rumbles, but I hope that those who trivialise the fact that men have a problem will look at some of the background statistics. The Executive's definition refers to people who experience domestic abuse as women because they represent the majority of victims, and rightly so, but they are not 100 per cent. We must maintain an awareness that domestic abuse can take place in any relationship and defining those who experience it in gendered language reinforces the belief that it is not macho for a man to be a victim of violence. It is difficult to ascertain accurate figures for male victims of domestic abuse because the problem is likely to be seriously under-reported. We cannot get an accurate picture simply by looking at police reports. The Executive's study "Domestic Abuse Against Men in Scotland" found that the embarrassment that many male victims feel is a factor that explains the infrequency with which male victims of domestic abuse come to the attention of the Scottish police. Among the men who were interviewed for the report there was a common feeling of being more upset or angry about the breakdown of a relationship in which abuse had occurred than about the abuse. We cannot allow male victims of violence to be trivialised—or indeed ignored—simply because they are not represented in the same distressing number as females. I will say a few words about rehabilitation programmes. In several local authorities, criminal justice workers provide programmes for men who have been convicted of domestic violence offences. Such programmes aim to encourage men to identify and rethink some of the attitudes and fears that underpin their use of violence. That is necessary and praiseworthy, but I note that the Royal College of Psychiatrists states that male abusers tend to be emotionally inexpressive, to have low self-esteem and to lack assertiveness, and by the time they get to programmes it is often too late. We should consider more preventive measures. The level of repeat incidence is alarmingly high, which points to the fact that the help that is available, for both men and women, is not sufficient. Although preventive work to repair the culture that permits violence is difficult to undertake, it might provoke healthier results than our forcing a convicted male to undertake a rehabilitation course in what will already be a crisis. The priority is confirmed and well outlined in the motion. It is to open service provision to men and to make men aware of the support that is available  to them just as it is available to females who wish to leave a situation of domestic abuse. Every effort must be made to ensure that the act of leaving an abusive partner, whether they are male or female, is not hindered by financial, housing or other constraints. Everyone in Scotland is entitled to the social and natural justice and protection that we expect from our public and voluntary agencies.

Given that we had an extensive debate on the issue of violence against women three weeks ago, I want to use some of my time to concentrate on male-against-male violence, particularly that of male rape. According to the Executive's national strategy to address domestic abuse,  "Domestic abuse ... is part of a range of behaviours constituting male abuse of power, and is linked to other forms of male violence." However, the document "Preventing Domestic Abuse: A National Strategy" states that the prevention strategy's underlying principles will be "informed by women, children and young people who have experienced and witnessed violence, and by research." I fully support that approach, but could it not also include the experience of men who have been affected by male or, indeed, female violence? In past debates, I have confirmed that I would wish to introduce a member's bill in order to look at male rape. I have not done so, precisely—

I am happy to do that, Presiding Officer, but I noticed that the minister, in introducing the debate, clearly concentrated on male violence. In that respect, I hope that some of what I want to say—a small part of my speech—is, indeed, appropriate. I have not introduced a member's bill because of the Solicitor General for Scotland's written answer to a parliamentary question from me, in which she said: "In Scots law the crime of rape can only be committed against a female. Equivalent crimes of sexual violence against male victims are charged at common law as offences of indecent assault and/or sodomy. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service review will include examination of the prosecution of serious sexual offences  committed against male victims."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 11 March 2004; S2W-6544.]  I was pleased to make an intervention in the minister's introductory speech and to hear her commitment to the review. Rape is defined as intercourse against a person's will, so why should men be treated less equally than women in that respect?

I think that Carolyn Leckie should be aware that the term "gender-free" relates to men and women. However, after that rant, I will continue. The other point that I wish to raise in the debate relates to the 50 per cent of recorded cases in which victims had previously recorded incidents, which indicates that victims find themselves trapped in abusive circumstances and that abusers are not addressing their behaviour or, indeed, getting the support needed to change their behaviour and to move away from physical abuse. In our most recent debate on the subject, I mentioned that in some cases there might be a straightforward communication impairment, which could be helped by the professional input of a speech therapist. That would enable the person affected to state their case in a more reasoned and measured manner, instead of resorting to fists. We are all aware that there are many anger management courses and other types of support on offer. When violence is recorded, it would surely be helpful for the victim and the abuser to be offered some help and support in coping with a situation that could lead to violence in future. I was pleased that the Executive's strategy includes the longer-term goal of the need to "Resist demonising men who use violence. But challenge abusing men to accept responsibility for their behaviour." If we lock people up without providing rehabilitation, counselling or some other way of addressing their unacceptable behaviour, we will not address the problem in the long term. I hope that the experience of men and women who have used violence is listened to and that it informs future strategies. My final point relates to Women's Aid refuges, which undoubtedly do a wonderful job by providing much-needed support and safety. However, a problem that affects many single women who are  in abusive situations, as well as women with families, is that once they are settled in a hostel, they find it difficult to move on to their own accommodation because of a local crisis in housing. That is a particular problem in Inverness at the moment and I imagine that the situation in other towns and cities is similar. My fear is that, in future, a concern about not being able to move on from a hostel or refuge may discourage women from leaving abusive partners. I hope that the Executive will consider all forms of male violence and will ensure that the reasons that lead to that violent behaviour are examined and addressed appropriately.

As part of the review, will the minister be considering male violence against men, and male rape in particular?

To ask the Scottish Executive which areas will be selected for the care commission pilot studies of the regulation and inspection of foster care. (S2O-4193)

Given the recent debates on foster caring and the minister's commitment to an audit, how will the Executive work with the care commission to ensure that the information and experience that the commission gains in its regulation and inspection work are included in that audit?

Will the minister give way?

We agree with the points that the minister made. On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I give our support to any measures that will help to address the many issues surrounding fostering that have been raised in the debate. There is no doubt that fostering is a vital service provided by dedicated people, as the minister said. We endorse the principle that foster-children deserve the same chances as other children, but I remind the minister, as he considers his audit and review, that COSLA produced a report in 2000, the conclusions of which many members have mentioned. I will read out a quote about that report: "A CoSLA report on Foster Care suggests that teachers' low expectations are a factor in low achievement ... studies of children who had grown up in care and been educational successful have been critical of social workers, carers and teachers for stereo-typing looked after children as low achievers." I think that that merits further investigation. The quote continues: "The most consistent response from the high achievers was that they felt unsupported by social workers, care staff and teachers. Their ability had not been recognised or their achievement valued by social work staff and at school they experienced discrimination by teachers and bullying by peers." I ask the minister to ensure that his audit and review take into account the conclusions of the COSLA report. Many members have mentioned kinship care, but a look through the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care's standards, "national care standards: foster care and family placement services", has led me to wonder whether kinship care falls outside the category of fostering. If that is the case, does it also fall outside the category that qualifies for training, financial support and  advice? The minister should consider that as part of the review. The provision of £12 million is welcome but, as the Fostering Network's survey shows, foster carers in 91 per cent of Scottish local authority areas are receiving sums that are below the organisation's recommended minimum rates. That means that their fostering expenses are not being covered, so foster-children are being short changed and carers are, in effect, subsidising the state. That is in spite of the existence of the national care standards that the Parliament agreed to when it passed the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, which state that all carers should be reimbursed for the full costs of fostering. While listening to the debate, I have been flicking through some of the national care standards. I hope that members will bear with me if I mention some of them. Standard 3 relates to Andrew Welsh's excellent point on individuality. It says: "your identity and self-esteem will be valued and promoted." Under the care standards, the care commission regulates "issues of diversity, including sexuality and lifestyle choices." Although that is the case, few members have mentioned the care commission's role—the minister did not—and I look forward to hearing about it. Christine May made some excellent points about health care. Standard 2 talks about "the provision of good quality care" and mentions occupational therapy and psychology, which Christine May referred to. We have had the national care standards for three years, so why are we all so concerned? We need to ask whether the care commission is examining the standards of fostering that local government is responsible for as vigorously as it examines the standards in private care homes. Standard 8 talks about the care commission's commitment "to developing, preparing and training foster carers" and to ensuring "that they work within its standards, policies and guidance", but successive members spoke about the absence of support and guidance. If the fostering agencies, which are mainly our local authorities, are failing to provide foster carers with the standard of service that the care commission has set out, serious questions need to be asked, because the care commission is a  powerful Government organisation, and I fully support the work that it does. Standard 9 states: "you receive payments to cover the cost of caring for any children or young people placed with you. Payments are based on their needs and in line with the cost of caring for them", but member after member has asked why foster carers are not being paid the amount that they deserve. The care standards have been set out and approved by the Parliament, but we allow the issue to carry on three years after the care commission was set up. We have passed the legislation; now we need the care commission to be more vigorous. Standard 10 mentions "clear published policies and procedures on all payments made, and ... information about the skills, training and qualifications that are needed for different payment levels." Adam Ingram mentioned that only 11 per cent of carers have access to the proper qualifications. If they do not have access, what is the care commission doing to ensure that they are given support? Standard 11 states that the fostering agency should have "review systems in place to make sure that ... good quality care" is provided. It also promises carers "the facilities you need to meet the needs of children placed with you, including their ethnic, cultural, language and faith needs", which covers the point on individuality that Andrew Welsh raised. I ask the minister whether the care commission is really doing its job. Is it doing what we asked it to do: to ensure that all fostering agencies are adhering to the excellent standards that we have in Scotland? I will probably lodge some parliamentary questions on that, because the Parliament seriously needs to ask those questions. One issue that must be addressed is the postcode payment system for foster carers. The Fostering Network recommends £108 for babies and £191 for over-16s. The lowest actual payments are made by East Lothian Council and Midlothian Council at £63 for babies and £126 for over-16s, which is a shortfall of £45 for babies and £65 for over-16s. In Scotland, only Glasgow City Council comes close to the recommended levels, as its payments are within £10 of them in each category. We might say that different payments are necessary throughout Scotland, but surely that is not so in our two major cities. Glasgow City Council pays £34 more per young child and £60  more per adult than the City of Edinburgh Council does. The Presiding Officer is indicating that I should close now. I am sorry that I cannot say any more.

On the subject of the £12 million, given that Glasgow City Council pays £60 more than the City of Edinburgh Council does for a child who is over 16 years old, how will the money be distributed? Are you saying that Glasgow is paying enough and that other councils should uprate their payments to that level?

I welcome this debate—after this morning's rather confrontational debate, I also welcome its tone. I note both that the motion focuses on support for those who experience domestic abuse and that the minister's commented that there is no excuse for domestic abuse. Many excellent contributions have been made today but I want to highlight Cathy Peattie's thought-provoking contribution. Domestic abuse is not all about black eyes; emotional abuse is equally damaging. I acknowledge all the other comments made and, like my colleague Bill Aitken, I found very little to disagree with. I also commend those MSPs who raised issues relating to older women. There has been an increase of more than 10,000 in recorded incidents of domestic abuse in the past three years. That should give us cause for concern. As the minister has said, many people experience abuse almost 30 times before they call for help. We know that there is gross under-recording. I would also like to support a point that Mike Rumbles made. There is a serious under-recording by women of abuse by men, but I think that men who are abused by women could well make up more than 10 per cent of the total, because there is equal, if not greater, under-recording of such abuse. We need early recognition and early intervention. Whatever the  figures, we can be sure that they all underestimate the extent of the problem. There are three types of domestic violence and most of us have spoken, and rightly so, about the primary victims—the ones who are directly attacked. Many MSPs have spoken about the secondary victims—the children who witness violence. When they are in refuges, a total of 48 per cent of those children are found to have mental health problems. I want to focus on the third type of domestic violence and the tertiary victims. A future victim may enter a relationship with a perpetrator. I fully support all the investment in providing women's refuges and in looking after children, but more research is needed into understanding why men—predominantly men—abuse women. I realise that that may be a controversial point but I feel that abusers need help as well.

Those people will go on into further relationships and abuse further. Recently, I met some speech therapists who told me that they had been doing work in prisons. They said that many prisoners found it very difficult to express themselves verbally. Those prisoners had a communication impairment and often, because they could not express themselves, they would lash out at others. I am not suggesting that the issue is that simple, but I feel that a bit more research needs to be done. Mental health difficulties may also play a part. Men in particular are not good at talking about their problems. They are less likely to visit the doctor and extremely unlikely to seek help. I have met many families in Inverness who have lost a male family member because of suicide. It is shocking how few of the suicide victims actually talked of their problems to their families before taking their own lives. It is also shocking how few—I have not heard of any and I have met many families—who left a note.

I welcome a debate on older people in Scotland. However, like Karen Whitefield, I believe that the SNP should use the Parliament to debate issues in relation to which it has powers, rather than to lodge motions that tell our colleagues at Westminster how to do their jobs. The people of Scotland elect 72 members of Parliament to debate pensions at Westminster. I think that all members of the Scottish Parliament would have something to say if Scottish MPs started telling us how to run the health service and provide education in Scotland. The SNP is undoubtedly comfortable with taking orders from Westminster, but Scottish Conservatives acknowledge the devolution settlement. We have pledged to work  within the powers of the Scottish Parliament for the people of Scotland and to let Scottish MPs represent our country at Westminster.

Not yet. The main point is that the SNP will never be in a position to implement its pension promises, especially as it lost a quarter of its MSPs last year and more SNP losses are expected at the next election. Only the Conservatives provide an alternative to Labour at Westminster. The pensions debate cannot be addressed simply by calling for a rise in pensions; the issue is far more complex than that. An irate pensioner visited my surgery recently to tell me that she had received a £12 increase in her pension through the new pension credit system, only to have to pay out £12.75 per week more because her housing benefit and council tax had been reduced. Nicola Sturgeon mentioned the briefing from Help the Aged in Scotland, which says: "means-testing ... has created a complex and bureaucratic system". It goes on to say: "145,000 pensioner households entitled to pension credit were not receiving it." A pensions debate should also include a discussion of how to address the incentive to save. Help the Aged comments: "many pensioners with moderate incomes still feel they are little better off than those who never saved. Means-testing could also dis-incentivise saving for young people." For pensioners who want to continue working, every £1 of earnings reduces their pension credit by 40 pence, which is, in effect, a tax on the poorest pensioners at the highest rate of income tax. The Conservatives have an eight-point action plan to address the pensions crisis, the first point of which is to restore the link between pensions and earnings and to remove the obligation to buy an annuity at 75. My colleague Bill Aitken inhabited the world of annuities in his previous life and he will address those and other pension issues.

I will tell members later.

There are very good reasons, and I hope that Labour members will respect that. I will raise some issues that we can address in this Parliament from a survey that was carried out by the Highland senior citizens network, entitled "Better support for Older People in the Highlands". On chiropody services, more than 1,000 people are being taken off the national health service list in the Highlands and many more have had their appointments cut. The service is being privatised with no regard to patient need or ability to pay. If we audited the health benefits of every public pound that goes into chiropody, the service might rate the highest, as quality foot care keeps elderly people mobile and independent and less likely to fall or need home care or hospital care. Foot care from a trained and qualified podiatrist can also pick up other problems that can then be referred to other specialists. It is disappointing that not one member of the SNP managed to find the time to come to the first briefing in the Scottish Parliament from the Society of Chiropodists and Podiatrists, although Christine Grahame gave her apologies.

I am happy to talk about the privatisation of services, which we debated in Parliament and on which the Tories were open, honest, upright and accountable. I am complaining about the stealth of the privatisation that elderly people are facing in the Highlands as they are taken off NHS lists and forced to go private.

No, I have to get on. Highland NHS Board has come up with some innovative solutions to the problem, including suggesting to an elderly man in Nairn that he invite his friends round for a toenail-cutting party. One of his friends was blind, another had arthritis in his hands, another had mild dementia, and one had diabetes. The gentleman said to me that, if the new Minister for Health and Community Care would like his feet attended to by the group, he would be happy to arrange it. Government leaflets state that dental treatment is free for pensioners, but that is only the case if they can find an NHS dentist. In some areas of the Highlands, there is a four-year waiting list. One elderly person in the Highland senior citizens network's survey stated that, after four years of  waiting for a dentist, they had to pay £86 for a filling, not to mention the £150 registration fee. Another respondent in the survey states that, at older than 70, he was instructed to have full dental treatment before being accepted on a private list, but he could not afford to do so. That is typical for dental care in the Highlands and the situation is rapidly spreading across Scotland.

No, I do not accept that. If Margaret Ewing asks pensioners in Moray and the Highlands about that, they will say that their podiatry, eye care, ear care and home care services have deteriorated in the past seven years. On long-term care, it cannot be right that councils award themselves around £150 more per person per week for those in council-run homes than for those in independent homes. Council-run and independent homes have to meet the same standards, which are set by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, but they are funded differently. Other issues arise when someone enters a home with funding for personal care but their condition deteriorates to the point that they need nursing care. The care homes have to provide nursing care but, in some instances, the councils doggedly refuse to pay the higher rate, which brings horrendous problems for families. Of course, if an elderly person self-funds, they not only pay more for the same level of care in many homes but they can be assured that their discharge from hospital will not be delayed and that they will be placed instantly in a home of their choice. Five years into the Parliament's existence, we still have 1,932 patients in blocked beds, which is a reduction of 83 since 1999. My colleague David Davidson, who, I am pleased to see, has arrived in the chamber, will cover that issue. In its 1999 Scottish Parliament election manifesto, the Labour Party pledged to eliminate fuel poverty over two parliamentary sessions—that is, by 2007. However, when the Executive's fuel poverty statement was issued in August 2002, the target had changed to 2016, which is a delay of nine years. Charles Gray, who has been a Glasgow councillor for 45 years, recently spoke of the consultation documents that are currently circulating on health, dental services, chiropody and digital hearing aid programmes and said that, although the intentions are good, the services become more unattainable as they get more expensive. I move amendment S2M-1940.1, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert:  "condemns the Chancellor's promotion of the means test which acts as a major disincentive to save; believes that linking the basic state pension to earnings would lift a million pensioners out of means-testing over a four year period; calls for greater measures to encourage personal savings, and acknowledges that only a Conservative administration at Westminster can implement these changes for the benefit of all Scotland's pensioners."

Given that council rents in Moray are among the lowest in Scotland, that the average wage there is the lowest in Scotland and that there may be a surplus of MOD property, will Moray be placed at the top of the list for the next dispersal of jobs from Edinburgh or elsewhere in Scotland?

When a speaker comes a bit further down the pecking order, the problem is that most of the issues have already been raised. The problem is exacerbated when one Highlands MSP follows another who has already spoken about all the local issues. I want to raise two particular points. The first is about hidden carers, as mentioned by John Swinney and Maureen Macmillan. Some carers hide the care that they provide. That is especially true when there are mental health and drug and alcohol problems. I, too, commend the work of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers. The debate has taken me back to a presentation made by young carers from Golspie in committee room 1 when the Parliament was in its old home up the road. They gave us a drama presentation to illustrate the many issues that affect them in their responsibilities caring for their parents—for example, having to conceal their parents' problems, especially those relating to mental health, drugs and, in one particular case, alcohol. The young people felt that their loyalty to their parents would be questioned if they went outside to ask for care. Maureen Macmillan raised that issue and it was wonderfully illustrated by the Golspie carers. We also heard about the effect of the young people's caring responsibilities on their  schoolwork and their achievement of qualifications, and about the impact on life's opportunities. There were some points that John Swinney did not mention; one was bullying at school. A paper from the Princess Royal Trust for Carers highlighted the fact that one survey found that almost every young carer whom the trust supported had been bullied at some time. Another issue was physical ill health—for example, tiredness, stress and worry, and mental health problems. Many carers do not recognise themselves as carers. They are children and part of a family. We all naturally help our family without labelling ourselves as carers. It is shocking that there could be up to five times more carers than is recorded at present. I thank John Swinney for giving us the opportunity to have this debate.

Many members have raised the issue of prisons. I should mention that Inverness prison is currently more than 50 per cent overcrowded. If we want prisoners to undertake further detoxification and rehabilitation programmes, we must seriously address certain staffing and overcrowding issues.

My time has been cut.

Keith—

No, I would never agree with Mr Raffan. That would be a dangerous thing to do. The Executive motion refers to "increasing the range and effectiveness of local drug treatment and rehabilitation services". I hope that both ministers will consider the fact that in the Highlands a drug addict can wait up to four weeks for treatment and in Moray up to three months.  Although I welcome co-ordination across the Parliament on this issue, Dr Richard Simpson promised some time ago that dual diagnosis would be introduced. I welcome the review that has been announced today and hope that something positive will come out of it. I want to raise some questions that follow on from parliamentary questions I have asked over the past few years, most of which were answered by Hugh Henry. Given that asking parliamentary questions does not always lead to informative answers, I would first like to know now how the Executive is monitoring the methadone programme. Has the effective interventions unit, which was set up in 2000, audited people on methadone? Has any evaluation been made to find out what is an effective intervention and what kinds of prevention, treatment and rehabilitation have been cost-effective? We need to know that information. We should not have to bat questions and answers backwards and forwards and be made to feel that one side seems to know more than the other. Indeed, the Executive website contains very little such evidence. Secondly, how many people have progressed through the methadone programme to a drug-free lifestyle? Ministers need to provide the figures to back up their claim that the programme is a good one. Furthermore, what has been done in response to the Scottish Centre for Infection and Environmental Health's report on injecting drug users in the Highlands who were also on a methadone script? What percentage of methadone patients are regularly tested for illegal drugs? Are their methadone scripts halted in certain circumstances? Some time ago, when I asked whether heroin was more addictive than methadone, Iain Gray replied: "Heroin is generally thought to be more addictive than methadone. However ... drug users often claim that methadone is 'harder to come off' than heroin."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 2 July 2001; S1W-16696.]  We need guidance from the effective interventions unit on that question. Finally, how often is methadone recorded as a factor in the cause of death? After all, doctors and pharmacists can be charged with culpable and reckless conduct for dispensing high levels of methadone that later result in death. I want to return to the issue of dual diagnosis, which the minister touched on. Drugs and, indeed, alcohol are often used as a mask to cover up underlying mental health problems. When people complete the detox and rehab process—quite often successfully—they are often left to face their demons and to address the fears and anxieties that might have led them into the drug culture in  the first place. Indeed, after ridding themselves of illegal drugs, they find themselves on legal drugs that they just cannot come off. For example, NHS Highland sent a gentleman a letter that read: "You have been referred to the Community Mental Health Team, but unfortunately, due to a number of circumstances we are unable to allocate a worker to you at present. Your name has therefore been placed on our waiting list." That gentleman committed suicide two weeks ago. The family found the letter among his belongings. I am sorry that I must rush so much. There is around a 12-month wait to see a clinical psychologist in the Highlands. However, legal antidepressants are handed out freely without proper and adequate support and care. I remind the minister that many women in the 1950s and 1960s were given valium for post-natal depression and that they were still on that antidepressant when they were in their 70s. I ask the minister to co-ordinate her work with the Minister for Health and Community Care to ensure that that does not happen with the selective serotonin re-uptake drugs.

It seems to me that today's debate is going to be coloured by the question of who is right and who is wrong. I remind the member that the Executive set up its effective interventions unit in 2000, but there is little to tell us what is right and what is wrong. Does the member share my concerns about the funding, remit, research and conclusions of the unit?

Does Jamie Stone share Nora Radcliffe's concerns on nuclear power, or is he slightly more positive about it?

Would the member describe the 88.4 per cent of people in north Lewis who said in a survey that they oppose the AMEC scheme as loopy environmentalists?

I congratulate the Enterprise and Culture Committee on its report and, in particular, on the booklet that summarises its main points, which is very user friendly. It provides easily accessible information and reduces the need for huge piles of paper. I hope that other committees will consider the use of such a format, if and when appropriate, as a way of giving out concise information. As other members have mentioned, in a debate on renewable energy and related issues, we should not forget the necessity of addressing the issue of the 60 per cent of our energy that will still need to come from the base-load stations beyond 2020. That debate has to include nuclear power. When David McLetchie and I met the Dounreay management and trade unions recently, it became clear that we in Scotland are world leaders in decommissioning at both plant and academic research levels.

No. The North Highland College is taking full advantage of the opportunities that that strategy affords. We have learned that decommissioning and safety issues must be taken into account at the building and planning stage, in preparation for the end decommissioning stage. Any member who would like a reasoned and balanced view on nuclear power and wind power—the name of Maureen Macmillan, my colleague in the Highlands, springs to mind—just needs to ask the people of Caithness whether they would prefer the jobs, investment and power from Dounreay to the Caithness landscape being covered in wind turbines such as those at Causeymire and pylons that are 70ft higher than those that exist at present.

Does the member want to intervene or is he just standing there for the good of his health?

I would be very happy to accompany the member to Dounreay and to North Highland College, where he will be told all the answers. I am not an expert on the subject. We should also listen to the people of Ullapool and Wester Ross, who are bitterly opposed to the new pylons that will form the grid transmission line from Ullapool to Beauly. The line will run across one of the most beautiful areas in Scotland, which is part of the last wilderness in Europe. Even though the members of the Cairngorms National Park Authority decided that the area should be wind farm free, that decision can be, and is likely to be, overruled by the Executive in its headlong rush for wind farms—especially those with a capacity of more than 50MW, which are the subject of applications under section 36 of the Electricity Act 1989. Even when communities win their battles locally against wind farms, they are still not in a position to match the developers. That was the case in Thurso recently, when the developers flew up three lawyers from London to the pre-public inquiry meeting. Local communities cannot match that.

The reason for the huge expansion of wind farms in Caithness rather than in Ayrshire or in the member's area is that there is spare capacity on the national grid. However, that does not mean that we need to have pylons that are 70ft higher than those that we have at present.

I am nearly finished; I have given way quite a few times. The Highlands of Scotland are paying a hefty price for wind farms. Each week, I probably receive as much mail as Maureen Macmillan receives—dozens of letters and e-mails—from people who are opposed to the enormous changes that are being imposed on the landscape and environment of their area; that is not to mention the packed surgeries in Ullapool. The committee's report raises many issues, a few of which I will list. Wind farms have an impact  on scenery, wildlife and the environment. The reliability of wind power is highly questionable and there could be an over-reliance on one source of renewable energy. The Executive has failed to provide an energy strategy. There are serious concerns about the 230 giant turbines in North Lewis, each of which is 460ft high and which a local constituent described as "desecrating the island's landscape for eternity." Investment is being diverted from other forms of renewable energy into an unco-ordinated and unbalanced rush towards wind power and, as Nora Radcliffe said, more emphasis on conservation is needed. Many people have mentioned the local plan. It is probably considered quite clever in planning to call the developments wind farms, but it is wrong. They represent the industrialisation of our countryside, with megatons of concrete under ground and 460ft-high turbines above ground. That is the opposite of working the land and using our natural resources, so, like Mike Watson, I hope that the ministers will respond positively to the recommendations in the report and that they will do better than their disappointing response so far.

Will the minister give way?

As I indicated in my speech, BT said at its meeting last week that 0800 numbers would be free and that it would be possible to reverse the charges, so ChildLine and many other similar organisations could be contacted. I understand that that facility is available now.

I am grateful to Bruce Crawford for the opportunity to debate this matter. Although his motion mentions plans to close 165 call boxes in Mid Scotland and Fife, I remind him that, of the 1,300 call-boxes under threat, 257 of them are in the Highlands, which is probably one of the most remote areas in Scotland. Bruce Crawford criticised the consultation period, but I am sure that he is aware that it has been extended by a further three weeks. Last week, along with many other MSPs, I attended a meeting arranged by my colleague David Mundell with the director of BT pay-phones. I attended that meeting precisely because of my concerns and because people had written to me about theirs. It comes as little surprise to any of us that, in an age when the popularity and use of mobile phones is ubiquitous among people of all ages, the revenue produced by pay-phones is  reduced. Likewise, it is understandable that BT, as a company with profit margins to keep, will try to make changes in those areas of business that perform less efficiently. Some £1,500 per phone box is a substantial amount. Perhaps we should look at why BT has to subsidise the phone boxes as that might be another issue. However, there are concerns about public safety and communication. On the point that Bruce Crawford raised about community councils and people being made aware of the situation, I say to him that the matter is not that simple; many areas in the Highlands do not have a community council. My worry is that such areas will not be part of the consultation process. My other worry, which was raised at the meeting, is that the objection response rate in Scotland is 26 per cent. That is not high, given the huge change that the proposed closures will impose.

I am sure that BT is well aware of how to implement its ideas and that is important for it. Pay-phones serve an emergency need for tourists whose cars have broken down, for example, but that is also why BT has to act sensitively when working with local communities. Bruce Crawford did not raise certain points that were made at the meeting so I will raise them. BT needs to ensure that all phones are in working order because it cannot complain that phones are underused if they are not in proper working order. BT has to rely on members of the public to report those phones and many people do not bother. However, there are three other options to pursue and I hope that, rather than removing the telephone kiosks, we can use and advance those three options. I also hope that they will be available to community councils as part of the consultation process. One option is for kiosks to be used as tourist information points—I believe that that is being considered for a kiosk beside Loch Ness. That would cost around only £200 a year and I understand that local authorities are also looking at that option. There is also the option of modernising pay-phones to make them into multimedia terminals that would be accessible throughout many areas of the Highlands where broadband and internet access do not exist. The third option is to use the telephones to contact the emergency services. No cash would be used, but people would be able to telephone emergency numbers, dial 0800 numbers and to reverse the  charges. Rather than looking at the threats, we should look at the opportunities.

On behalf of the Conservative party, I congratulate the campaigners in Glasgow who fought so long and hard to retain services at the Queen mum's hospital on their great victory. Well done to them. I have no doubt that, if the motion were not being debated today, they might still be faced with that uncertainty. As the minister would not allow me to intervene during his speech, I remind him about the consultation document on services in Caithness. The minister concentrated on clinical safety. I remind him that affordability has very high priority among the criteria. Let him be in no doubt about that. The debate is about the centralisation of health services, but from our mail we could easily raise concerns about out-of-hours services, ambulance services, NHS 24, hospital-acquired infections, lack of dentists and cuts in chiropody—I could go on for almost all my six minutes. I will quote from two letters on health matters that I received this week from the Highlands. The first is from Nethy Bridge community council, which states that it "cannot accept the proposals put forward for out of hours care—the plan is ill conceived, inadequate, under-funded and creates a threat to the health and well being of the Highland community—with NHS Highland telling the public that additional funding for out of hours would mean a reduction in cancer care and acute services". The second is from Latheron, Lybster and Clyth community council, which feels "that the downgrading of services at Caithness General would be a retrograde step and because of its distance and winter road conditions could lead to deaths of expectant mothers or their babies". The Belford hospital in Fort William services a huge area, as well as thousands of tourists to the outdoor capital of Scotland each year. People  choose to live and work in the area on the basis that health services will be there when they need them. Over recent years, services at the Belford have been built up. People now face the threat and uncertainty of lesser services, as the Belford integrates with Oban hospital.

It is a disgrace that Professor Calder flew in and out of Wick. He should have had some experience of trying to manoeuvre across the Berridale braes on a rainy, wintry, icy night. Baroness Ray Michie has done an excellent job on the solutions group and I look forward to seeing its findings. The problem is that changes at Oban affect not only people in that area. Hospital services in Argyll and Clyde are also under threat. The difference between the situation that we face today and the one that led to the petitions that the Health and Community Care Committee considered on Stracathro, Stobhill and so on is that I have never known such clinical involvement. Fergus Ewing and I were present at a meeting in Fort William attended by more than 2,600 people, with hundreds turned away, where consultants, general practitioners, anaesthetists, medical staff, nurses and physios all said that local lives and services were in danger. It was not just the people saying that; it was also the medical staff. Jamie Stone mentioned Caithness. Professor Calder's report states that management from Inverness has led to "dysfunctional relationships between consultants", poor communications and lack of appraisal and medical audit. That is what happens when there is centralisation of medical services and distant management systems. When David McLetchie and I visited Caithness, everyone we met raised the issue of maternity services. The trade unions and management at Dounreay, the North Highland College, the Thurso Bowling Club, firemen, community councillors and local councillors were all up in arms about maternity services. As Councillor Bill Fernie said: "Nothing has united the Caithness community so much as three attempts in just over six years to remove the level of cover at Caithness General." The standing of the health board is the lowest it has ever been in Caithness. The problem is that NHS Highland is only carrying out the instructions of the Minister for  Health and Community Care and of the Liberals. The Liberals are equal partners in decision making at Cabinet level, so they cannot abrogate their responsibilities on this matter. Charles Kennedy recently criticised health services in Scotland. I say to him that the Liberals cannot be equal partners in Edinburgh but in opposition in London and the Highlands. Let us have some honesty from the Liberals. There are further concerns about transporting pregnant women. There is no point in having gold-plated standards in Inverness when women are giving birth in lay-bys down the A9, between Wick and Inverness. I refer also to the neurology service that the Highlands buy in from Grampian. After 30 years of being built up, the service, which has a nine-month waiting time for routine referrals, will be cut from eight days a month to two days a month. In Moray, the Spynie and Leanchoil hospitals are closing, but the long-awaited purpose-built hospital and health centre is still a distant dream for the local population. As far as the NHS in the Highlands is concerned, it is Lochaber no more, Sutherland no more and Raigmore no more. After the next election, I hope that it is Labour no more.

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister agree that affordable housing applies to house purchase as well as to house rental? What is being done to assist first-time buyers to purchase their first affordable home?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it has taken to ensure that all secondary school pupils have the opportunity to participate in rugby. (S2O-3161)

Rugby is one of the Scottish Institute of Sport's core sports, yet less than 30 per cent of our state schools participate in the annual schools cup. Does the minister agree that the promotion of rugby as part of the physical education curriculum could be seen as encouraging a form of social inclusion and that allowing more people to participate could, I hope, improve the success of our national team?

We thought that the minister was climbing.

Does the minister agree that the provision of affordable housing depends on the provision of affordable land? Some time ago, I asked the minister whether she would meet Andrew Bradford, who represents the lairds and landowners, to see how they could be involved in releasing land. Has she met him and, if so, what was the outcome of the meeting?

Earlier, I mentioned a point that citizens advice bureaux in the Highlands have raised with me, which is that because most of the new money for the debt arrangement scheme and money advisers will be awarded on the basis of deprivation, most of it will go to Glasgow. Does the minister agree that some of that money should be distributed to areas such as the north-east and the Highlands, which are not quite as high in the deprivation category?

As a volunteer for a CAB in my past life, I am delighted to speak in this debate secured by Bill Butler. Sustainable funding is a constant problem for CABx. Indeed, my colleague Annabel Goldie received a letter from East Dunbartonshire CAB saying that the negotiations for funding every three years place an unacceptable strain on the system. Like other CABx, it has expanded its team, which now includes a dedicated housing worker and an elderly services worker, with more new appointments planned. It is a fact that the increased specialist knowledge that is required for working in CABx means that they require more secure, paid staff. Over a sixth of volunteers left the service in 2002-03, so there is a need to ensure that training—from which I have benefited—and specialist training in particular continue so that specialist knowledge is not lost to the service. We also need to have more understanding of the word volunteer. There seems to be an assumption that volunteers do not cost the service money. However, not only are there costs for volunteers' travel, but desks, heating, lighting, office space, computers, office equipment and training are also needed, which are costly. Therefore, although there are no wage costs for volunteers, there are certainly considerable overhead costs and there is always a limit to service cuts and drives for efficiencies. I had hoped that the debt arrangement scheme would help to sustain many CABx and outreach services in Scotland. However, I am led to believe that councils are holding much of the resource for money advisers as they build their own services and that the money will be focused on areas of highest deprivation. The Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber CAB dealt with 19,456 new client issues with funding of £802,071, which works out at £41 per issue. I realise that that is a simplified calculation, but it illustrates the cost effectiveness of the service, which I doubt would be matched by local authority money advisers. I also contend that debt resources should be focused on areas of high deprivation, although debt is a problem across all Scotland, particularly among public sector workers—because someone is in a secure job, that does not mean that debt is not a serious problem for them.  I would like to thank the Princess Royal for her commitment to and support for CABx, as well as for her extensive understanding of the work that they do. Finally, there are unsung heroes in CAB offices across Scotland, but I would like to take this opportunity to mention in particular John McDermott and Steve Alderson of the Raigmore CAB for the professional, efficient and friendly advice that they have given and continue to give to people with whom I have had contact in the past year.

SNH staff are examining all the options. The decisions on whether to move to Inverness, become redundant or go elsewhere will not be made until the end of October, so the member's figures are a bit premature.

When it gathers new information and audits existing information, will the Executive also listen to families to find out how often help was sought by the suicide victim; whether such help was for drug, alcohol, mental health or self-harm problems; how often that help was not available; and how those circumstances contributed to their deaths?

I thank Duncan McNeil for securing the first members' business debate on the first and second day in this new Parliament building. In the first session of the Parliament, I spoke during a members' business debate on suicide, and I had my own members' business debate on men's health. We must continue to consider both those important issues. Janis Hughes mentioned the suicide rates in Scotland compared with those in England; I would mention the suicide rates in the Highlands, where the rate of female suicides is very similar to that in the rest of Scotland, but where the rate of male suicides is much higher. I agree with the objectives set out by the Executive at national and local level, especially the raising of awareness, early intervention, more effective care and support, the improvement and increasing of the provision of services, the removal of the stigma that men feel about seeking emotional support, the offering of effective and sympathetic support to family members and sensitive media reporting. Over the summer recess, I had several meetings with Dr Cameron Stark, a public health consultant in Highland NHS Board with special responsibility for addressing the high suicide rate. I also met many families who had lost a loved one to suicide. Most recently, I met John Burnside, who lost his son Richard—or Titchy, as he was known. I learned a lot from those families, and—although, as Janis Hughes said, every suicide case is unique—some common elements come through. I  listened to a mother who begged that her son be taken into prison because she knew that that was where he would get the help he needed. I have also listened to families who are still begging for help to save someone in their family from suicide. However, when people seek help for depression and mental health problems, they will often receive a costly prescription rather than someone to listen to them. When they seek help for drug and alcohol problems, the help is either not there when they need it or not sufficient in relation to the care and support that they need. Even when alcohol and drug problems start to be addressed, many of the underlying mental health problems have to be faced. At that point, people often say, "I had to face my demons." Help is desperately needed, and rarely there. People are not always treated with the respect and dignity—which were mentioned by the First Minister yesterday—that they deserve. In fact, it can be a humiliating and degrading experience for many. Over the recess, I am sorry to say that I saw the police acting with more compassion and sensitivity than some—although not all—health workers. I commend the NHS in much that it does, but I also commend the police. For many people, debt problems are a serious issue and they do not know where to turn for help. As Janis Hughes said, families are left with the burden of asking themselves whether they should have noticed the signs and done something. There are so many questions and it often takes months or years to get the answers. In social work, the constant turnover of staff and shortage of social workers mean that such support can take much longer to appear than would be expected. When people are taken into psychiatric hospitals, they sometimes find little to do all day and are left to their own devices to pass the day as they can. Hospitals should offer intensive therapy, care and support, not just bed and breakfast with the prescription pills thrown in. A patient who was admitted to Newcraigs hospital has compared that experience to her recent experience in Castle Craig hospital, where she was admitted to tackle her alcoholism. In Newcraigs hospital, there is nothing to do all day. In Castle Craig hospital, patients rise for breakfast at 7 and then undertake a full programme of therapy and events that goes on all day. Given the shortage of hospital beds, I ask the minister whether we can provide more intensive therapy when patients are admitted. I am grateful to the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, which met several families in Inverness last week—a meeting that they said was positive and productive and at which action points and timescales were agreed for the issues to be addressed. It is by listening to families and their  experiences that progress can be made. The suicide awareness group in Inverness is a leading catalyst for change, working with NHS Highland, the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, the Scottish Association for Mental Health and other organisations. The group has been inundated with inquiries not just for solace but for help to prevent suicides. The choose life strategy says that suicide is preventable, and the first step towards reducing the number of suicides is to raise awareness of the subject and to encourage people who feel suicidal to speak up and seek help. We should all remember how we may respond to that cry for help and think about how we can be part of increasing awareness and understanding of suicide and how we respond to constituents and families who come to our offices. In conclusion, as convener of the cross-party group on funerals and bereavement, I raise again the question of unresolved grief and whether attempted suicides in psychiatric hospitals should be audited. I commend John Burnside, who lost his son two weeks ago, for speaking out about the curse of alcohol. I hope that the matter will be addressed in forthcoming legislation.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to encourage corporate social responsibility in businesses. (S2O-3078)

I hoped that the Minister for Communities would respond to my question as I understand she has responsibility for the matter, but it is nice to see joined-up working. Will the Executive ensure that organisations that pay taxes and rates and contribute to our social fabric are given the recognition that they deserve for their often unsung contribution to our society?

As the diabetes framework gives priority to patients with diabetes for chiropody treatment, how will the minister ensure that elderly patients whose mobility and independence depend on chiropody care do not lose out as a result?

It is nice to hear Fergus Ewing being so modest about his abilities. I am sure that he will take all our good wishes to his wife, Margaret. We are delighted to hear that she is on the mend. I will mention a couple of proposed bills before I go on to talk about those in which I have an interest as party spokesman. On the issues that are raised by the proposed bill on smoking, the Parliament has to be careful because there seems to be an assumption that when the proposed bill is passed, people in Scotland will suddenly stop smoking. Yes, there will be more smoke-free premises, but it would be naive for any of us to believe that the legislation will cut down on smoking. I have just come back from Donegal where I spent a few days last weekend and where there is suddenly a plethora of beer gardens and sheltered buildings attached to pubs and other premises, which are catering for smokers as well as non-smokers.

My point is that we should not assume that the proposed bill on smoking will reduce smoking. That argument comes up elsewhere and I do not want to use the rest of my speech to consider greater access to anti-smoking measures; there are other ways in which it could be done. My second point is about the proposed Gaelic language bill. Having come back from Rannafast in Donegal, which is at the centre of the Irish Gaeltacht, I hope that members on the committee that will consider the bill will work with our Irish colleagues and consider the whole of Gaelic culture, not just the language. There is much more to Gaelic culture than just the language. I move on to issues for which I am the spokesman. First, on the charities bill, Conservative members will certainly support all moves to restore confidence in charities and to encourage giving through donations and volunteering. I hope that Parliament will have a balanced debate about private schools and that we will consider the contribution that they make to our society. During the recess, I visited Gordonstoun School and discovered quite a bit about it that I had not been aware of, such as the fact that it was founded by a Jew who was fleeing persecution from Nazi Germany between the two world wars. The school is also based on community principles; pupils are involved in the local fire service, mountain rescue team and coastguard and are called out regularly to help with those services. That is something that could be more widely learned in Scotland.  We also have to ask why the Inland Revenue has 18,000 charities in its database, yet the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has 28,000. Ten thousand charities not being registered with the Inland Revenue has to be a matter for concern. We are not looking for more regulation or over-regulation; we want only that those that are bona fide charities abide by the rules. We must also have a balanced debate that defines the characteristic of independence in charities, particularly when we consider the example of Scottish Natural Heritage, a supposedly independent charity that required two ministerial directives to move it to Inverness. It is going to be difficult for charities to be free from external control or third-party direction when they are under ministerial direction. I look forward to a balanced debate on that issue. On the proposed housing bill, if we are to do things better in Parliament, we have to ensure that we consult properly and adequately so that we include all the issues in the appropriate bill. The national registration scheme for private landlords did not fulfil that criterion. A consultation on that issue was not undertaken prior to legislation. A national registration scheme for private landlords should not have been in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, particularly when we are going to be considering a housing bill in this session. When Margaret Mitchell's internet grooming amendment to that bill came to the Communities Committee, it was not accepted by members, mainly because no pre-legislative consultation on it had been undertaken. I supported Margaret Mitchell's amendment, but I understood and acknowledged other committee members' point that no consultation had happened. Having rejected proposals on internet grooming as part of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, we should also have rejected the registration scheme for landlords, because the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill was not the appropriate bill for such a scheme.

I am in my final minute. We are consulting on a housing bill and conducting post-legislative consultation on a national registration scheme for private landlords, which forms part of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. Housing is not the only answer. Where people have a care need that is assessed, the absence of that care leaves many people isolated. For people with mental health and alcohol problems, the isolation of their own home may be the worst, rather than the best, option.

On this first day in the new Parliament building, I acknowledge the loss of Rab McNeil from our press gallery. Although that will be a loss, I welcome his replacement.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Scott Barrie agree that the independent sector could pay higher wages if it received the same amount of funding as local authority care homes receive?

I thought that Brian Adam was enjoying making his speech so much that he was not going to stop. I was expecting to be sitting in my chair for a fair while. He was probably asked to open for the SNP because he is not in the running for the leadership and is spare for the day. I certainly welcome the review of 21 st century social work. I also respect and commend the minister for his tone; after all, the tone of previous debates on this subject has been indicative of many of the problems that we have faced. It is easy to say that those problems should have been addressed earlier. However, the thoroughness of the investigations into the Caleb Ness case and the Borders case has undoubtedly given us more information to consider. We also need to listen to the problems that social workers are facing. Although I agree with all the elements of the expert group's remit, I would like to suggest a few more that the minister might not wish to include within that remit but which I hope will be addressed elsewhere. The Conservative party does not call for more resources. However, we are calling for lines of accountability and transparency in social work spending. Members will know that, in many cases that have been raised with us, social work departments have claimed that they do not have enough money while the Executive claims otherwise. Whom do we believe? We need openness and honesty in this matter. The expert group's remit should also include an examination of the question whether services are always best delivered through social work departments. We need some clear-headed thinking on this issue, which I will return to later. Social work is often talked about as if it stands alone and operates in a vacuum. We hear all too often of headline cases in which the finger of criticism points mainly at social work departments. The two investigations that I mentioned earlier highlighted poor interagency working, poor communications, assumptions about what other agencies were aware of and marked failures to respond appropriately at the appropriate time. Unless all organisations get better at working  together, people who need help and support will continue to fall through the net. A strong and effective link with social work will strengthen support for the criminal justice system, social care, children and young people in need and other vulnerable groups. I welcome the fast-track qualification for social workers, particularly for people in the Highlands who have families. After all, it would be difficult for them to attend university in Aberdeen or the central belt. There is no doubt that such an approach will give many experienced staff the necessary qualification to practise and so boost social work staffing levels. I should also point out that we focus too much on recruiting new social workers. We must focus equally on retaining qualified and experienced staff, who need to feel valued and supported in their jobs. We must examine the relationship between the Parliament and local councils. Too often, we in this Parliament pass bills whose provisions require more social work staff to implement them. As a result, we pile more responsibility on to already overstretched departments. I hope that the expert group will have a better dialogue with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and trainers to ensure that work-force planning is improved and that social workers in post are given necessary support and are made to feel valued for their work. On Monday, I spoke to an elderly gentleman who has been fighting for a long time—I cannot remember how long—to secure free nursing care for his wife, who is in a care home. As he pays the full fees, his wife was placed immediately. He said to me, "Your Parliament promised free personal and nursing care. Why am I having to fight so hard with Highland Council to get it?" I am not pointing the finger at the Executive or the councils, but someone is missing something. We need more transparency and accountability. In this case, the problem lies with Highland Council social work department but, for the population as a whole, the blame lies with the Parliament. After all, we pass the legislation. Brian Adam mentioned the chief inspector of social work's recent report, which highlighted an increase in demand for social inquiry reports, probation orders and community service orders. Those demands are being placed on social work staff and will have to be met either by increasing the number of staff or by introducing more efficient working practices. The blame culture has to end. I have no doubt that, given the extent of its remit, the expert group will help to achieve that aim. Because Highland Council has run out of money, many people in the Highlands have had to wait until the new financial year to receive funding for residential care. Either the Scottish Executive  is not funding community care adequately or councils are using the resources for other budgets. Whatever the problem, elderly people should not have to languish in hospital beds when they should be in care homes or given home care. Moreover, that care should be provided in accordance with the agreed care plan that was introduced by legislation that we passed. Of all the glossy brochures that the Executive has produced, my favourite is perhaps "The same as you? A review of services for people with learning disabilities". I am pleased to say that almost all the 29 recommendations have mostly been met. However, given the varying and complex needs of those in care and the difficulty of finding health care staff, the closure of long-stay hospitals, which is scheduled for the end of next year, represents a huge challenge for social work departments. The Executive and COSLA must have an open and honest discussion about this matter. There needs to be better dialogue, because I know that there are huge difficulties in the Highlands and I am sure that there will be difficulties elsewhere in Scotland. In its recent work-force report, Community Care Providers Scotland found that 92 per cent of providers experienced serious difficulties in recruiting staff and that almost half the providers have no care home or day care managers who are qualified to the standard required by the Scottish Social Services Council—which again was set up by legislation that we passed. Moreover, CCPS found that there was no identified means of securing the necessary resources to achieve that standard. The Social Care Employers Consortium now recommends that the Commission for Social Care Inspection should be given the power to inspect the funding relationships between local authorities and the voluntary sector providers to ensure that those providers are adequately resourced to meet the new care standards. Furthermore, Audit Scotland has promised to revisit this issue once the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 has bedded in. As a result, I am not sure that the expert group should examine financial spending, accountability and so on, although I hope that someone will look into those matters. Home care charges in the Highlands have risen from £5.45 an hour to £10.50 an hour and there is no doubt that the financial burden is falling on those who self-fund their care. Although 1,785 people remain in blocked beds waiting for social work funding, those who can pay the full costs of care are placed instantly. The Executive has created a two-tier system in which the people who have substantial savings receive the care that they need when they need it and the others simply have to wait to be allocated social work funding.  The Parliament should not find it acceptable that councils pay considerably higher sums to fund care in their own homes while the Church of Scotland, the voluntary sector and the independent sector have to meet the same quality standards set by the care commission with substantially less funding. Last week, when MSPs met children's panel members, they were told about the desperate need in Scotland for detoxification and rehabilitation facilities for children under 16. If children's panel referrals for services cannot be met, surely social work departments and COSLA need to work with the Scottish Executive to establish the need for such a service and then to consider whether that need should be addressed. When the Parliament was established, prisoners were being discharged into the community with no throughcare or support for their drug or alcohol problems. The help and support that they got in prison was often wasted when they were released and they were lost to the services. Now, Cranstoun Drug Services provides care and support within prison that continues seamlessly in the community on the prisoner's release. Prisoners build up tried and trusted relationships in the community while they are incarcerated. One of the great indications that a privatised public service is working is that it is not headline news every day—unlike a certain other privatised prison service. Is it not time to consider other aspects of social care that could be privatised to give better value for the public purse, provide better-quality health care and support, and bring social justice and equality of access to all those in need when they need it? I hope that the minister will bring a bit of blue-sky thinking into the expert group.

If a property was repossessed because, under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, the landlord received no rent and therefore could not pay the mortgage, what would happen to the sitting tenants? Would the lender have to register as the landlord?

I, too, associate my party with the thanks that have been expressed to the clerks and to all those who responded to the consultation. Having a day out with Stewart Stevenson in Lossiemouth was one of the great pleasures of participating in pre-legislative consultation. I will write about that in my memoirs. Bill Aitken told me today that antisocial behaviour in Glasgow is not like that anywhere else in Scotland. There are different stories to tell in Dumfries, Inverness or wherever, and what Stewart Stevenson and I heard was interesting. The first group that we met were elderly people; we met community councils at the end of the day and school pupils in between. It was interesting that people across all age ranges said much the same thing. Johann Lamont was an extremely fair and reasonable convener of the Communities Committee, even when my colleague Bill Aitken came along with his multitude of amendments. She was very good. I have two points to make. First, as a young Parliament, we should learn from our experiences. I am not going to repeat everything that I said earlier about the national registration scheme for private landlords, but putting such a scheme in this bill is not appropriate. One amendment is not the same as 25 new amendments that add up to, I think, eight pages in the bill. We are not simply talking about amending what was in the bill as introduced, but about introducing a huge chunk of new legislation at stage 2 and, whatever people say, those measures were not consulted on—I will not mention all the different bodies that we mentioned earlier. I hope that the Procedures Committee will consider that issue. However, the bill is done and dusted now and we must make the best of things. I will certainly look forward to the post-legislative scrutiny in that respect. Secondly, I would like clarification from the minister either today or in writing in the future about Paul Martin's amendments 158 and 159. After everyone had voted on the amendments, my colleague John Scott asked me how the provisions would apply to farming. Of course, that shows the difficulty of considering substantial amendments at stage 3. John Scott hopes that law-abiding farmers will not be prevented from going about their business—I sincerely hope that that will not happen, as I do not think that they go around  causing alarm or distress.

There are persistent complainers as well as persistent offenders and we would like clarification from ministers—I would appreciate written clarification—on John Scott's point.

I, too, commend Elaine Smith for the work that she has done. As she has used at least half my speech, I will just say a few words. I find the issue difficult, because I do not believe that we can achieve perfection—it is not possible. We have to realise that there will always be some kind of problem. Recently in Inverness, someone told me that he was threatened with being done for breach of the peace after he had had an epilepsy seizure. Once that was explained, things were all right. Attempting to distinguish between intended behaviour and unintended behaviour on the basis of disability undoubtedly provides a challenge. However, Elaine Smith's amendments improve the definition of antisocial behaviour that is used in the bill and go some way towards forming a more objective definition. We will support the amendments.

I ask Paul Martin to clarify some points. First, will people who use quad bikes on their own land be exempt from the proposed provisions? I know that we discussed that issue at stage 2. Secondly, would not it be more appropriate to place the proposed provisions in road traffic legislation? Thirdly, are not quad bikes already covered by road traffic legislation?

I remind Cathie Craigie that one of the paragraphs in the committee's stage 1 report said that, because of the Scottish Executive's commitment to introduce a private housing bill, the committee accepted that it was inappropriate to include the registration scheme in the bill. I also remind her and others that the Conservatives are not necessarily opposed to a national registration scheme, but we want it done properly, in the proper bill, with the proper consultation. We are supported in that stance by the Council of Mortgage Lenders in Scotland, the Scottish Association of Landlords, the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland, COSLA and the Scottish Council for Single Homeless, not on the basis that the scheme is bad, but on the basis that there has been inadequate consultation and that the scheme is in the wrong bill. That could be a point for the Procedures Committee to consider. If no housing bill were planned for the next 10 years, perhaps we could consider introducing the scheme through this bill, but I understand that a housing bill is planned for early next year. I also remind Cathie Craigie that the consultation document talked about "Giving local authorities the power to require all privately let property in a defined area to be registered". That power was included in the draft bill, which we supported, but the Executive did not consult on a nationwide registration scheme for private landlords; let us get it right.

I will move the amendment in Bill Aitken's name and raise some points that I raised at stage 2. We supported the draft bill, which highlighted landlord registration for designated areas. There are two basic principles involved in this issue. First, there was no pre-legislative consultation on the 25 extensive and complex amendments that were lodged by Cathie Craigie at stage 2. The second principle relates to the question of whether the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill is the correct place in which to deal with the national registration scheme for private landlords. I refer to the Communities Committee's stage 1 report which says: "The Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland and the Scottish Association of Landlords both agreed that full registration of private landlords would be best left to a private sector housing bill, in order to avoid tarnishing what is seen as a very positive move with the negative connotations of antisocial behaviour." The report also noted: "The Committee notes the Scottish Executive's commitment to introduce a private housing bill which will provide for the physical standard of a property and for all aspects of the landlord-tenant relationship and therefore accepts that it is inappropriate to include such provision in this particular Bill." I appreciate that the committee then said, "However," did a U-turn and came up with another paragraph that agreed to include such a provision in the bill, but the basic tenor of the committee's report is that there was no consultation on the registration of private landlords and that this bill is not the right one for such provisions. The Executive has been commended by all parties and organisations throughout Scotland for its wide-ranging consultation on the bill, but Cathie Craigie's amendments at stage 2 were substantial and complex. I will quote from a briefing of the Council of Mortgage Lenders, which raised "the principle of a voluntary accreditation scheme which could make a useful contribution towards raising standards in the PRS". That idea might not be appropriate, but the whole issue requires further debate and a more wide-ranging consultation with all the relevant people, to  examine the wider impact on the private rented sector. Not only did the private sector not have the information to feed in to us, members of the committee did not have that information.

I am very short of time. Page 15 of the Scottish Parliament information centre's briefing quotes the housing improvement task force's recommendation: "After considering all options, HITF concluded that local authorities should promote the development of local voluntary accreditation schemes."

In the minute that I have left, I will say that my points were supported by COSLA, whose members said that they did not "think that it is appropriate to have an amendment of this magnitude at this stage of the Anti-Social Behaviour Bill" and they recommended that the issue be taken care of in a private sector housing bill. In the same briefing to the committee, COSLA said that "We would strongly urge members of the committee to reject the amendments." The amendments were also seen by the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland as "a step too far". I ask the minister a question from the Scottish Council for Single Homeless; it relates to part 8 of the bill and the registration scheme. "Given the difficulties already experienced in a number of local authority areas in tracking down Houses in Multiple Occupation for licensing, how does the Minister envisage the processes to be used in tracking down private landlords who are unwilling to register?" I move amendment 20.

The Conservatives have problems both with the amendments in the group and with the whole ethos of section 56A. Basically, the provisions reward a bad tenant; in fact, it could be said that, if someone is allowed to live rent free, the provisions would create an inbuilt incentive for bad behaviour. The full obligations of the antisocial behaviour notice are placed on the landlord and yet the focus and the priority of action should be on the tenant. Surely a basic principle in the legislative process is that sanctions should be brought against the miscreant. The Executive amendments in the group, however, would produce the bizarre situation in which those who are involved in antisocial behaviour are rewarded and the landlord is punished.

As I understand it, the tenant will not pay rent, which means that he would be living rent free. I listened to what the minister had to say about the provisions that are being made for back-rent to be payable and for benefits to be backdated. I understand that there will be further consultation on the provisions—that has to be welcomed—and the Parliament will scrutinise the regulations that will come before it. The area is one that requires further discussion, and I welcome the discussions that will take place in the fullness of time.

I welcome the fact that any such orders laid before the Parliament will be subject to the affirmative procedure, but I seek further clarification from the minister. It is difficult to make a judgment just on the basis of the minister's remarks, but I am concerned about her comment that antisocial behaviour notices are for houses under continuing occupation rather than for short-term lets. As a member for the Highlands and Islands, I am concerned that, even with the best will in the world, those who let holiday homes cannot always guarantee the behaviour of those who rent from them, particularly given that many holiday cottages are let through the internet. I am not fully aware of exactly what the minister is planning, but she said that she might introduce an order to regulate the landlord's role in the situation. However, I think that it would be wrong to punish the landlord. For example, when someone who books a week in a holiday cottage causes havoc in the local community, should that issue not be dealt with by the police, given that it is a short-term problem? We need to consider the fact that we are talking about houses that are in short-term occupation and houses that are in continuing occupation.  Another point is that, if the landlord is punished, other tourists who have booked the holiday cottage could end up losing out on the opportunity of a holiday because of the bad behaviour of a few. We could use the current example of football fans who have caused havoc in hotels in Portugal. No one suggests that we should close down the hotels or punish them for having badly behaved guests. I welcome the fact that the orders would be subject to the affirmative procedure, but we need more clarification in relation to short-term lets or continuing occupancy of holiday homes.

We often find at stage 3 that there are strange alliances throughout the chamber. I am pleased to  say that the Scottish Conservatives will support Elaine Smith against the Scottish Executive. As Stewart Stevenson said, there were wide-ranging discussions and arguments at stage 2. We still have problems with amendment 49, despite the case that the minister made. It cannot be right that a law-abiding family with one child who engages in antisocial behaviour should have their housing rights challenged on the basis of that child's behaviour. Surely the ethos of the bill is to address and correct the child's behaviour rather than to punish the family by changing the security of their tenancy and threatening them with eviction, thereby disrupting the family, who might be making every effort to correct the child's behaviour.

I am sure that the member will have a chance to speak later. Of all the briefings that we were sent for stage 3, I was probably most moved by the one from Barnardo's, which expressed that organisation's disappointment that the minister is seeking to overturn the amendment that was moved successfully by Elaine Smith at stage 2. The briefing also confirms that it needs to be acknowledged that a person under the age of 16 has no possibility of securing tenancy rights of their own. It says: "This amendment by the Minister could lead to young people being encouraged to move away from their families in order to protect their parents, or carers' tenancies." I hope that, before they press their voting buttons, every MSP will consider that point.

I, too, would like to congratulate Kenny MacAskill. It was nice to hear him speaking in such measured tones; his speeches are normally much more rumbustious. I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. It is right that the Parliament should mark international refugee week in this way. I associate the Scottish Conservative party with the positive remarks that have been made about the Scottish Refugee Council. I say to Jamie Stone that my mother came from Donegal. Many people who have ended up in the Parliament have parents who came to this country from elsewhere. I am very proud of my mother. However, life was not always easy for her. She was often made to feel that she was inferior, having come over on the Derry boat. She had many stories to tell.  International refugee week is a celebration of people who have much in their lives that makes it difficult to celebrate at all. For refugees who have fled persecution and conflict in their own lands, the sanctuary of our country should be welcoming, tolerant and compassionate. Refugees should feel able to celebrate their safety. We have to strive to foster an environment in which the willingness of many refugees to contribute to our society—while working to support themselves and their families—is encouraged and welcomed. Johann Lamont made that point. In the Highlands, as in the rest of Scotland, there is a distinct skills deficit in occupational areas such as medicine and teaching, which are vital to the whole community. The shortage of doctors and other specialised medical staff is leading to threats to downgrade hospital services. As other members have said, many asylum seekers who come to Scotland possess the vital skills and education that would fill the gap in our services, so it would make sense for them to be allowed to work in this country while they seek refuge. That would benefit our communities and aid our economy.

I will give way in a second. At the Conservative conference in Dundee, we had a fringe meeting that was set up by the Scottish Refugee Council. I was delighted to meet a chap called Dr Omar Hassan from Iraq, who desperately wants to contribute to society and to maintain his skills and training. He does not want to live on benefits; he is a qualified obstetrician. Do we need obstetricians in Caithness? At this point, I will give way to Jamie Stone.

I knew that Jamie Stone's intervention was timely. The interesting thing is that I asked Dr Hassan whether he would like the job in Caithness, if it was going, and he said that he would go anywhere in Scotland.

I wish I could. As Johann Lamont said, more has to be done to allow refugees to work, for the sake of their respect and dignity and to allow them to keep their skills and training up to date. Working would give them pride in being able to look after their family and would help to alleviate the fear of going back  to their country. I realise that tackling that issue is outwith the Parliament's remit, but I ask the Executive to work with our colleagues in the Westminster Government to examine whether people could use their skills while they wait for their work permit. I will give some of the figures on the skills of refugees in Scotland, most of which Kenny MacAskill covered. More than 10 per cent of respondents to the Scottish Refugee Council's survey had medical skills, three quarters of them spoke more than one language and more than 30 per cent of them possessed qualifications in areas in which Scotland has a shortage of qualified workers. I do not know whether Rob Gibson is speaking in the debate, but I have started to read his interesting book, "Plaids and Bandanas", which is about the Scottish drovers who went to various parts of the world. The Scots who went to all corners of the globe are very good for tourism, because many of their descendants come back to try to trace their ancestors and so on. That is a huge part of Scottish tourism. Such visitors are very welcome.

Highland Council recently doubled its rate of recycling and composting from 2 per cent to 4 per cent, but it still has the lowest recycling levels in Scotland. In a meeting with MSPs on Monday, the council said that it needs a substantial share of the £230 million to achieve its target. Is the minister in talks with Highland Council and is he sympathetic to the request for a large share of the £230 million?

As a resident of the capital city of the Highlands, I am delighted that we are having this debate. I agree with the point that most ministers tend to raise, which is that we need to build confidence and self-esteem. I am pleased that that idea cuts across the Executive's departments. It is my belief that it is wrong to bar MSPs from the Highlands and Islands convention. I say that with due respect to all my colleagues from the Highlands and Islands who are in the chamber today. All of us—Liberal Democrat, Labour, SNP and Conservative—have proved that we often put the interests of the Highlands and Islands ahead of our party politics. We are all mature and professional in our approach. I hope that that decision will be reconsidered.

It provides a forum for debate, but it does not allow us to meet all the Highland organisations in one room. That has been acknowledged by Mr Morrison's party and others. There is good news for the Highlands. The reverse of its population decline and the investment in its communication and transport infrastructure started in the 1990s under the Tory Government. We are now reaping the benefits of economic investment and the opportunities that  were set in place by that Government. As our Invernessian enterprise spokesman, Murdo Fraser, said, it was Michael Forsyth who gave the green light to the UHI's foundation. I am pleased to commend the Scottish Executive when it acts in the best interests of the economy of the Highlands and Islands, but I ask that the Executive acknowledge the excellent economic management of the previous Government. We should remember that the crofters' buyout in Assynt and the partnership working at Strathmashie forest in Laggan were both Michael Forsyth's initiatives. We should remember that Michael Forsyth started the crofting buyouts in the Highlands. We must be careful when we say to people in towns and villages throughout the Highlands and Islands that unemployment is low. They are quite likely to respond that many of the working members of the population are working away from home. That was evident when the Barmac yard—

I acknowledge Jimmy Gray's contribution to the Barmac yard's search for contracts that would require up to 4,000 people. However, there were not 4,000 suitable unemployed men locally because most were working abroad on short-term contracts. We recognise the figures, but we should do as Jim Mather said and look behind the figures as well.

HIE was certainly not reluctant in doing what Michael Forsyth told it to do, and I commend Michael Forsyth, who was Secretary of State for Scotland at the time, for taking no nonsense and moving that initiative forward. The Executive should not be coy about declaring the social and economic criteria for job dispersal. If the Executive is to be a good economic manager, it is fair for us all to know what the social and economic criteria for dispersal are. It took two ministerial directives for the SNH plan to happen, and the trade unions talk of seriously distressed staff. Of the 200 jobs to be dispersed—

May I finish, please? Of the 200 jobs that are to be dispersed to the Highlands, I understand that less than 30 per cent of the staff  are likely to move. Of 270 jobs, fewer than 70 staff are coming to Inverness.

May I please finish my point? I will call George Lyon when it is his time, and I ask him to be patient. He should not meddle with a woman when she is in the middle of a rant.

Yes, especially not me. As I said, fewer than 70 staff are coming to the Highlands. I welcome that, because it means 200 extra jobs in Inverness. If the negotiations had been conducted professionally and amicably, however, and had some sensitivity been shown to the staff and their families, I do not think that we would be facing much of the current bad publicity around the jobs dispersal.

If we knew the social and economic criteria that made Inverness the top priority for SNH, we would understand why Wick, Elgin, Fort William, Stornoway or Kirkwall were not made the top priority instead. All that I ask is for the founding principles of the Parliament—openness, transparency and honesty—to be followed. May I take George Lyon's intervention now, Presiding Officer?

I will make a couple more points to finish off. House prices in the Highlands are extortionate. Much of the reason for that is not the booming economy; rather, it is to do with people buying houses to let. There is not an incentive to save or to invest in the stock market; there is hardly an incentive for people to put their money into pension funds, given the way in which the Chancellor of the Exchequer has managed them. The best advice that people are being given is to buy to let. In the street where I live in Inverness, there are four houses up for rent. I commend the UHI for its latest degree—a BA in health studies—which people can access by e-learning and distance learning, wherever they are in the Highlands or the rest of Scotland. That is innovation at its best. I commend the UHI for leading in the provision of training and education opportunities.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I acknowledge much of what the minister says about the Highlands and Islands, but given the booming economy, can he outline the social and economic criteria that were used in the dispersal of Scottish Natural Heritage jobs to Inverness?

Will the minister confirm whether everything is being done to encourage online and distance learning, especially for specialist subjects throughout schools in the Highlands, where the number of pupils in each school might not always justify a teacher? Such developments would not only increase access, but provide a wider range of subjects.

The other designated place, run by the Church of Scotland, is in Inverness. People are often taken there from accident and emergency wards, and by the police, to be given advice and support. Given the minister's commitment to services, will she visit the Church of Scotland's designated place at Beechwood house in Inverness, with a view to  rolling out that excellent service throughout the rest of Scotland?

Will the member give way?

I would like to ask ministers to acknowledge the problems in the NHS and, for once, to put some honesty and humility before their own pride and arrogance. If that was the starting point, we might just be able to make some progress. During the passage of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002, the Conservatives supported the principles of equity, fairness and choice. On the basis that a patient with cancer or heart disease receives free NHS care and treatment, a frail, elderly person should also receive the care necessary to their quality of life. In fact, it is the Scottish Executive that has now created a two-tier system, in which those who can afford fully to fund their care can enter a care home immediately, whether from hospital or from their own home, whereas those who are waiting for funding from the council enter the statistics of delayed discharge and bedblocking. Those statistics are still up 20 per cent from 1999, with more than 2,000 people in hospital waiting for placement, mainly in care homes. Despite several millions being allocated for that purpose, councils still say that they do not have enough money. That is confirmed week after week by letters from Highland Council to people in the Highlands, who are told to wait for the next year's financial package to come through. Surely it is also unfair to pay more for people who reside in council-run homes than for people who reside in homes run by the private and  voluntary sector. The Church of Scotland has had to raid its social fund to subsidise homes, and the excellent Free Presbyterian Church home in Inverness is currently struggling to keep pace with the additional financial pressures. The financial memorandum for the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill stated that the costs of registration and inspection would be £40 per bed for care homes, but the cost is already £120 per bed and rising. That, alongside the considerable investment needed to keep up with the new regulations, which we all support, is putting enormous financial pressure on the private and voluntary care sector. Council homes are therefore financially safe and secure for the future, while the private and voluntary sectors—particularly the churches—continue to face more closures of day centres and homes. Again we see an example of a plan by the Executive to reduce choice and turn the care home sector into a public monopoly. We can do much to stop elderly people ending up in hospitals and care homes after a fall, for example, when people lose their self-confidence and independence. We should put greater emphasis on preventive and more positive care for the elderly. When in Government, Conservatives ministers in the Scottish Office introduced a regulation that stated that every person over the age of 75 should be given an annual health check. I give credit to Susannah Stone, Jamie Stone's mother and a Tory stalwart, for her continued and consistent campaigning on that issue.

If all elderly patients had that annual health MOT, which was introduced by our own Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, problems could be assessed and diagnosed at an early stage to prevent further deterioration. Unfortunately, as ministers well know, that guideline is largely ignored. I could not talk about care of the elderly without mentioning quality foot care. A third of chiropody patients have been removed from NHS care in the Highlands, and others have had their appointments cut. Investment in foot care brings enhanced mobility and independence, and ensures that elderly people can exercise through walking and are not isolated in their own homes. By striking chiropody patients off NHS lists, choice is reduced and patients are forced to go private, whether they are able to pay or not.

I shall take Mike Rumbles's intervention when I have finished this point. For many, the choice will be no foot care, which  will lead to higher long-term costs for the NHS and a lower quality of life for elderly people. Why has that come about? The ministers with responsibility for health constantly say that it is for local health boards to make those decisions, but when they brought forward the diabetes framework and made diabetic patients the priority for chiropody and podiatry they did not increase funding for chiropody services—the diabetic patients have effectively pushed the elderly patients off the list.

I apologise to Mike Rumbles. I cannot take his intervention as I am in the last minute of my speech, but I know that he is very supportive of good chiropody care. My final point is that entitlement to free dental treatment means nothing in the Highlands, where one cannot find an NHS dentist. Elderly patients in the Highlands have to pay the full cost of dental care. As David McLetchie stated in his opening speech, principles of fairness and equality are becoming a thing of the past. I support the motion.

Nora Radcliffe mentions the increased use of PAMs. What does she have to say about Grampian NHS Board reducing the number of chiropody appointments for elderly people and striking many elderly people off the list? That is hardly increased access to health services.

Where is the increase going?

Will the member give way?

About a year ago, an Audit Scotland report confirmed that the lowest rates of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus are to be found in hospitals where the cleaning is done by private firms and that the highest rates are to be found in hospitals that have in-house cleaning firms.

Several good speeches and good points have been made today. I was especially struck by the point that Paul Martin made about poverty. The consultation document refers to a 140 per cent increase in divorces and a tripling in the number of single parents since 1971. I was left alone to bring up my children when they were aged one and two and something that upset me more than anything else was the phrase "children from broken homes". My children were never near the children's hearings system and I hope that the increase in the number of marriages that break up will not be seen as creating instable or insecure households for many children. Annabel Goldie summed up the situation well by highlighting public confidence in the children's hearings system; the need to bring to children an understanding of their actions and of the implications and effects that their actions have on others; and the system's under-resourcing.  Rosemary Byrne, along with Margaret Ewing and many others, highlighted the role of the education system. That point is welcome. Kenneth Macintosh talked about the emphasis on keeping a child with their natural parents. It is time that we revisited that, especially as many couples are desperate to adopt and to offer a stable and secure home. Michael Matheson mentioned the need to involve local government, but we also need to involve the police fully, especially as 82 per cent of referrals to the children's hearings system come from the police. The police seem to see the same serious and persistent offenders time and again. I was struck by Donald Gorrie's point about self-esteem. The First Minister has often mentioned confidence in our country, but we should have confidence in our children. That point needs further examination. On a separate and perhaps not unrelated issue, there have been 29 suicides in the Highlands this year, 27 of which have been young men. I appreciate the fact that all cases are unique, but I think that we need to do more to understand if young men feel undervalued. We may also ask why girls now consistently outperform boys in schools and universities.

There are, undoubtedly, many issues. We all need to understand more about the geographic location and to address that frightening figure. Although the figures for care and protection for boys and girls are fairly equal, boys are responsible for more than 80 per cent of offences. We need constantly to examine that point. Johann Lamont made an excellent speech with a passion and understanding that we have come to expect from her on the issue. Robert Brown, the prophet of doom and gloom, spoke in his normal carping, critical and petulant manner. He need not have prophesied that, late or soon, we would all be deep drown'd in gloom, as he made sure of that in the first three minutes of his speech. If he had any constructive points to make about the consultation process, I certainly missed them. When he told us what the Liberal Democrats would and would not support, I switched off entirely, knowing how meaningless those words were. One of the main issues has been the problems relating to social work, many of which are mentioned in the Audit Scotland report.  Unfortunately, the social work problems do not relate simply to children. We have all discussed the problems encroaching on care of the elderly; mental health; drug misuse, alcohol abuse and other problems; and the role of grandparents, who often become the carers, providing security, shelter, support and love in a desperately overstretched system. We need to look at the benefits system to examine the allowances that are given for parental care of children, which could be paid to the grandparents in some circumstances. Many members mentioned the excellent work and commitment of children's panel members. Given the issues of recruitment and retention, the question arises whether we should revisit the upper age limit of 60 for panel members. Although Jamie Stone is approaching 50, there are many who can do very good jobs at 60 and into their 70s. Many people who are freshly retired and who have a lifetime of experience could make an excellent contribution, as they have the time to do it that they may not have had during their working lives. Paul Martin mentioned a new approach to local authorities; I, too, mentioned that in my intervention on Peter Peacock. It is not enough just to put on paper the fact that local authorities have a legal duty to implement a recommendation of the children's hearings system. The Parliament cannot always say, "It's got nothing to do with us. It's the responsibility of local government. Councils are democratically elected." It has got something to do with us. The minister has to say who is holding local authorities to account. If a child goes to Highland Council and it refuses to give him education, we all know that that is wrong. However, we are ignoring the fact that local government is not fulfilling its statutory responsibility and is failing our children. There may be good reasons for that, but we have to understand those reasons and hold local authorities to account. As Paul Martin said, we have to find a new approach.

There are certainly provisions in the bill, but we must ensure that they are implemented. That is the main point and it is something that Jackie Baillie also mentioned.  Seventy per cent of persistent offenders have been referred previously to the children's hearings system on non-offence grounds. If the first referral were to be given greater attention, priority and resources, that might reduce offending. Many members have made points about the children's hearings system and the criminal justice system. It is worth pointing out that a case in the children's hearings system costs £945, whereas a case in the criminal justice system costs up to £12,400. I appreciate that we are not comparing like with like, but we must ask whether we expect the children's hearings system to handle cases on the cheap. I am sure that a key indicator of the success of today's debate will be the minister's acknowledgement in his summing up of the new points that he has picked up in his consultation throughout the day.

Does Mary Mulligan share my concern about the average time that is taken from the incident to the final hearing? I understand that, in cases in which an offence has been committed, the time is 15 weeks and that, in cases not involving an offence, the time is 18 weeks. We can hardly blame the children's hearings system when panel members do not see the offender or young person until such long periods have elapsed, during which time the young person can reoffend persistently.

I come back to an issue that concerns me across the board in relation to children's hearings, mental health and various other matters. What sanctions are in place or what action is the minister willing to take when a local authority does not implement or follow through a plan that is agreed by a children's hearing?

To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of Lord Bonomy's recent judgment, what action is being taken to address any issues of inadequate regimes, overcrowding and slopping out for prisoners who are suffering from a mental health condition. (S2O-2276)

Is the minister taking steps to ensure that claims will not arise as a result of the triple-vice effect, which I described in my question, on prisoners with mental health problems? Will she further ensure that adequate and appropriate psychiatric and clinical psychological support is given to all prisoners who need it?

How many of the extra 1,500 allied health professionals will be podiatrists, given that there is a chronic shortage of workers in that profession?

That is what always happens—it is difficult to get an answer. I cite the example of Alex Bochel in Nairn, who was asked to have his toenails removed in order to get him off the list. I was at the chiropodist in Inverness on Monday, for a normal annual appointment. Care of toenails is a small but essential part of overall foot care. If an untrained person does the job, they will not pick up on the other problems that are associated with the foot. Complex issues are involved.

I thank everyone who has supported the motion and those who have remained in the chamber to hear the debate. Not only is this the first debate on chiropody in the Scottish Parliament, but I understand that chiropody care has never been debated in the Westminster Parliament. A chronic shortfall in national health service foot health services threatens the health, mobility and independence of many thousands of elderly and frail people in Scotland. We spend millions on care in the community and on hospital care, some of which could be saved if high-quality, accessible and regular foot care was provided by trained professionals. Chiropodists—or podiatrists, as they are now known—are highly trained, specialist clinicians who are deservedly well respected by their peers and greatly valued by their patients for the essential care that they provide to ensure people's mobility and independence. Podiatrists provide comprehensive treatment for all foot disorders, including basic foot care for the elderly and infirm, wound care, management of the diabetic foot, minor surgery, complex bony procedures and biomechanics. They also undertake the screening and correction of gait abnormalities in children and young adults. If such abnormalities are left untreated, they can lead to debilitating skeletal conditions in later life, such as knee and hip arthritis. Such care should form a central plank of health care policy, but unfortunately elderly foot care and podiatric screening services are largely things of the past. NHS podiatry care is being removed from one in three patients in the Highlands, so many patients who used to enjoy NHS foot care are now being denied the service. In care homes throughout the Highlands, chiropody is becoming  an emergency call-out service, rather than an integral part of patient care. Until six years ago, the NHS provided a comprehensive foot health care service throughout Scotland to a number of priority groups, including schoolchildren, pregnant women, pensioners and patients with contributory medical problems—such as diabetes, arthritis or vascular disease—that might compromise their foot health. The value of clinical intervention by podiatrists cannot be overstated, in terms both of the cost benefits to health care and of quality of life. The current crisis is not in the quality but in the quantity of care. In Scotland, 664 full-time-equivalent NHS podiatrists provide nearly 500,000 episodes of care every year to more than 300,000 patients. There are three times as many physiotherapists and twice as many occupational therapists and radiographers. Given that there are about 1 million pensioners in Scotland and that it is estimated that 70 to 90 per cent of people over 65 suffer from a foot problem that could benefit from the intervention of a podiatrist, the lowest estimate of what is required is a doubling of the existing capacity of the NHS podiatry service—just for starters. When we consider other priority groups, such as the 250,000 people with diabetes—and that figure is set to rise drastically, as we all know—not to mention the thousands of people who suffer from other disabling conditions and who desperately need regular foot care, it is obvious that the capacity of the NHS podiatry service is grossly inadequate to meet the foot health needs of Scotland's population. Indeed, I was told today that, if we properly addressed the podiatry needs of everyone with diabetes in Scotland, no one else would get care. We are facing a crisis. Many NHS boards in Scotland seem to ignore or assign a low priority to the foot health needs of their local population. The service redesign that has been carried out during the past six years has led NHS boards unilaterally to change the eligibility criteria that determine access to NHS podiatry care. Instead of the traditional priority groups, only patients who are classified as high risk can now qualify for free foot care in Scotland's NHS. I gave the example of the Highlands, but many thousands of patients throughout Scotland have had their care withdrawn and must pay to receive what is an essential service in the private sector, irrespective of whether they can afford it. The NHS is founded on the principles of fairness and equity. I ask the minister whether it is really fair that a fit and active 25-year-old person with diabetes who is in full-time employment is eligible for free podiatry care when an 85-year-old pensioner whose mobility depends on foot care is not.  Podiatry managers are being faced with the impossible task of having to make cuts in the service while meeting care of the elderly and national service frameworks, even though the service is receiving no additional funding and resources, let alone work-force planning.

My point is that, under the national service framework for people with diabetes—which I think most members would support, given the complex issues relating to foot care and diabetes—a 25-year-old in full-time employment who is earning a wage of whatever amount is entitled to free foot care, whereas a pensioner on the minimum pension whose mobility depends on podiatry is denied access to it. I hope that I have made that clear. To plan and deliver podiatry services effectively and in line with health and social policy, I ask the Executive to specify what should be available and to whom it should be available. Clarity is needed on access and eligibility criteria, together with funding to service the demand from those who qualify for free foot care. Only through national guidelines will NHS boards cost and implement progressive rather than restrictive strategies that will help our elderly to keep mobile, pain free and independent. Perhaps then NHS boards might be able to reinstate the screening service for our children and give them a chance of a life free from the crippling disorders that blight the lives of many of today's older generation.

Most of the member's speech and most of what we read about MS is about beta interferon, drugs, neurologists, specialist nurses and so on. Will she also confirm that, as I have discovered recently through a friend of mine, there are tremendous opportunities for help in the complementary medicine sector, and that we should not ignore that sector and concentrate just on very expensive drugs?

Will the minister ensure that mental health services for looked-after and other children recognise and diagnose communication impairment? Earlier this week, speech therapists to whom I spoke told me how much they can do for those children. Will the minister ensure that speech therapists are included?

Will the minister join me in commending Lochyside RC Primary School in Fort William, which the First Minister, Jim Mather and I visited separately on Monday, for its excellent relationship with the pupils whereby the staff listen to and build partnership with the pupils and encourage them to express their feelings through art projects?

In the document "National Mental Health Services Assessment Locality Reports", the section on Highland says, on page 82, that the priorities of service users in Caithness include "Easier transfer to hospital—waits of 18 hours in police cells are not acceptable." We can take it that the recommendations to which Eleanor Scott refers have not yet been implemented.

Although Carolyn Leckie, Marlyn Glen and other members have mentioned the statistic that one in five people will be affected by depression, I seem to remember that the British Medical Association wrote to us to say that more than 30 per cent of visits to GPs involved an element of mental health,  so I think that the one-in-five figure may be an underestimate. Too often, we concentrate on staff, on drugs and on day centres, assuming that if we throw more money at mental health all the problems will be solved. I suddenly realised that we do not actually spend much time talking about the causes of depression or recognising those causes, as other members have said. Last night, many MSPs turned up for the briefing from the National Association of Funeral Directors. I was touched to hear the speakers talking about unresolved grief, which is obviously a problem that funeral directors recognise but cannot deal with. They said that they can do their bit at the time of death and that they are aware of that enormous problem, but when they refer people to bereavement counselling—particularly to Cruse Bereavement Care in Edinburgh—those people have to wait for more than three months. Instead of always talking about drugs, psychiatrists and psychiatric hospitals, we should perhaps start to look at giving people help where it is needed, rather than telling them to wait for three months and to cope on their own. The point about early intervention has been well made. Members of this Parliament should be proud of achieving the passing of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. The Westminster Government had been considering such legislation for some years and then shelved the Mental Health Bill, but we just got on with it. The complexity of the 2003 act and the speed of its passage through Parliament is a matter for concern, but its provisions are nonetheless to be welcomed and I am sure that ministers and MSPs in all parties will closely monitor its implementation. I commend the work of the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland. I have contacted the commission on behalf of constituents who had complaints and I believe that in any discussion of mental health we should commend the excellent work that it does. However, when the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) Scotland Act 2003 was passed, the shortage of psychiatrists and mental health officers was highlighted. At that time, we were 29 psychiatrists short in Scotland and required a further 28 to implement the act. Although staffing is crucial, the considerable bed blocking in mental health is also due to the shortage of day centres, crisis care centres, supported housing and residential care. Sandra Grant's thorough report highlights those shortages. In this Parliament, we are capable of raising concerns about postcode prescribing—we are right to raise those concerns—and I was pleased to hear the point that Adam Ingram made, but that  debate often leads to the view that there is a pill for every ill. In mental health, that is particularly the case, whether the problems are long term or short term, but drugs can never be the only answer. In fact, the side effects sometimes cause greater problems than the drugs attempt to resolve. I make no apology for once again mentioning the prescription of Ritalin to young children, which is a matter for serious concern. There are also concerns about the use of Seroxat for adults. I have worked with several constituents in the Highlands who have been trying to reduce their intake of Seroxat and I am aware of the horrendous side effects that they have suffered. I acknowledge that that is not the case for every patient, but it is the case for some. Psychological support is also needed. Given the severe staff shortages, that area is sadly neglected. As other members have said, hospitals are not just about containment. I am always shocked when I hear about people who are on suicide watch in a psychiatric hospital but who go out at 9 o'clock in the morning and come back at 9 o'clock at night. I am also amazed that so many people are reported to the police as missing from psychiatric hospitals. Psychiatric hospitals are there to support people and should not just offer bed and breakfast. The people whom they support should be closely monitored. Carolyn Leckie mentioned therapy, counselling, complementary medicine and so on. In Scotland, 40 per cent more prescriptions are handed out for depression than in England—that is a shocking statistic. I commend the work that Adam Ingram is doing in the cross-party group on mental health. At the group's meeting yesterday, Graham Bryce talked about suicide among young men. If we think that a helpline is the only answer to that problem, we are really missing the point. Many young men and women are depressed because they are unable to express their feelings and fears. Earlier this week I met speech therapists. I had tended to think that they could help only people who have physical impairments, but in fact they have a tremendous input into helping people to express themselves. I hope that speech therapists, as well as other professions allied to medicine, will be made available. Let us not naively think that the answer to everything is to roll out the breathing space advice line throughout Scotland. I commend the community mental health team in Nairn for its excellent work in supporting patients safely at a local level, which consistently reduces admissions to psychiatric hospitals.

I, too, welcome the minister's statement, the national planning framework and the two consultation papers. As the real Opposition party, the Conservatives will discuss those papers with councillors and key stakeholders in business and the community. I have a few brief points. First, I ask that we do not allow the debate simply to focus on the third-party right of appeal. That issue should be  considered in the wider context of the national planning framework and the consultations. If the debate were to focus simply on the third-party right of appeal—which could happen—the wider consultation that the Executive seeks would not take place and the process would fail. Secondly, as part of the drive towards the modernisation of the planning system, will the minister ensure that Historic Scotland and others are accountable and responsive to public views? Finally, page 11 of the advance copy of the minister's statement mentions Scotland's location in north-west Europe. Will the minister also remember north-west Scotland? I do not mean just the Western Isles, which are mentioned in the statement, but Shetland, which faces serious challenges, particularly in relation to fishing, and Orkney.

Margaret Ewing is making precisely the point that I made. Stewart Maxwell should concentrate on our national Parliament holding the Executive to account so that we can speak with a single voice in sending Westminster a strong message on the issue. Will the SNP support our motion and agree to withdraw its amendment?

I am delighted to support the motion in the name of my colleague Murdo Fraser. Like him, I welcome the Executive's constructive amendment, unusual though that is. I hope that the First Minister and the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning will engage with the chancellor as promised. I deplore the petty, carping comments that we have heard from the SNP this afternoon. It is  absolutely disgusting that the SNP has chosen to talk about nationalism and not about the national drink. It is also absolutely disgusting that the SNP is represented in the chamber by only three members in a debate on one of our major industries. Stewart Maxwell mentioned the "brave band of Labour MPs". I do not think that his party has ever understood devolution. The business of the SNP MSPs is not to hold Labour MPs to account, but to hold Labour MSPs to account. The SNP needs to learn that lesson. I say to SNP members that that is why they are in the Scottish Parliament and not at Westminster.

No, I have heard enough from Mr Maxwell this afternoon and everything that I heard was totally negative and carping. I do not wish to hear any more. I am very disappointed about the approach that he took. I think that, if Winnie Ewing had been in the chamber, she would have had something to say to him about that. It is highly appropriate that the Scottish Parliament should make representations on behalf of the Scotch whisky industry. Recently, Diageo tried to interfere with Cardhu by blending single malts and calling the result a pure malt. I am grateful that the First Minister responded positively to that situation. Although I am not sure what sort of talks took place, I am thankful that Diageo came to appreciate the unique nature of the single malt and reversed its decision. I hope that, following today's debate, the Scottish Parliament will put pressure on Westminster to reverse its decision on tax stamps.

Whatever talks took place behind the scenes, the Scotch Whisky Association was certainly very vocal on the issue. I am sure that all members would wish to do whatever it takes to combat fraud. If Conservative members were convinced that the introduction of strip stamps would succeed in that respect, the measure would have the backing of every one of us. However, as Murdo Fraser and Mike Watson said, no evidence exists to support Gordon Brown's figures. When a Government decides to impose higher taxes and costs on industry, normally the industry can choose to move to another country where the Government is more understanding, sensitive and supportive. That is  not the case for whisky, however. Scotland is the monopoly producer of the national drink—there is no substitute for Scotch. As Mike Watson said, the National Audit Office, the Public Accounts Committee and the Scottish Affairs Committee at Westminster have all cast doubts on the chancellor's figures. I hope that that will be a basis for the Executive's future discussions. Perhaps the chancellor should reconsider the severe cuts in the number of customs and excise officers and put resources into HM Customs and Excise to combat fraud. I was told earlier this week that, about six years ago, there were 12 customs and excise officers in Shetland, whereas now there are two. Such figures are replicated throughout Highlands and Islands communities. We should also reconsider the reduction in the number of trading standards officers at local level. I am pleased to say that Shetland now produces vodka and gin and that a local firm is planning to open a distillery there. We should take into account the impact of measures such as strip stamps not only on the existing whisky industry, but on the future of the industry. I ask Margaret Ewing, who represents the constituency with the highest number of distilleries in Scotland, to bring pressure to bear on her colleague and persuade him to drop his amendment.

Will the member take an intervention?

I wonder who that was.

Were they from the northern isles?

We could all wear kilts.

I will refer to Professor Calder's independent review of maternity services, which was published this week. There were 570 births in Caithness general hospital in 1966, but that figure had decreased to 224 by 2003, with another 133 births in Inverness in that year. There are likely to be 112 births in the midwifery-led unit in 2004. I worry that in 2006, we will analyse the number of births and ask whether the unit is viable. Professor Calder's report states that the review visit and "subsequent developments have reinforced the strength of local feeling and have persuaded the Review Group that there is probably no issue currently of greater concern to the people of Caithness and Sutherland." I hope that the minister takes that point on board tonight. I will discuss section 6 of the review. I was under the impression that consultants who work at Caithness general hospital spend two or three days each month at Raigmore hospital. I was told a couple of years ago at one of our regular meetings with NHS Highland that such visits took place to give the consultants the opportunity to maintain their skills and training and to learn about new technologies. I do not know whether such visits have stopped. The section of the review dealing with midwifery issues states that although the midwives at Caithness are positive about the future, "they did raise some concerns", including "Reservations regarding safety if no obstetrician is available ... Specialist help more than 100 miles away ... Potential for no resident obstetric cover ...Issues of transfer, retrieval and transport." If the midwives remain concerned about the recommendations in the report, I will remain concerned and the local population will remain concerned. Assistance must be sought from 100 miles away. If there were such problems in the minister's constituency, mothers in Edinburgh would have to travel to Carlisle, Newcastle or Aberdeen. I invite him to think about that. An important point is made in the report's conclusion, which states: "We believe that the preferred configuration should be the Community Maternity Unit model and that it should be developed under the following stringent conditions". I will not list all the conditions, but it is enough to say that six of them include the phrase "should be"  and the other one includes the word "must". If the community maternity unit model is chosen, many questions will remain unanswered and many commitments will not have been met.

Will the minister give way?

I will speak about the latest stealth tax that has been imposed on pensioners in the Highlands. They are being forced to pay for chiropody care that they received for free in the past. Conservatives believe that if people pay their taxes and wish to pay for private treatment, that is their choice. However, we do not believe that people should be forced to go private when no regard is had to ability to pay. In the past two years, NHS Highland has reviewed chiropody care. That has resulted in cuts in chiropody care for people who are in care homes; for people who have Alzheimer's disease and cannot state their needs or communicate their pain; for elderly people who have diabetes; for people who are registered blind; and for people who have arthritis and cannot even hold scissors, who are told that they must take care of their own foot care. Many people have been removed from the treatment list and the number of appointments for those who receive chiropody care has been halved at best.  I commend Alex Bochel of Nairn, who was 82 this week. Many elderly people feel very vulnerable and do not wish to speak out, because they are frightened that they might be picked on. They are frightened of going back to the NHS as they feel that they might be victimised. Another war veteran—a Normandy veteran—came along to my surgery in Nairn this week. Like Alex Bochel, he has worked all his life. He fought in the war and paid his taxes and national insurance. He desperately needs chiropody care to be mobile and independent; to prevent him from falling; to save the health service from providing him with community care; and to reduce the need for him to receive NHS acute care in hospital. Nairn is a very social place and offers a good life for those who play bridge and golf. That gentleman told me that in one week, he had spoken to about 50 people who have had their chiropody care cut or have been removed from the list altogether. He said that they are being forced to go private, irrespective of their ability to pay. Mark Ballard talked about radical solutions. NHS Highland came up with a radical solution for that gentleman. In the vein of Marie Antoinette, it was suggested that he and his friends should have a party. He was told, "Never mind bringing your own bottle. Why don't you all bring your own toenail-clippers?" That shows the arrogance and complacence in NHS Highland's treatment of elderly people. I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and to describe the respect that the Executive has for our war veterans and many others. It asks people who have Alzheimer's disease or diabetes, who are registered blind or who have arthritis to have a toenail-clipping party. That must be the height of arrogance, complacence and heartlessness. The fact that NHS boards are being forced down that road reflects much of the Lib-Lab Executive's direction. I thought that I had two minutes for my speech, but I was given four minutes, so I will finish early.

Unusually.

As my colleague Annabel Goldie said, we support the bill's general principles, which seek to address the blight that is antisocial behaviour. However, we have some concerns, which have been raised both in committee and during today's debate. In particular, I highlight the Scottish Police Federation's comment that we need more police officers, not more legislation. Moreover, ACPOS told the Communities Committee that the police have never faced a situation involving a group of people that could not be dealt with under existing powers. As far as Mike Rumbles's speech is concerned, I find it quite strange that in the six months that the Communities Committee has been working on the  bill, the Liberal Democrat member did not once mention that the Liberal Democrats have problems with measures in the bill such as the dispersal of groups, or that the bill raises issues about the partnership agreement. We have heard about no such problems until today. As for the comments that Johann Lamont, Karen Whitefield, the minister and others made about dispersal powers, I understand that on BBC Scotland today Chief Superintendent Tom Buchan, the divisional commander for Motherwell and Wishaw, said of those powers: "We didn't ask for the legislation, don't feel there is a need. I would think long and hard before I would put it into use. It is not addressing the issue." He also revealed that those views had been put to the Executive. As a result, I ask the minister to clarify whether the First Minister was aware of those comments, whether he lends them any weight and whether he will continue to ignore the expert views of anyone who disagrees with him.

My time has been cut, so I really cannot give way. I also want to address issues that have not yet been mentioned. Much of the media attention on the bill has concentrated on dispersing groups, locking up parents, guidance of and ministerial powers over chief constables, and the ned culture in Scotland in general. However, parts 5, 7 and 8, which contain very important measures, have barely been mentioned in today's debate. No doubt we will have more opportunity to debate them over time. On parts 7 and 8, which relate to housing, there are concerns that landlords might become the whipping boys for the personal conduct of their tenants or indeed their tenants' visitors, over whom landlords have no control. There is also concern that an antisocial tenant may be rewarded by not having to pay rent and that the landlord may be penalised by his property management being transferred to a local authority. Statistics for the year ending 30 September 2003 show that although local authorities made 20,725 applications for eviction, only 21 of those cases resulted in eviction for antisocial behaviour. Given that 10 per cent of the bill relates to noise nuisance, I ask the Executive to comment on the final sentence of paragraph 160 of the Communities Committee report, which relates to noise nuisance and the current provisions for dealing with it, particularly those under the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. The Scottish Parliament should clarify the law rather than muddle it. I point out that the minister has incredible power in that she can set the permitted level of noise.

My colleague Bill Aitken says that the minister makes plenty of noise—I would not say that. I make no apologies for asking that we take into account our national musical instrument—the bagpipes—when considering the permitted level of noise. The bill addresses persistent offenders, but it also needs to address persistent complainers. The likelihood that one will be alarmed and distressed is different for each individual and is unique to the individual. I take the point that the Justice 2 Committee raised about the test of reasonableness. We need more clarification on that issue. Finally, more should be done to examine why existing legislation is not sufficient to deal with antisocial behaviour.

I was pleased to be asked to speak in this debate on national health service reform, until I read the bill, that is—all six pages of it. A unified health board has already happened in the Borders without the bill, so I have to ask the minister what kind of an NHS we have that the Parliament has to legislate to place a duty on health boards to co-operate with other health boards. If the patient's needs came first, the health boards would have to talk to each other. Consider the section of the bill on powers of intervention when there is service failure: what is acceptable and unacceptable? Are financial deficits as boards struggle to make ends meet acceptable? Will the long wait from GP referral to seeing a consultant or for a magnetic resonance imaging—MRI—scan be included in performance assessment? I looked to the section that is entitled, "Duty to promote health improvement" in part 2 of the bill. The Western Isles NHS Board is certainly promoting health improvement, but that is exactly what boards are meant to have been doing for years. Part 3 of the bill is even more exciting. It states: "The Scottish Ministers may by order made by statutory instrument make such incidental, supplemental, consequential, transitional, transitory or saving provision as they consider necessary or expedient for the purposes, or in consequence, of this Act." I think that the people of Scotland will all rest well in their beds tonight, given that they have received those assurances from the Minister for Health and Community Care. Of course, the three island authorities already have unified boards. I will show how impressed  Orkney NHS Board was by the bill by quoting from its submission to the Health Committee. When it was asked whether it supported the general principles of the Bill, the board's response was that one member of the board did. The board's submission also states: "We don't have a LHCC in Orkney and I do not know what kind of animal a CHP will be. I do not know where it sits in relation to the Joint Future Agenda." It seems that the LHCCs have passed NHS Orkney by and that just as it was getting to grips with the joint future agenda, LHCCS have now been passed by for CHPs. When Orkney NHS Board was asked about the quality of the consultation, it stated that five weeks was not enough—particularly given the active and highly regarded work that is done by the local health councils. The submission states that NHS Orkney "would prefer that we have power to choose the way we spend the funds, as Scottish Executive directives don't always fit Orkney's situation". At least we can depend on Orcadians to tell us how it is. Again, on what constitutes an acceptable service, would NHS Orkney's cash-saving measure to cut the number of patients who go to Aberdeen for treatment because it does not have enough money be regarded as acceptable, or would that be a service failure? Perhaps the minister could tell us which cuts will be regarded as acceptable when the level of activity exceeds the financial allocation. I quote from a statement issued by NHS Orkney: "Clinically urgent cases should continue to be dealt with where the Consultant feels that postponement of treatment would significantly impact on his/her patient's health." We have had telemedicine for some years; now telepathic medicine is being applied from Aberdeen to Orkney. Those actions have been taken with no consultation of patients or GPs. When the money comes through for the next financial year, there will already be a waiting list in Orkney left over from this year. I hope that the minister will now review the financial allocations to the three island authorities—Orkney NHS Board, Shetland NHS Board and the Western Isles NHS Board. The policy memorandum states that the Executive's policy is that care should be delivered as close to home as possible; in Caithness, people would like their babies to be delivered as close to home as possible and in Applecross and Lochinver, on the west coast of Scotland, people would like an out-of-hours service that is closer to their homes than the east coast.  Western Isles NHS Board, which faces a £600,000 overspend, now has the pleasure of intervention by the man from the ministry. I understand that he has proposed that the Western Isles should have four medical directors—three more than Lothian NHS Board has, although the Western Isles has a fraction of the Lothians' population. Much more could be said about the Western Isles, but given the current problems with staff suspensions and so on it would be unwise to discuss the matter further. Will the minister include registered practitioners of complementary medicine in the CHPs so that they are fully included in the delivery of health care and will he also ensure that the professions that are allied to medicine are included? As I said last week, the health service is not just about doctors and nurses. I want to come back to a point on local authority accountability that Unison made in its submission to the Health Committee. I am pleased that Unison highlighted this point: if partnership is to work, the performance of social work must be monitored and evaluated. If the performance of social work is included, the proposals that are being discussed today will, I hope, help to meet the expectations that are being raised.

Given that the co-operative movement is about equal opportunities, equal access and social inclusion, does the member also include members of the Conservative, Liberal and other political parties, apart from the Labour Party?

When Stewart Stevenson spoke, I was reminded that I am a member of a co-operative as well: I am a member of the Inverness credit union. I thank Johann Lamont for the opportunity to speak in the debate. I would not say that I am an expert on the social economy or the co-operative movement, but what is good about being asked to speak in a debate is that it forces us to read about a subject. I am delighted that I did so. I welcome Johann Lamont's comments about the sector's diversity. However, the document "A review of the Scottish Executive's Policies to promote the Social Economy", which was published in January 2003 by the then Minister for Social Justice, Margaret Curran, says: "the role of Scottish Enterprise and its associated network should be to concentrate on the support and development of social economy businesses". Perhaps the fact that a minister with responsibility for enterprise is to respond to today's debate answers Stewart Stevenson's question about the agency being subsumed in the enterprise network. The document also says: "The purpose of this review ... is to assess the social economy's potential to contribute to the achievement of key Scottish Executive objectives and to identify how the Executive and other public sector and independent agencies might help the sector to realise its potential." I hope that the co-operative development agency will be part of a wider strategy to support the social economy. The agency may be welcome, but I hope that it will not be the only outcome of the social economy policy review and that such a wider plan will include a range of support measures for social firms. In talking about social firms and the co-operative movement, we should acknowledge the extent of corporate social responsibility activities by many small and large private firms, such as Lloyds TSB and the Bank of Scotland, and the sponsorship by many firms of arts, culture and sport in Scotland. The social economy has great potential. I will quote from "A Smart Co-operative Scotland", which contains research by Co-operation and Mutuality Scotland. The document starts by talking about co-operative values. The values of self-help, self-responsibility, democracy,  equal rights, equity, members supporting one another and "the ethical values of honesty, openness, social responsibility and caring for others" are basic Conservative principles of which Mrs Thatcher would be proud. I am pleased that Johann Lamont endorses those principles. Perhaps we have a little more in common than we realised. "A Smart Co-operative Scotland" refers to the Scottish Association of Farmers Markets, whose champion I am delighted to say is my colleague John Scott. I am pleased to leave the debate about farmers' markets with him. In the short time that remains, I will talk about Highland Wholefoods Workers Co-operative, which is based in Inverness and covers the Highlands and Islands. It supplies not only health food shops, but hotels, pubs and others. The enterprise was established in 1989 by five people who contributed £1,000 each and received the support of a Government enterprise scheme—under the Tories, of course. Highland Wholefoods has been going for more than 14 years. It supplies something that people cannot find elsewhere in Inverness and the rest of the Highlands. That is an example of a welcome, green and organic organisation that might not have been established in any other guise.

I appreciate that. Will the minister also accede to the request to talk to his Westminster counterparts about pay and conditions for the professionals allied to medicine, which seem to be falling out of step with those for nurses and doctors?

It is always a delight to speak in a debate with  Mike Rumbles. Every time I hear him, I thank the Lord that I am a Highlands and Islands MSP and can work happily with Jamie Stone and John Farquhar Munro. Mike Rumbles's inability to listen makes him a prime candidate for being the person who can cause a rammy in an empty house. I agree with Carolyn Leckie: the hardest work that I, too, ever did was in a maternity unit. I think that that would apply to many women throughout Scotland. For many years, we have seen the expansion and upgrading of hospitals, mainly in the acute sector, as Labour followed through the Tory plans. We have also seen growth in health staff numbers, more training opportunities and greater accessibility to health care provision. The hospice movement has expanded, as has the provision of voluntary sector care, community psychiatric nurses and family doctors, who are undoubtedly the backbone of our health service, with 90 per cent of patient contact. I name those as some of the growth factors in health care only to set the scene for the recent decline. As a Highlands and Islands MSP and Health Committee member for four years, I know that acute hospitals are now struggling to overcome financial deficits by cutting back where possible and that there are queues when a dentist mentions the NHS. Orkney NHS Board is cutting the number of patients being sent to Aberdeen for treatment; Western Isles NHS Board faces a £600,000 overspend and is cutting its services; Caithness general hospital in Wick is cutting its maternity service; and Oban and Fort William hospitals face downgrading or merging. Bedblocking is rife because councils say that they have no money for residential and home care—I accept Tom McCabe's point about that. Low-priority chiropody patients' treatment has been cut drastically. I have a huge case load about that. That cut has made some people housebound. Others have had the offer of having their toenails removed so that the waiting list can be cut. Those are only some factual examples of the crisis that faces the NHS in Highland. When they are put together with the report of people in Wick pulling out their own teeth, we can hardly honestly commend the Liberal-Labour coalition for its support for and management of our health service. Against that background, I remind the minister of his statement that "If it can be done in primary care, it should be done in primary care."— [ Official Report , 25 April 2002; c 11239.]  I ask him to consider the health care model in Nairn, which Dr Alastair Noble has pioneered. I believe that the example is well known to him. Under that model, local services, including the council social work department, work together. That has reduced the number of hospital  admissions enormously, particularly for mental health care. We always say that best practice is out there but that it is not rolled out. That model is a good example of that.

I would be delighted if the minister could tell me where else the Nairn model exists. Moreover, will he take account of the potential of our community hospitals in rural areas for the new out-of-hours service and for local health care? Too often, we talk about the health service as if it involved only doctors and nurses. I commend the BMA and the RCN for the job that they do in representing their members, but some of the most critical shortages—Shona Robison mentioned them—are of chiropodists, radiographers, physiotherapists, speech therapists, dieticians and others. The input of the professions that are allied to medicine can add much to quality health care. I hope that the minister will examine seriously with his Westminster counterparts the pay scales and conditions for those professions in relation to those of other health care staff. It should not always be those who shout loudest who have the most attention. The professions that I have mentioned are a bit of a cinderella service. I hope that a mechanism and time can be found in the Parliament—through the committees or otherwise—to undertake post-legislative scrutiny regularly and to monitor the implementation of, for example, the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 and, in time, the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. That is crucial, as we are passing legislation in the knowledge that staff shortages exist and that we will create greater staff shortages. When the Parliament discussed the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill, it was stated that Scotland had 29 vacancies for psychiatrists. The bill required an additional 28 psychiatrists. I do not suggest that the bill should not have been passed, but I ask the minister where the 57 psychiatrists are to come from. A high-quality health care system depends greatly on staff, but we also need premises such as day centres, respite care establishments, drug and alcohol detox and rehabilitation facilities, medium-secure units and supported housing. We must engage more fully with the complementary medicine sector. In 1996, the Conservatives produced a paper that set out a protocol for fundholding GPs to refer patients to that sector. I would like the Executive to make a  similar commitment on alternative medicine.

I remind Mike Rumbles that I said what I did in the context of advice from a professor at the faculty of dentistry in Dundee, who simply said that there are not enough dental specialists to start another dental school in Scotland. I also remind Mike Rumbles that an outreach centre is not a dental school.

I am delighted that this issue is now being addressed. The Executive tells us that enough money is being allocated to care in the community and I have no reason to doubt that. However, NHS Highland, the Highland social work department and the local health board all say that they do not have enough money. Jamie Stone is referring to the cases in Caithness, where there are eight free beds in Seafield House and patients lying in the county hospital who cannot get out because the social work department says that it has no money. Will the minister address that specific issue? I would be happy to put him in contact with the families who have written to me, as, I am sure, would Jamie Stone.

It was quite refreshing to hear a minister give a realistic appraisal of the current problems. Too often, we are aware of the problems but sit here listening to ministers defend the indefensible, so I welcome the minister's remarks. I also welcome the setting-up of a Cabinet group to tackle youth services and delivery systems as well as information sharing and the inspection and quality of services. I further confess that I actually enjoyed Robert Brown's speech—and I told him so. I am getting a wee bit worried. However, I give credit where credit is due and, on this rare occasion, I thought that he gave a moderate and considered  speech. Nonetheless, as an Opposition politician, I have a responsibility to highlight the issues that I hope will be considered by the new Cabinet group. Currently, the debate on young offenders and children's hearings is generally conducted in the context of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. We need to acknowledge the Audit Scotland report to which the minister referred, which highlighted the fact that between 300 and 500 children on supervision were not getting the service that the children's hearings system prescribed. Contact was made with half the children on supervision less than once a month, and 37 per cent of children's files did not contain a recognisable care plan. Those are only some of the issues that were raised in the report. If the Executive is committed to addressing them, as the motion that we are debating suggests, they need to be considered seriously. I note on page 4 of the NCH report entitled "Where's Kilbrandon Now?" that, for boys, 1,600 more referrals to the children's hearings system are made on the grounds of care and protection than are made on offence grounds. Although the minister mentioned that, looking behind the figures for referrals to the children's hearings system gives us a much better understanding of the sort of support that these children need. The NCH report also states: "From being a system for dealing mainly with those who require compulsory measures of care, the hearings system has become almost the only route of access to services for children in need of care and protection. This is because of deficiencies in the systems responsible for identifying children in need and providing appropriate voluntary support and care for them. The hearings system was not designed for this purpose, so it is no surprise that it has been engulfed in a rising tide of care and protection cases that distract it from its primary purpose." Surely that is a strong and clear signal to the Executive that it must address the needs of some young people and enable them to live free from abuse and other problems before they can even consider realising their potential.

I acknowledge Scott Barrie's comments about the mechanisms that are in place. However, the NCH report has concluded  that the system is not giving children the necessary care and protection. The Executive also needs to examine the report's comments on the limited range of disposals. Although I welcome the minister's announcement of what I presume is an additional £10 million for alternative community disposals, the NCH report says: "Allied to the failure to implement disposals is the lack of imagination and investment in ... leisure, health, education and community services". That point has been consistently raised by those who have given evidence to the Communities Committee on the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. I look forward to the Cabinet's report on the matter. If the Executive is serious about full and active participation and the development of skills and talents, we need to assess and diagnose children as early as possible for conditions such as autism, dyslexia and dyspraxia. In too many cases, potential development years are lost due to delays in or the absence of early assessment and diagnosis and the lack of health care and learning support. Two weeks ago, I raised the case of a 14-year-old boy in Inverness who was sent home because of the lack of a learning support teacher and who now receives four hours of one-to-one tuition a week. That boy is not the only person who is not realising his potential; his mother had to give up the opportunity of a good job to stay at home and care for him. Parents as well as children are being affected by the situation. I notice that Peter Peacock referred to having a well-trained work force. I hope that, as Rosemary Byrne said, training will be given to nursery school staff and teachers to identify signs and problems. I also hope that a system of early assessment and diagnosis is introduced for learning support. If that does not happen, we will exclude many young people from any opportunity to develop skills and talents.

To ask the First Minister whether sufficient resources are being allocated to fund free personal care . (S2F-630)

Given that more than 2,000 patients remain in national health service hospitals, ready for discharge, and given the long wait for occupational therapy appointments and community care assessments in some councils, how will the First Minister ensure that local authorities deliver high-quality, value-for-money care services to many of the most vulnerable people in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will Mr Muldoon give way?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate and am delighted to leave the issues of consequential funding under the Barnett formula to my colleagues Brian Monteith and Ted Brocklebank. I would like to concentrate on the accountability of local government in providing high quality and value for money in public services. I listened carefully to what the minister said—I noted what he said about working with COSLA on a review of joint delivery and improvements. Obviously, the minister also has concerns. I acknowledge that some improvements have been made. However, it is also incumbent on us to recognise that there have been significant failures. I am not calling for more ring fencing, but for local government to allocate resources that are in line with statutes that are already in place and that will support bills that are in passage and those that have been passed in good faith by Parliament. I refer mainly to my concerns over the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 and the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. In a written answer to me, the Minister for Finance and Public Services stated: "Local authorities are in general free to set their own expenditure priorities."——[ Official Report , Written Answers , 17 November 2003; S2W-3491.] What system of accountability or indeed sanctions does Parliament have that can ensure that statutory obligations, national standards, policy objectives and priorities that we set in good faith are met by local authorities throughout Scotland? I will give some examples from Audit Scotland reports and my own correspondence. Children with special needs have been sent home from school in Inverness because there was no learning support teacher and some 22 per cent of children on supervision have no social worker, according to Audit Scotland. In the Highlands, it takes 11 months for a terminally ill patient to be seen by an occupational therapist. This week, I received a letter from a person who has had two amputations and lives alone. He has no means of bathing or showering, but he has had no contact from the council for the past six  months. He stated that it appeared that his big mistake was to want to go home after his operation in July last year and to try to live a normal life after his two amputation operations. He stated that if he remained in hospital, perhaps the work would have been completed. Highland Council roads are now upgraded every hundred years, compared with every 25 years under the Tories. Patients are left languishing in hospital at greater cost to the taxpayer because social work departments have no money to pay care home fees. An example from yesterday concerns a gentleman in Thurso; there are eight places in the local nursing home, but the social work department has no money to place him there. Only seven councils in Scotland deliver the required level of service to children on supervision and 27 per cent of special educational needs assessments take more than a year to complete in the Moray Council area. The money that is due for council house rents—excluding Glasgow and the Borders—is £28.5 million, with £25 million being lost as a result of empty houses. Those are only a few examples of local government's failure to provide high-quality public services to vulnerable people, to whom services matter so much. I want to ask of the minister only one thing today. I want him to talk not only about money being poured into local government, but about local government's service levels, outcomes and ability to respond to needs. Is local government getting enough money or is it providing local services inefficiently? When we criticise local government it says that it does not have enough money. However, the minister says that it has enough money. We need a clear, unambiguous statement about that. Either local government has enough money and is spending it wrongly and inefficiently, or it does not have enough money to provide the required services, which results in examples such as I gave. What does the minister intend to do to respond to some councils' failures to deliver certain services?

To ensure a consistent approach to promoting breastfeeding, will the minister ensure that all pregnant mums are given information and advice on the benefits of breastfeeding, both to the mother and to the child, as a routine and integral part of the antenatal check-up system?

I welcome the minister's commitment to council housing stock transfer and I hope that the size of the new associations will ensure that the tenant's voice is heard. I also welcome the commitment to protect tenants from the high rents that are levied simply to allow councils to retain their housing stock. I highlight the fact that the weekly rent in  Highland Council area is £12 higher than in Moray Council area. Although the minister mentioned the cross-tenure Scottish housing quality standard on page 2 of her statement, the rest of the statement concentrated on social housing and local authority housing. What is being done to assist the private sector and, as I have asked before, the agricultural and landowning sector to meet that housing standard? My second question is about what the minister read from page 3 of her statement. She said: "Failure to deliver the standard will be unacceptable and landlords who do not deliver can expect some hard questioning from ministers." That could apply to many council functions. It is a serious matter. What sanctions will the minister apply if councils that retain their housing stock, and other landlords, do not meet the housing quality standard?

In the member's quest for food for good does he think that taste should be a factor? When did he last taste the Fairtrade coffee and tea in the Parliament's tea room?

I also welcome the conciliatory tone that the minister took in speaking to the motion on the bill. Naturally, the Conservatives support additional  learning support. We would always support something that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton supported. If it passes the Lord James test, it is good enough for our group. I commend the excellent work that was carried out by the Education Committee. It is always difficult for someone who was not involved in a committee's work at stage 1 to come to the debate at this point and speak to a report. That is particularly true because I understand that the minister gave other concessions to the Education Committee this morning. I can only say that, if I raise an issue that the minister has negotiated and compromised on, I apologise for doing so. I had to attend a meeting of the Communities Committee this morning. Although I was not involved in drafting the bill, I spent 20 years in classrooms and lecture theatres. Anyone with that sort of commitment to education has a clear interest in the bill. I am especially interested when I think of people in their 20s and 30s who get into further and higher education before being diagnosed with Asperger's syndrome and dyslexia. Anything that can help to diagnose such conditions earlier has to be a great advantage. I want to alert the minister to the following points in the committee report. First, paragraph 27 says: "Lorraine Dilworth from Record of Needs Alert (RONA) expressed the view that the new Bill was essentially the same as the current system". If the current system had been policed and enforced as it should have been, we would have had a workable system by now. The Parliament needs not only to pass legislation but to ensure that local government implements legislation and that it is accountable to us for implementation. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton highlighted paragraph 36 of the report in which the committee states: "any changes to legal rights must not represent any lessening of the rights of any child". I was also concerned to read under paragraph 71 that "The Committee expects education authorities and other agencies to comply with their duties under the Bill". Having spent many years on the Health and Community Care Committee, I do not think that the word "expects" is strong enough, especially given the absolute necessity for every child who deserves additional learning support to have it. Under paragraph 80, I note that "The Committee further calls on the Executive to ensure that local authorities continue to operate the Record of Needs". I have never heard so many complaints about a  matter as I have heard about the record of needs: I had four fresh cases last week. For many people the record of needs is just that. It is only a record of needs and not an educational support plan. I hope—

Perhaps I could just finish this. Elaine Murray will probably correct me on something that was perhaps negotiated this morning. I hope that I made it clear earlier that that might happen. I hope that the bill goes some way towards ensuring that that problem is sorted. Under paragraph 88, I note that "Others, such as the Educational Institute of Scotland (EIS) and the Association of Support for Learning Officers (ASLO) expressed concern". Further on in that paragraph a representative of one of those organisations states: "We estimated ... that it was taking 10 teaching weeks to do the administration" for an individualised educational programme. If it takes teachers and professionals 10 weeks to do that, we have to look for a much simpler bureaucracy, because that is 10 weeks that are lost in addressing a child's needs. Paragraph 111 of the report states that the committee "seeks clarification from the Executive on the rights of an education authority to refuse to conduct an assessment and notes the need for the Code of Practice to clearly identify valid reasons for a request to be refused." I hope that that has been negotiated, because far too many parents are unsure of their rights or their children's rights. Time moves on and, before they know it, it is too late. I notice that Adam Ingram is in the chamber. When I was reading the report, I kept thinking about Ritalin and the need for health, social work and other authorities to work together. Adam Ingram is the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on mental health. The number of children who are being given Ritalin is a matter of serious concern. That drug obviously has never been tested on children. I realise that I am digressing, but that drug is often referred to as the zombie drug, which is not flattering. Everyone in Parliament should be concerned about that issue. It is not clear to me whether every child will have a right to advocacy. I was on the Health and Community Care Committee when it dealt with the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill, which sought to place on councils a duty to provide advocacy, but it did not give children or parents the right to advocacy. It is quite a different thing to say that  the council has a duty to provide advocacy. In addition, there is a great shortage of advocates. As an MSP for the Highlands, I am happy to pass to the minister a letter from Dyslexia Scotland, which highlights that it can take up to two years in the Highlands to get a diagnosis of dyslexia. Brian Adam made an excellent point about joint working. The shortage of social workers and occupational therapists is crucial. I am happy to pass the minister a letter from a lady in Inverness, whose child was sent home last week because there was no learning support teacher.

I too would like to thank George Lyon for initiating this debate. Like Fergus Ewing, I attended the meeting in Fort William. In 20 years in Scottish politics, I have never seen anything like it. Around 2,800 people from the Lochaber area attended—young children to elderly people who were united in their concern about their local hospital. As Fergus Ewing said, their passion and support for their NHS was commendable. I commend the sensitivity of and the response from Richard Carey, who did an excellent job, and Olwyn Macdonald. Over the past four years, the Health Committee has dealt with many problems relating to the downgrading and potential loss of hospital  services—Stracathro hospital, Queen Margaret hospital in Dunfermline, Perth royal infirmary, Montrose maternity services, Stobhill and various others. The difference between those campaigns and that of Fort William is that whereas they were generally led by local people, local newspapers and, quite often, by local politicians, in Lochaber the clinicians are leading the campaign—32 out of 36 local doctors are against the NHS Highland proposals. Local nurses, physiotherapists, consultants—the whole range of healthcare staff—are against the NHS Highland options. I say to the minister that if the local clinicians and staff are worried, it is hardly surprising that the local population is worried.

I was highly impressed by the gentleman Mr Stone mentions. I hope that the minister will agree that although we get many complaints about the NHS, the passion and support of the people in Lochaber for their NHS is second to none. I want to look at the situation not simply in the context of acute care: we must take into account NHS 24, the new GP contract and the opting out of out-of-hours care by GPs without knowing what will be put in its place. The change to the GP contract is the biggest change to local health care since 1947. Let us not look at what is happening at the Belford and Lorne hospitals alone—let us look at the delivery of health care services in general in Lochaber. NHS Highland gained most in Scotland from the Arbuthnott funding formula, to address inequalities in access to health services. The options that were put forward by the NHS will not address inequalities; they will create inequalities in access to healthcare. As others have done, I highlight travel times. It can take up to two hours just to get to Fort William from Lochaber, so we should add that to the 66-mile onward journey to Inverness and to the journeys to Oban or Paisley. When the planners talk about clinical feasibility and risk assessments, do they take into account the effect on a patient of lengthy travel times, of poorly maintained roads, of single-track roads and of adverse weather conditions? I commend Stewart Maclean and the Belford action group on their positive and constructive  approach to finding a workable solution to the problem. People talk about community hospitals, but the term can be misleading. Glencoe is a community hospital that provides geriatric care; the Balfour in Kirkwall is a community hospital that provides excellent acute care—and it has just got a brand new theatre. When we talk about community hospitals, we must be clear what we are looking for. I hope that the proposal—it was not previously an option—suggested by Andrew Sim of the Viking surgeons group at the Lochaber meeting will be taken into account.

It is all very well to talk about the increase in supply, but would the minister acknowledge, as others have done, that there is an increase in demand for social workers across the voluntary sector because of legislation from here and elsewhere? Many graduates do not choose to take up a career in social work. The minister is giving only a part of the picture.

I, too, am grateful to Brian Adam for securing the debate. He will notice that among the many signatures that are missing from his motion is my own. That is not because I do not agree with the motion's general tone but because I have two points of disagreement with it. First, the motion refers to the shortage of social workers. However, like Eleanor Scott, I am concerned about provision in the social work service as a whole. I want to concentrate more on social work teams, which include directors of social work, senior social workers, care managers, occupational therapists, social work assistants, home care managers, sheltered housing wardens and managers and qualified staff in residential and day care settings. It is not only the lack of social workers but staff shortages throughout social work departments that affect the service. Secondly, like Scott Barrie, I want to consider the motion's reference to social workers' pay and conditions. Unusually, I agree with Scott Barrie in that that narrows the focus and leads us to believe that the problem is only about pay and conditions. If I were to support a McCrone-type review, it would have to consider a wider range of matters than simply pay and conditions.

I am simply saying that, if there were a review, it would have to be a review of more than just pay and conditions. Brian Adam referred to the Caleb Ness inquiry. If we have learned anything from that, it is that there were problems at all levels of social work provision and that the problem was not simply one of a shortage of social workers. However, I do not want to digress into that area. Although I appreciated Brian Adam's points about children's services, if there were inquiries into mental health, care of the elderly or drug and alcohol services, we might find that the problems that exist in those areas are similar to those that exist in children's services. The shortage of social workers is well documented. However, I am concerned about the fact that the Scottish Parliament continues to pass legislation—for example, the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003—that requires increasing numbers of social workers when there are not enough social workers to provide existing services. I agree with much of the legislation,  particularly that on mental health, that we have passed. However, if we pass the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, which we are now considering, there is no way that we can meet its requirements for social workers and mental health workers. We hear from the Executive about the need for partnership and joint working, with which I agree and which we all want. However, that clearly cannot happen if one part of the equation does not deliver. I am not blaming social work services, but we cannot have a partnership if a partner is missing. I have examples of cases that highlight the problems that arise from the shortage of social workers and the lack of partnership—I will give no names. Recently, two sisters who came to my surgery told me that they had to argue with different social workers week after week about their mother's care on discharge from hospital. They finally got a sympathetic social worker and things worked out, but it took them a long time to get there. On mental health, children's services, court services and the children's panel, the lack of social work reports or their lateness is leading to seriously inaccurate, incomplete and inappropriate decisions being made in some cases. On drug and alcohol cases, I have recently come across a problem relating to the inability of parents in Inverness to gain access to a social worker for two years. If it is decided that a review is the way forward, it must cover all social work staff, including occupational therapists and so on. Finally, because I have spoken about occupational health services, I would like to give an example of how long people have to wait in the Highlands, where a priority system is used for people who are waiting to see an occupational therapist. Cases with priority rating B are judged to be urgent; they are in that category because they involve a terminal illness, the facilitation of hospital discharge, the prevention of the breakdown of the home situation and so on. There are currently 290 people in category B on the waiting list; they will have to wait up to 11 months to see an occupational therapist. Finally, there are 585 category C cases, which are judged to be high priority; the people concerned must wait up to two years.

My point is made.

If Scott Barrie sees the two-year diploma as inadequate, what are his views on the fast-track proposals?

Will the member give way?

By the look on the Presiding Officer's face, I think that I am entitled to quite a long intervention.

I could make another speech. In the spirit of consensus, I appreciate what the minister said. However, he did not mention the points that I raised, which were serious and passionate points about the fertility problems that arise from chlamydia. I would like to see more emphasis on such fertility problems as well as on family planning advice and more emphasis on intended pregnancies, including those later in life, rather than only on unintended pregnancies. I ask the minister whether he will take those points away from the debate to integrate into the strategy?

I am delighted to speak in the debate and to be able to raise an issue about which I take every opportunity to speak—low fertility rates in Scotland. The registrar general has recently raised the issue, too, and research has been done on it by the University of Aberdeen.  I will concentrate on the relationship between chlamydia and fertility. There are many reasons why some couples choose to have no children and why others choose to have one child or small families. However, the problem of men and women being unable to conceive children is increasing. I am pleased that the strategy acknowledges the increase in the incidence of sexually transmitted infections. Paragraph 1.3 states: "Sexual wellbeing is not just about the absence of disease or unintended pregnancy." Any sexual health strategy should be combined with a reproductive health strategy, as is outlined elsewhere in the document, including at page 51. However, the link is not strong enough. The Minister for Health and Community Care commissioned the national sexual health strategy with particular reference to measures to reduce unintended pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections. I would like the strategy also to focus on intended pregnancies and the effect of chlamydia on infertility. As the minister suggested, rates of chlamydia increased by 41 per cent in 2000-01 and by 12 per cent in 2001-2, although some of that increase can be put down to better diagnoses. However, the increase among females under 16 is particularly marked. The infection is symptomless, so many people—men and women—go through their lives totally unaware that chlamydia will prevent them from having children in future. We now have the morning-after pill, Levonelle, as well as condoms and peer pressure—the emphasis at the moment is on avoiding pregnancy. Many youngsters may be confident that, as long as they are not among the statistics for teenage pregnancy, they are all right; they may think that pregnancy is the main issue. In addition to having a strategy on unwanted pregnancy, we must be more aware of fertility problems later in life, particularly given that people are marrying later—the average age at which people marry is now 28 to 30—and that many people are starting their families later in life. Naturally, couples often wait some time to build their home before thinking about a family. They may also wait some time before seeking help on fertility problems, which is not to mention the waiting time to see a consultant. There are more second and third marriages, so many people are 38 years old before fertility issues are wholly identified. I am sure that the minister, like me and many other members, has had people at his surgery asking why they cannot be funded for fertility treatment after 38. That simply is not allowed in the national health service.  For that and other reasons, although we have to talk about unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases, we also have to tell young people that they should be aware that chlamydia is a symptomless infection. If they are not tested, they may not be able to have a child when they want one. For many people, by the time they ask for help, it is too late. Often, men and women are reluctant to seek help on fertility issues. They carry the burden that they are letting their partner down. For many women and men, the issue is complex; they feel that they are not quite a complete male or female because they cannot reproduce. I ask the minister to be sensitive to those complex feelings and to include those issues in his strategy. I raise those points because I would like the strategy to place more emphasis on intended pregnancies as well as on unintended pregnancies. There must be more emphasis on the fertility issues resulting from the increase in the incidence of sexually transmitted diseases, particularly chlamydia. Box 8 of the strategy is entitled "Interim national clinical service targets for chlamydia". Out of nine targets, seven of them use the word "should". For example, the list of targets states: "Each NHS Board should increase chlamydia testing ... NAAT should be used ... 90% of individuals diagnosed with chlamydia should be treated within four weeks". However, only one of the nine targets uses the word "must". If the consultation is serious, I ask the minister to look again at those targets to ensure that they cover reproduction. The targets on chlamydia should also be firmed up to cover fertility issues.

I have been in receipt of a statutory repairs notice and a bill from the City of Edinburgh Council for a statutory repair to my Edinburgh flat. As a lawyer, does Robert Brown agree that such statutory measures are already in place and that we should perhaps examine the definition of what constitutes a statutory repair?

I welcome the debate on improving Scotland's homes. The Conservatives will support the Executive motion on the basis that the housing improvement task force's report is an excellent basis for debate and discussion, and we will also support the SNP amendment that calls for a timetable and resources. No member could deny the transformation of council estates throughout Scotland that have benefited from the tenants' right to buy, which gave council tenants the opportunity to own their homes, which many could not afford to buy at the market price, and to move to private housing, which many could not do because they were locked into paying high rents. The aspirations of 360,000 people in Scotland have been fulfilled, and we look to the Liberal Democrat-Labour coalition to continue to encourage, support and work with councils to extend stock transfer to give tenants greater rights and responsibilities.

After that lengthy intervention, I must say that, instead of the Tories' rush to sell being the problem, it was the tenants' rush to buy—we cannot have a market unless there is a buyer and a seller.

No. I apologise to Linda Fabiani, but I must cover quite a few points. Recent figures from Highland Council showed that it has the highest council house debt in mainland Scotland—at around £11,000 per house—with 47p in every pound of housing revenue going to service that debt. That raises the point that Tricia Marwick raised. The problems of care, maintenance and investment in the housing stock become serious issues. I hope that Highland Council and councils throughout Scotland will vigorously pursue the transfer of housing stock to local associations. I ask the minister to commit to keeping in touch  with the Ministry of Defence regarding properties throughout Scotland. It is important that the Scottish Executive be informed of the proposals for military bases in Scotland. In Inverness and Ardersier a considerable number of MOD properties are linked to Fort George. Any changes in personnel at and the use of Fort George would have an enormous impact on the need for local housing and it would be senseless to allow good homes to become empty and fall into disrepair when they are desperately needed for rent. My next point concerns the confusion in councils about the selling of homes to pay for care of the elderly, although I realise that the issue is a health matter as well as a housing one. I was recently approached by a middle-aged lady who had lived with her mother all her life and who received a letter from Highland Council saying that their home would have to be sold to pay for care. When I looked at the regulations, I found that the home could have been passed on if the lady was over 60, under 16 or a carer, but instead she was faced with having to take out a mortgage for half the value of the property. We must re-examine the guidelines on such cases, because that was not my understanding of the legislation when it went through the Health and Community Care Committee. I ask that the appropriate ministers give local authorities clear and consistent guidance on the issue to save people from the trauma of losing their homes. The Scottish Conservative party welcomes initiatives to improve the housing stock and to give people the freedom, choice and opportunity to own or rent the property of their choice. The housing improvement task force report seems to concentrate on common repairs to and maintenance of flats. It does not seem to acknowledge the problems that are faced by owners in private housing estates throughout Scotland, and I have spoken to the minister about that. Recommendation 58 states: "The Scottish Executive in consultation with the Law Society ... should prepare good practice guidance on the inclusion of common repair and maintenance burdens in title deeds for new developments". I live in Inshes Park in Inverness, where I set up a local residents association and, more recently, a community council to try to sort out the common factoring and ground maintenance of the large open spaces. I say to the minister that the problem is still not resolved. Owners have not received a bill for ground maintenance for two years and those who refuse to pay are not being pursued. Those who pay end up paying for the non-payers, and people who buy a house on the estate will be faced with a bill for ground maintenance for the two years before they moved in. In addition, the house's title deeds might not specify an obligation  to pay for ground maintenance, as that depends on the phase of development in which the house was built. I am pleased to pass that information to the minister again and to ask for her advice. I ask the minister to meet Andrew Bradford, the chairman of the Scottish Landowners Federation's rural housing committee, who has said that savings of up to 25 per cent on current subsidy levels could be made by including the landowning sector in the provision of affordable housing in rural areas, given that that sector receives less than 2 per cent of public funding. We look forward to the outcome of the pilot study for the single survey, which will be conducted on a voluntary basis. We also look forward to receiving further information about surveyors' duty of care and professional indemnity insurance. We entirely agree with point 165 of the report, on page 39, which says: "it would be advantageous for single surveys to be developed as a market-led, voluntary initiative". Finally, although we welcome the chapter about strengthening the rights of private tenants, we want those rights to be balanced with a responsibility to keep houses in good repair and to have common respect for the peace and privacy of neighbours. I move amendment S2M-761.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the report of the Housing Improvement Task Force; recognises that housing stock transfer to community-based housing associations gives tenants far more say in the way their housing is run, giving tenants greater rights and responsibilities, and therefore believes that, to improve the standard of housing for everyone in Scotland, it is necessary to step up the process of devolving control of housing from local authorities to community-based housing associations, housing co-operatives or a range of other providers to give tenants a real choice of landlord and a real say in the management of their homes."

Does Jean Turner have sympathy for the GPs in Lochaline and Lochcarron who worry that, if they opt out of the new out-of-hours arrangements, the community will turn against them? GPs have a moral commitment to their patients and if a patient dies, they will be cast out by the community.

Does the minister understand that GPs in the Highlands are having to make very difficult—indeed, agonising—decisions about opting out of out-of-hours commitments to their patients because of uncertainty about what is being put in place for their patients?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention now?

Does Mike Rumbles agree that the Executive has created a two-tier health service and that the poor, who cannot pay to go private, have to wait longer than ever before for health treatment? Only those who can afford private health care, who pay taxes  but also have to pay the full cost of private treatment, can access treatment quickly.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether funding to local authorities for roads is adequate to maintain road infrastructure. (S2O-845)

In 1994-95, when Jamie Stone was a Highland councillor, John Farquhar Munro was convener for roads and transport and Peter Peacock was convener of Highland Council, they all complained about the inadequacy of Conservative funding for roads at £34 million.

Now those three ex-Highland councillors are influential players and partners in the coalition agreement, so why has road and bridge maintenance funding now halved from £34 million under the Tories to £17 million under the Liberals and Labour?

Although I have never participated in a debate on domestic violence, I acknowledge and support the fact that the Parliament has given the issue rightful priority and attention. I also acknowledge the contribution that individual members, such as Maureen Macmillan, have made in helping many women and families throughout the Highlands. The theme of my speech is the under-reporting of violent attacks. We should also be concerned about the inconsistent methods of recording domestic violence, as we cannot have a clear picture of the problem unless an accurate and consistent approach to recording is taken throughout Scotland. I draw members' attention to paragraph 5.2.5 on page 27 of the statistical bulletin on which the debate is based. Under the heading "Reporting Practice", the bulletin states: "some forces have ruled that no crime or offence should be recorded if no further action is to be taken e.g. because the victim does not wish any action to be taken. Other forces may record a crime or offence. These differences clearly influence the proportion of incidents which lead to the recording of a crime or offence which ranged from 98 per cent in Grampian ... to 24 per cent in Central. These differences also influence the proportion of recorded crimes and offences which are referred to the procurator fiscal." It therefore seems likely police forces, as well as women themselves, seriously under-report domestic violence. I appreciate that the debate is about violence against women and further acknowledge that this is the start of 16 days of activism against gender- based violence, but, being contrary—as is my nature—I will raise two points that relate to men, and hope that, unlike the previous two members who did so, I will not get lambasted. First, I suggest that domestic violence against men is also very highly under-reported. In Scotland's macho culture, it probably would not go down well for a man to admit to his mates that his wife was beating him up. My second point relates to an issue—male rape—that was raised by Glasgow's only Tory councillor, Alan Rodger, whose motion on the issue received unanimous backing from all the Glasgow councillors present when it was debated. There seems to be an assumption that violent or sexual attacks take place only between males and female victims, and figures state that 90 per cent of victims are female. Although I acknowledge the attention that has rightly been paid to violence against women, I suggest that we also need to give attention to male rape. Recently, harrowing cases have been recorded in Glasgow involving the date-rape drug and gang rapes of men by men. Although around 400 sexual assaults on men are reported each year, there also seems to be a myth that male rapists—that is, men who rape men—are homosexual. However, according to an article by Catherine Deveney in Scotland on Sunday , a 1990 study found that, in 98 per cent of studies, the men who rape men are heterosexual.

I have absolutely no doubt about that. Power and control were at the forefront of the article that I just mentioned and the meeting that I had this week with a male who was the victim of such a crime. Surely, in this age of equality and social inclusion, it is time for us to address the discrimination that exists in the current law on sexual offences. It is my understanding that the prosecution simply has to prove that a female victim has not consented to sexual intercourse with the man, but that, for a male victim, evidence is required that force was used against the victim. The need to prove that force was used will ensure that male victims are reluctant to come forward and that their attackers are not brought to justice. With few cases coming forward, it is unlikely that male rape will ever get the attention or recognition in law that it deserves, not to mention the fact that the advice, support and counselling services that are needed to allow men to cope with that trauma will also not be forthcoming. The present situation is hardly in the spirit of promoting equality under the law. As the law  stands, it is likely that many male victims suffer in silence and that their psychological distress is ignored. I put down this marker to say that, if male rape in Scotland cannot be included in any current legislative vehicles to bring the crime into line with the attention that is given—and rightly so—to women, I would consider proposing a member's bill. I hope that, like Alan Rodger's motion in Glasgow City Council, such a bill would get support from all parties. I agree with Johann Lamont's point that male aggression is unacceptable. It is as unacceptable against men as it is against women.

Why has the Executive delayed the target date for eradicating fuel poverty from 2007 to 2016?

On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I welcome the reduction in fuel poverty that is shown in the "Scottish House Conditions Survey 2002". I have many friends who have benefited from the warm deal and free central heating and I know that those initiatives have transformed their lives. Although I fully welcome the progress that has been made, I think that it is right to put on record the fact that the warm deal scheme replaced the highly successful Conservative home energy efficiency scheme, which the Executive took over in 1999. The framework was in place and many people were benefiting from it, so we welcome the Executive's extension of the Conservative scheme. We also support the priority that is being given to the provision of central heating for pensioners. There could be a case for extending that scheme to other groups in the fullness of time, once measured and costed proposals have been produced and the full needs of pensioners have been met. The biggest contributor to the reduction in fuel poverty has undoubtedly been the privatisation of the utilities. That policy was wholly opposed by Labour, which threatened renationalisation when it got back into power. Seven years, later, however, I am delighted that Labour recognises that the Conservative policy was right.

I have only four minutes and I will struggle to fit in everything that I want to say. The Scottish Labour manifesto in 1999 stated that fuel poverty would be eliminated over two sessions of the Parliament. The target has since been moved from 2007 to November 2016, which is a delay of nine years. Moreover, the aim, as stated in the motion, is now to "eradicate fuel poverty as far as reasonably practicable". Fuel poverty is a complex issue. The reduction of bills is a huge factor, but the situation is also helped enormously by energy efficiency. However, the increases in other household bills, such as council tax and water rates, leave less disposable  income to meet fuel costs. A household could spend less than 10 per cent of its disposable income on fuel, but the rises in council tax and water rates—which have been 80 per cent more in Scotland than in England—could lead to debt and difficulty in buying other essential goods. The 10 per cent figure might be appropriate for most people, but I note in the survey that 35 per cent of households include at least one member with a long-term illness or disability compared with 29 per cent in 1996. Moreover, pensioners and disabled people are less mobile, less likely to go out and more likely to be greater users of energy than other people. Help the Aged's briefing paper states that, in ordinary households, rooms are heated for an average of nine hours daily, compared to 16 hours daily for the house of an elderly person, who will also require a higher temperature. I always like to advocate joined-up services, so I will say a quick work about occupational therapists. In the Highland Council area, 924 people are waiting for an occupational therapist to make an assessment with regard to aids and adaptations to make home living comfortable. There are 290 people on the list that is classed as urgent, which includes those with a terminal illness. They have to wait up to 11 months for an appointment with an occupational therapist. Before making my final point, as I am running out of time, I will simply state that I welcome housing stock transfer. At the Energy Action Scotland conference last week—Margaret Ewing, the vice-chairman of the organisation, was also in attendance—I was delighted to hear Martin O'Neill, a Labour MP, talking about genteel and hidden poverty. I hesitate to mention the problem, because I do not know how to measure it, but I would like the minister to keep the issue in mind. I move amendment S2M-627.2, to insert at end: "and recognises that the single biggest contributor to a reduction in fuel poverty was the privatisation of the utilities by Conservative governments at Westminster."

I acknowledge the excellent work that Paul Martin and the dental think tank are doing in the Highlands and I hope that the minister will work with them, as many MSPs have done. Will the minister include in the consultation the issue of free dental care for the elderly and for people who are on benefits who currently have to pay the full fees for dental treatment? If those people need their dentist to issue a prescription, they have to pay a fee to an NHS dentist and the full cost of the prescription to a private dentist. That leads to serious financial hardship.

I thank Cathy Peattie for the debate, and for reminding us of the struggle by women. I must admit that I did not enter politics to fight for women or feminist issues. I have not thrown eggs or broken windows and I gave up trying to look 35 some years ago, but I am pleased to speak in this debate. I am proud to belong to the party that produced the first female MP and the first female Prime Minister. From grocer's daughter to Prime Minister and a highly respected politician on the world stage, it is fitting to acknowledge today the contribution of Mrs Thatcher to our politics and history. It is also fitting to note that Mrs Thatcher went round many constituencies before she was selected as a candidate. She was certainly not brought in through any source of influence.  I thought it would be pertinent tonight to remind members of my experience when I went after my first seat. It was 1989, the seat was North East Fife and I was delighted to become the candidate. I owe North East Fife Conservative Association an enormous debt of gratitude. The association invited along 14 men and me, as the token woman. I still have the letter that asked me to bring my wife that night—they forgot that the letter was being sent to a woman. At the recent Conservative conference in Blackpool, I was pleased to attend a fringe meeting by the Fawcett Society and MORI, which our then chairman Theresa May attended. She confirmed that the Conservative party is examining its selection process. At that public meeting she said that candidates will no longer be selected on the basis of tub-thumping speeches, and that much more emphasis will be put on their ability to deal with cases of domestic abuse in their surgeries. We may not be moving towards a 50:50 split, but there is recognition of the contribution that is made by women, and of what the Conservative party is looking for, not just from women, but from male politicians. As Cathy Peattie said, in the world league table of proportions of female representation, Scotland is now in fourth place. We are bettered only by Sweden, Wales and Denmark. Today, we should not forget that women now lead councils in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Fife, Tayside and Highland, although undoubtedly there is considerably more scope for female participation at local level, given that only 22 per cent of Scottish councillors are women, compared with 39.5 per cent of MSPs.

Yes—it is important that 22 per cent of councillors are female and that some of our leading councillors are highly respected women. We do not need women simply to come to the chamber to put forward women's and family issues, although that is welcome. I was delighted to secure a members' business debate on men's health. Perhaps some of our male MSPs found that difficult, but it is right for good and effective female MSPs to raise issues across the whole spectrum, in particular issues such as men's health. Cathy Peattie listed many heroines in her speech and I hope that the Parliament will continue to have a large representation by women; indeed, that representation increased at the  election in May. I hope that one day a female MSP will become First Minister and perhaps even a Presiding Officer.

To ask the First Minister what action is being taken to support the Scotch single malt whisky industry. (S2F-339)

I thank the First Minister for that enthusiastic reply. Does he agree that a single malt, such as Cardhu, is unique and quite different from a combination of selected malt whiskies, even if they are from the same area? Does he agree that a blend of malt whiskies should be clearly labelled as such so that changes to the product are fully understood by the trade and customers alike?

Sir Stewart Sutherland wrote the report on long-term care for the elderly. He said that councils had taken resources from care of the elderly and diverted them into social work. That was part of the evidence.

I welcome today's debate and the initiatives that the minister has presented, in particular the multi-agency inspection proposals, as well as training and other initiatives. Looking at the 35 recommendations of the report of the inquiry into the death of Caleb Ness, I think that it is a sad fact that most of those recommendations could apply to all councils in Scotland. I hope that every council will read the recommendations and consider how it could adopt the best practice that they outline. The motion states: "That the Parliament agrees that keeping Scotland's children and young people safe from harm and neglect must be a priority for all". We now need to challenge the culture that it is best to keep children with their families at all times. In recent months and years, we have seen that, sadly, a number of cases of child deaths have been at the hands of those who were responsible for them. Indeed, they have sometimes been at the hands of the child's natural parents. Councillor Brian Meek of the City of Edinburgh Council recently wrote: "as long as those who have to deal with these difficult cases continue to believe that parents or relatives are always to be preferred to all other avenues of care, the killings will go on." We should listen to that point. We must stress the need for greatly improved co-operation and communication between agencies, as well as a system that encourages greater responsibility and accountability within the child protection system. I am pleased that the Executive has accepted the amendment in my name in the constructive manner in which it was lodged. If the shortage of well-trained, experienced social workers impacted only on child protection services, there would perhaps not be so much to concern us today. I sat on the Health and Community Care Committee when it passed the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill and the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill, and one of the major issues that arose on those occasions was that there are simply not enough social workers to carry out current work loads, let alone meet the enormous demands of home care, free personal care and respite for the elderly. The Mental Heath (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 will be  successfully implemented only with a huge increase in the number of social workers and mental health officers. As Fiona Hyslop indicated, they do not exist in sufficient numbers to meet the current demands on the service, let alone the additional demands for which the Parliament is legislating. The Health and Community Care Committee agreed that there should be a single budget for community care between the national health service and social work. All members of the committee and all those who gave evidence, bar one, supported that measure. If there is one budget and management system, there is no passing of the buck. In the fullness of time, we may want to revisit that issue. Shortages of social workers exist right across the service—in care of the elderly, mental health services, drug and alcohol services and child protection services. I am now a member of the Communities Committee, and in the early stages of scrutiny of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill it is becoming evident that there are shortages of social workers in that area, too. During the passage of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill, we were told repeatedly that social work services had been taken from the elderly to fulfil the requirements of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. Now the requirement to implement the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 takes social work away from children's services, services for the elderly and drug services. For two years, the Osprey centre in Inverness, which helps people with drug and alcohol problems, has had no social worker to support those people's families. My amendment also emphasises the need for better communication between social workers and other professionals. I cannot forget the evidence of cultural incompatibility between the NHS and social work that I heard while I was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee. We also received written evidence that referred to attitude preciousness. I am pleased that the minister has addressed those points today. An increase in the number of social work vacancies by a third in a year naturally places a tremendous strain on those who are working to provide the existing service. The report on the Caleb Ness case identifies errors and makes recommendations that sound all too familiar. It states: "this was an avoidable ... death ... neither parent should have had unsupervised care of Caleb." The report identifies fault at almost every level in every agency involved. It states that "many of our recommendations are not new"  and refers to "the lack of proactive senior social work involvement" and the "tendency among professionals in ... agencies to make assumptions about the knowledge, training and actions of others." The report also states: "there was a complete failure by Criminal Justice workers and management to recognise that they did have some responsibility for child protection." As the minister acknowledged, there is evidence to suggest that this was not an isolated case. Many of the comments that I have cited must be made in similar vein in relation to care of the elderly and of mentally ill patients. Despite the legislation that the Parliament has passed, we need assurances that mechanisms are in place across the spectrum of social work to resource, train, support, monitor and audit fully the performance of social workers. Because of social workers' front-line role, blame is generally directed at them. That is probably inevitable. Most of the tragic child deaths that have occurred and that are associated with alleged mistakes in child protection have involved bad interagency working, poor communication and assumptions being made about what other agencies were aware of. When passing legislation that places greater demands on social workers, the Parliament must ensure that social work departments are resourced and fully able to deliver what we expect of them. In the case of Danielle Reid in Inverness—the child who ended up at the bottom of the Caledonian canal—despite anonymous phone calls about the behaviour of Danielle's mother a year before the child died, no social worker saw her and there was no home visit. Naturally, the blame fell on social work because, as I understand it, no other agencies were called in to help. For that reason, I welcome the emphasis that has been placed today on interagency working. There is much evidence to highlight failure in the system of child protection. I hope that the measures that have been announced today will help to protect Scotland's vulnerable children. We can be sure that there will be no improvement unless the old cultures of demarcation are broken down. I welcome what the minister said on that issue. There will be no improvement until the needs of the child become the leading driver of the service, with greater co-operation among professionals. I welcome what the minister said about breaking down professional barriers and making the child the priority. There will also be no improvement  until we can recruit, retain, value and support social work teams in councils throughout Scotland. Finally, will the minister tell the Parliament how he will monitor and audit the initiatives that he has outlined today and that the Parliament has welcomed, to ensure that in three years' time we do not have to debate the issues that we are identifying today? I move amendment S2M-593.1, to insert at end: "; acknowledges the findings of Susan O'Brien QC's inquiry into the death of Caleb Ness, and as a result calls for greatly improved co-operation and communication between agencies along with new arrangements that encourage greater responsibility and accountability within the child protection system."

To ask the Scottish Executive how many drug-related deaths there were last year. (S2O-668)

I understand that around 60 per cent of those drug-related deaths were deaths of people who had recently been released from prison. Many such people are referred to waiting lists for community drugs services. What is the minister doing to bring about clinical continuity of care for ex-prisoners?

Will Stewart Stevenson give way?

I commend Maureen Macmillan for highlighting the problems that exist in the Highlands. Does she agree that there have been unprecedented levels of appreciation in house prices in Inverness, which last year went up by 25 per cent? In the city of Inverness, it is now impossible for young couples and young people on low incomes to buy their first home.

Where are those 29 places likely to be?

I, too, welcome Scott Barrie's motion, which acknowledges the huge contribution, dedication and commitment of children's panel members, and I welcome the opportunity to debate the issue. I am sure that Scott Barrie will understand that I cannot speak for Bill Aitken, who has had a bad accident and is trying to cope with crutches and a wheelchair. I am sure that he will respond to Scott Barrie's comments when he returns to Parliament. Although I commend the recruitment campaign, which I hope will bring forward more men as well as women, we should also focus on the retention and morale of existing panel members, as Fiona Hyslop and Colin Fox mentioned, particularly given those members' experience and the training that they have undertaken. A briefing from the city of Edinburgh children's panel notes that panel members are not a bunch of do-gooders from the Morningsides of Scotland; they reflect the communities in which they live and serve. As others have said, we are unlikely to retain those committed volunteers unless they are supported by local authorities. Although a hearing can in theory impose wide conditions, if the  resources that are needed to follow those conditions through are not available, their effectiveness is undoubtedly muted. That is a demoralising factor for panel members. I understand that the promised additional 29 places in secure accommodation are not yet finalised, but perhaps the minister will confirm that. Conservatives would also support more detox and rehabilitation services for young drug and alcohol abusers. It is simply not good enough to tell a person who is ready to try to kick his or her habit to come back in a few months. I represented a 15-year-old in Fort William, who had been referred by the children's panel to detox and rehabilitation services in Lincoln in England, but the council said that it could not afford to pay for that treatment. However, the council eventually paid after quite a bit of intervention from elected members. The responsibilities and decisions of the children's panel can be made more difficult when a wide range of disabilities are misinterpreted as antisocial behaviour. Such disabilities include mental health problems, autism spectrum disorders, learning disabilities and emotional, social and behavioural problems. A recent report by the Audit Commission indicated that 90 per cent of children who have been permanently excluded from primary school and 60 per cent of children who have been permanently excluded from secondary school have special needs. It might, therefore, be more important to ensure that assessment is made of whether behaviour is the result of disability before further sanctions are considered. If we want to be successful and effective in recruiting and retaining volunteers for the children's panel, we could do no better than address the points that were raised in the Audit Scotland report of December 2002. I want to pick just a few points from that report, which has been mentioned by other members. Unless we pay attention to that, the children's panel members will continue to be demoralised and feel that their contribution is not effective.

Employment is one issue, but I can only reflect the points that have been put to me by the panel members whom I have met in the Highlands. If Scott Barrie thinks that he knows  better than Audit Scotland, he should challenge its report. Finally, let me mention what Audit Scotland said should be tackled to assist the children's hearings. It takes an average of five and a half months for a child to reach a hearing, during which time much more offending behaviour can take place. It takes seven and a half to eight and a half months to get a court decision. About 400 children are not getting the service that they need and to which they are legally entitled because of staff shortages, lack of specialist services and lack of social workers. More programmes should be focused on persistent young offenders who are under 12.

I will be very quick. Over £60 million is spent on residential and custodial places, but only £25 million is spent on community-based services. There is also an increased, and increasing, vacancy rate for social workers in children's services. However, children's panel members need support.

The Minister for Health and Community Care has said that 90 per cent of patient contact with the NHS begins and ends with GPs. They form the front line of the health service, and they are known and trusted by patients throughout Scotland.  Although we are concentrating on the Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill today, we need to be aware that GPs do not work in isolation. They need the full support of all health care partners. If, in the Highlands, someone's relatives are not getting the home care for which they have been assessed, they will rarely, if ever, go to their councillor, who should take responsibility. Instead, the GP has to answer for the lack of care available. When patients in the Highlands have to wait for up to 71 weeks to see a neurologist and find out whether they have multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, Parkinson's disease or another neurological condition, or to access continuing care for those conditions, it is not the doors of Raigmore hospital that they will chap on; it is the GP, at the front line, who is expected to be answerable for the state of those and other health services. Like many other Inverness residents, I was not notified that my out-of-hours service call would be handled by a call centre in Glasgow. Once people have given all their details to that Glasgow call centre, they are passed to a call centre in Aberdeen, only to start giving all those details again. We are constantly being told that the nurses working at NHS 24 do not diagnose over the phone. I can confirm that they do, even with the scant amount of information that can be given over the telephone line. Although I support, and have always supported, NHS 24, we need to monitor the service very closely. The new contract largely focuses on out-of-hours provision, and I appreciate the crucial role of nurses and paramedics in that regard. Both professions are undoubtedly capable of delivering more health care. However, they should never be expected to have the assessment and diagnostic skills of a GP who has nine years of medical training. I draw attention to the use of management executive letters or Health Department letters—MELs and HDLs—and guidelines. In particular, I understand that carrying out annual check-ups for over-75s was a contractual obligation for the provision of general medical services under the previous GP contract in the red book. Interestingly, performing those check-ups does not form part of the new GP contract, as the issue has been parked pending consultation. I ask the minister to ensure that the consultation includes not only the BMA and the Scotland Patients Association and so on but elderly groups and patient groups that know how beneficial such check-ups would be. In particular, I ask the minister to consult Mrs Susannah Stone—the mother of that famous cheese-making clan from Tain—who has started a one-woman campaign to  reinstate the checks. I have to say that on this issue I support her fully. The initiative would be an investment not just in terms of saving money but in the health of older people. In the annual check, the doctor is expected to examine sensory functions, mobility, mental condition, physical condition, including continence, social environment and the use of medicines—very similar to the criteria for assessing entitlement to free personal care. I ask the minister to bring the consultation on the annual check-up for the over-75s out of the parking lot and into the mainstream. I hope that members of the Health Committee will ensure that it is on the agenda and that there is a statutory guideline on it in future.

Given that the biggest change in the budget is the £280 million in global sum payments in 2004-05 and given the member's experience of the Arbuthnott formula, is he satisfied, as a member of the Health Committee, that the bill will take into account the needs of rural and remote areas as well as islands?

I ask the minister to address prejudice in planning issues. Does she think that equal weight should be given to individuals' views regardless of how long they have lived in an area?

Does the minister recognise that although that seems like a generous GAE allocation, Highlands and Islands fire service regularly spends 10 per cent more than the GAE allocation?

I thank Fergus Ewing for giving us the opportunity to debate the fire service in the Highlands and Islands. We certainly hope that a flexible approach will be taken, so that as many of the Highlands and Islands units can be retained as possible. As Fergus Ewing indicated, supporting safety in the local community is the byword of auxiliary fire units. No one can measure or cost the commitment of volunteers in the Highlands and the value that they add. That commitment should  be recognised by the Executive, as it is by the fire service locally. It has brought us doughty campaigners, such as Bunty MacDonald from Carrbridge, who are fighting to maintain the safety of their community and its people. Today, I spoke to a member of the Glenborrodale auxiliary crew, who confirmed that the crew was first on the scene—in 12 minutes—at an 18,000-acre fire in Ardnamurchan earlier this year. That fire lasted almost nine days. The Glenborrodale crew was not called first, but it arrived first on the scene with water and ensured that the property was safe even before the other crews arrived. In this instance, crews came from Grantown, Nairn, Inverness, Fort William, Spean Bridge, Acharacle, Strontian, Lochaline and Kilchoan. I hope that, in making the risk assessment, the minister will take into account the length of time that fires last and the fact that units are taken from hundreds of miles across the Highlands. It is said that auxiliaries are not allowed into houses to deal with fires. However, as Fergus Ewing indicated, they can do much to put out fires from outside houses. In many areas, auxiliaries are first on the scene when a car crash takes place. They can put out the fire, secure the vehicle by ropes to prevent it from sliding or falling over, disconnect the battery to ensure that there are no sparks and make safe the road. They may not have or need breathing apparatus for that type of call-out, but they can do invaluable work at the scene to make things safe. The same point applies to Lybster auxiliary fire unit, with 21 volunteers, and to the Carrbridge unit. Bearing in mind the huge geographical area of the Highlands and the three examples that I have given—property fires, house fires and car crashes—surely we should consider having more units such as those in Glenborrodale, Lybster and Carrbridge, rather than fewer. I am aware that my time is limited, but I would like to make a couple of further points. We should examine how best to use in future the good will and contribution of volunteers in the 32 units that are under threat. I hope that in the risk assessment the minister will take into account what would have happened had auxiliary units not been first on the scene at fires such as the one that I mentioned. Today, the issue of funding was raised in the crossfire between Fergus Ewing and Hugh Henry. I understand that there is a public-private partnership bid for more than £30 million to bring the 95 units up to the capital standards that are required. It would be helpful if the minister told us today whether that bid is meeting with favour.

After sitting through this helpful debate, I have picked up quite a number of points and learned much about the issue. First, I want to refer to a Children in Scotland briefing which says: "Of the approximately 1 million people under 16 in Scotland only 1.4% are referred to the Children's Hearings System". However, no member in this chamber should underestimate the damage that that 1.4 per cent can do. In many cases, those young people wreak havoc and cause fear in their local communities. In that respect, I acknowledge David Davidson's point about detoxification and rehabilitation, which illustrates the joined-up thinking that happens in the chamber. In her speech, Annabel Goldie wondered whether there was a need for the proposed  legislation. I wonder what has been done in response to the findings and recommendations of the Audit Scotland performance audit report entitled "Dealing with offending by young people", which was published in December 2002.

I ask Cathy Jamieson to let me finish this point, because I am trying to be constructive. I want to highlight some comments in the report's executive summary. For example, it says: "A small number of young people commit a large proportion of offences; but the evidence about whether this problem is growing is inconclusive." It goes on to point out that "It takes an average of 51/2 months for a child to reach a Children's Hearing. It takes between 71/2 and 81/2 months on average to get a court decision on a young person ... The proportion of offence grounds referred to Hearings by Reporters varies from 10% to 47% ... Some assessment reports on children in the CHS are late and some are not done at all because of staff shortages. The quality of reports is mixed." Moreover, the report says that "in the children's system we estimate that around 400 children are not getting the service they need and to which they are legally entitled, mainly because of staff shortages." It also mentions a "lack of specialist services and social workers"; refers to a vacancy rate in children's services social workers in October 2001 that was equivalent to "183 whole time staff", which is obviously a matter of concern; and says that "The quality of Social Background Reports must improve". Finally, the report recommends that "More programmes must be developed" about "'what works principles" and that "New programmes should be monitored and evaluated".

This is my speech, not the minister's. However, she set out those points in an excellent manner. As a member of the Communities Committee, I think that before we pass the proposed legislation it would be very helpful if she could update the committee on how she is addressing the issues highlighted in the Audit Scotland report, particularly the shortage of social workers. It is important to examine the existing system and existing powers to see if they can be better used. Children in Scotland also suggests that an analysis of the existing laws should be conducted prior to the introduction of new legislation. There is no doubt that services throughout Scotland are patchy. A briefing paper that we got from the City of Edinburgh Council suggests, as Sarah Boyack said, that there appears to be excellent practice in Edinburgh. The council seems to be addressing the issue. Could that good practice be rolled out throughout Scotland? ASBOs have been mentioned, but there is again inconsistency: some ASBOs are completed within six months, while others take more than nine months. Paul Martin made an excellent point when he pointed out that a policeman had asked him what an ASBO is. We need proof that everyone in the system is aware of the powers that are available before we take any further action on the issue. We also want an evaluation and examination of the use of reparation and restorative justice in local communities and in the children's panel system. That would be extremely helpful. Even Save the Children states its firm belief that "legislation and statutory powers already exist that can deal with the anti-social behaviour outlined by the Scottish Executive." I use those examples in the aftermath of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, which we passed knowing that the staff, services and infrastructure were not in place. Following the passage of the 2003 act, a review is being carried out by Dr Sandra Grant of existing services and infrastructure. I ask constructively whether it would not be more sensible to have a review of existing services before considering new services. Many members have acknowledged that tackling antisocial behaviour is a complex problem in the context of remedial and legal actions. However, we should not lose sight of what can be  done in education and I welcome Rosemary Byrne's commitment in that respect. Two weeks ago I visited Inverness prison, which has excellent education programmes that are improving year on year. The main programme in Inverness prison, as in many prisons, addresses illiteracy. One prisoner said that when he was at school, he could not keep up with the rest of the class and was left behind. It was only when he got to prison that he could learn at his own pace, and he said that was making excellent progress. A couple of days ago on a visit to Lossiemouth High School—Stewart Stevenson was also there—we were told that although pupils were given forms to notify their parents of the detention that they had been given, many of the forms were found littering the pavement. Before we take parents to task we must ensure that they are made fully aware of their children's behaviour—it would be well worth using a 19p stamp to ensure that that happens. People in Lossiemouth, from school pupils to members of the over-60s club, were unanimous in their view that bad behaviour is being rewarded. Whether or not that is true, it seems to be the perception. There seems to be an assumption that we can do everything in the Parliament. We must include our councillors on this issue as they have an enormous role to play. An example from Lossiemouth is that no one could play tennis during the summer because the net was broken. It does not take much effort to address such problems, but they are not our responsibility—they are matters for local authorities.

I, too, welcome the document and I congratulate the Equal Opportunities Committee on the work that it has done. I accept the point that Cathy Peattie made in her speech that the equality targets are long-term ones. Stewart Stevenson said that we cannot address all those who may be discriminated against, which is a very good point. I would like to give an account of my experiences in Lossiemouth yesterday, where we took evidence on the antisocial behaviour bill. One young girl at Lossiemouth High School told us that she was being bullied. I asked her why she thought she was being bullied, as we have to try to understand those issues. She said, "People keep telling me to go back to where I came from." Bearing in mind the fact that she lives in Lossiemouth, I innocently asked her where she came from. She said that she came from Elgin—5 miles down the road. She explained that the problem was due to the long-standing historical thing—whatever one wants to call it—that exists between Lossiemouth and Elgin, and seems to accept that she will always be picked on because she comes from 5 miles away. I raise that point because I think that it is impossible to consider all those who may be discriminated against. Football is another issue that comes to mind—Donald Gorrie usually raises these issues. I know that we will never convince Inverness Caley Thistle supporters that Ross County supporters are equal; they simply are not. When we were in Lossiemouth yesterday, Stewart Stevenson and I visited a Derby and Joan club. It turned out that there were 50 Joans and no Derbys, if I may use that expression. Stewart Stevenson was the only male in the room. I could not help thinking that we should not be too prescriptive and say that if we speak to more than 50 females over the age of 60 we have to go round Lossiemouth to try to find 50 males. We have to be more flexible and use more discretion when we are talking about equality. If the women are willing to turn up and give us their views, that is good enough for me. Having a statement on mainstreaming equality into the policy process is extremely helpful, not only in the context of the report but in raising awareness. The fact that we are discussing the report today is also helpful. I very much welcome the intent of the report, but it cannot by itself change attitudes and prejudice throughout Scotland. Our own attitudes and value judgments, which form attitudes and prejudices, will eventually help to achieve change and equality. When I started work, I remember older women  saying, "She is leaving her child to go to work—she does not deserve to have a child," or, "She's farming out her children—she doesn't deserve to have children." Such comments were made during my lifetime, and it is not long ago since women in Scotland put up the greatest barriers to women going to work. I am pleased—indeed, delighted—that those attitudes have changed, but they did not change because someone produced a document. Attitudes changed because women stood up, decided to pursue their careers and were unwilling to accept that form of prejudice. I note that the equalities checklist in the committee's report states: "What is the policy for? Who is the policy for?" Given that the antisocial behaviour bill will probably be one of the most controversial bills this session, I think that we must also go out to listen to neds and to those who indulge in antisocial behaviour. If we want to understand the issues, we cannot listen only to teachers, social workers and people who behave well. If we are to understand the issues, we must speak to people who indulge in antisocial behaviour. We must be equal in our understanding. We should listen to the experiences of the Airborne Initiative project. Whether the project is right or wrong, it is worth listening to its experiences. I noticed that mental health was not covered in the attitudes survey that was published yesterday. I commend the approach of the Health and Community Care Committee because I think that we went out of our way to listen to people with mental health problems when we considered the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill. We did not listen only to psychiatrists, social workers and so on. If we are talking about equality, we cannot always look at the issues top-down. If we want to change behaviour and include people, we must consider those who are affected by legislation. We could learn much from the Health and Community Care Committee's experience. I am concerned about the Equal Opportunities Committee's recommendation that there should be a database of equal opportunities contacts and consultees that would be accessible to all committees. We do not need just one list of consultees; instead, committees must be flexible and use their discretion. Consultees will depend on committee business, such as the bill concerned. Equality of opportunity applies to a wide range of issues, not just those of sex, race and disability. As Frances Curran said, members should set an example by accepting viewpoints. The Executive often thinks that ideas must be wrong if they come from an Opposition party, but no one has a monopoly on good ideas. If we want equality out  there, we should start by treating one another equally and with respect.

The Social Firms Scotland briefing paper on the subject of people with mental health problems moving into work states that stigma and discrimination are "the most significant barriers to employment aspirations". Will the minister condemn the unacceptable and inappropriate smears that Mike Rumbles made in the chamber this morning and distance members of her party from those shameful comments about people with mental health problems?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Murdo Fraser agree that the most shameful and disgusting comments that we heard this morning came from Mike Rumbles? Given that my party and the Parliament agreed to reduce the stigma of mental health problems when we passed the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, I ask my colleague Murdo Fraser to ask Mike Rumbles to apologise to the chamber.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, thank the minister for the advance copy of her statement. It will be noted that no Conservative member signed up in support of Jackie Baillie's proposed member's bill—the charities (Scotland) bill—because we recognise the need for a fully comprehensive review of charity law. However, the Conservatives support any actions and proposals to encourage the giving of money for charitable purposes in the faith that that money will be used for its intended purpose. At the outset of the consultation on charity law, I ask the minister to strike a balance between managing fraud and overburdening organisations with regulations, particularly smaller charities, but also in relation to the setting up of new charities.

First, I was very touched by Margaret Ewing's comments about Alzheimer's and dementia. I think that the BBC, with its "Eastenders" storyline, is doing an excellent job in raising awareness of the fears and experiences of those who are affected by Alzheimer's. Such a storyline probably educates more people than NHS booklets. We hear constantly that the situation in health is all the fault of the Tories. However, we should remind ourselves that the Labour party is now in its seventh year of government. During the Scottish Parliament's first session, I—along with Kay Ullrich and others—was faced almost weekly with self-congratulatory statements that welcomed everything that the Executive was doing to improve the health service. In that regard, the Minister for Health and Community Care's comment this morning that Scotland's health is not improving fast enough represents an honest change. Thank goodness that we are getting to the truth at last. Like other members, I want to concentrate on health issues in Highland. If the minister wants to rise to challenges, he needs to know what the challenges are. In that respect, I have only two words for the health situation in the Highlands: uncertainty and instability. I cannot describe the situation there better than Jamie Stone already has done. Incidentally, I commend the work that Jamie Stone has done on maternity services in Wick. Less than two years ago, we were assured that we would have a consultant-led maternity service once a wide-ranging consultation involving  numerous people had been carried out. Now, within two years of receiving that assurance, we have received letters saying that the service again faces uncertainty. In the Highlands, there is uncertainty not only over maternity services in Wick, but over GPs and dentists. I listened to Duncan McNeil's comments about problems and uncertainty in Paisley; however, there is also uncertainty at the hospitals in Oban and Fort William, which are currently thinking about reconfiguring services on the basis that patients will go to Paisley instead. There is uncertainty across the whole country. This week, I received a letter from a member of the Lochaber mountain rescue team. It pointed out that, although it can take several hours to evacuate casualties from the mountains while their condition is deteriorating, they can be treated by the excellent trauma service at Fort William within minutes of their arrival. Now, rescuers face the uncertainty of taking people off the mountain without knowing whether they will go to the Belford, to Oban, or even to Paisley. We must address that problem. In the Highlands, the NHS has always been a backbone that has provided certainty, stability and reassurance for people who live in remote, rural areas; now, that stability has gone. Within two years of an assurance being received about NHS services, that assurance has gone. Another example is kidney dialysis patients, who must endure the 66-mile journey from Fort William to Inverness for dialysis—if they are lucky enough to live in Fort William. If they have to travel longer distances from Kinlochleven, Kilchoan or Mallaig, they can add an extra two hours to their journey to reach Fort William before they set out for Inverness. We need much more understanding about the fears of people in rural areas in order to give them the assurances that they have had in the past. I fully welcome NHS 24, which is an excellent service. However, I worry when NHS 24 acts as a barrier to calling out GPs, and I worry that nurses are diagnosing patients' conditions down the phone line from Aberdeen. Although I welcome the service, it must be monitored carefully. Not only does the minister let down Scotland, but we all have to suffer the criticism for his incompetence. Last week, someone came to my surgery in Nairn and said, "I thought that the Scottish Parliament would help me get my cataracts done quicker; why do I have to wait a year to go on a waiting list? Why is the Scottish Parliament spending more money on health, yet I have to wait longer?" I found it difficult to answer those questions. The minister must address why more taxpayers' money is going into health, yet  people are waiting longer for treatment and fewer are being treated. Last week, I was privileged to meet a Flemish delegation from the Belgian Parliament. One chap said to me that his wife, who was a member of the Belgian Parliament, was very tired because she had had to wait seven hours in accident and emergency at the Edinburgh royal infirmary. The minister is damaging the image of Scotland abroad. Last night at the European Movement, contributors were asked to give their impressions of Scotland so that we could see ourselves as others see us. One contributor said that, 20 years ago when she came to Scotland, the NHS was an excellent service, but that she could not say that now. It is not only Scotland's patients that the minister is letting down; he is damaging this country's image.

While welcoming the free dental checks, will Shona Robison agree that in the Highlands people may get a free dental check but be unable to find a dentist or afford dental treatment?

The Executive's document "Recording our Achievements" states that the Executive was unable to record the achievement of providing a sports co-ordinator in all schools by 2003 and that  that aim might not be achieved because local government has not been able to afford the matched funding. Will the minister now give local government more funding to ensure that that promise is achieved?

Will the member give way?

I must first declare an interest—my son works for Babtie Group Ltd in Inverness as a civil engineer. As I will refer to Babtie in my speech, I feel that it is appropriate to mention him, even though he did not have anything to do with the Babtie report.

Yes, that is what he told me. I very much welcome the fact that Margaret Ewing has secured this debate and I join Maureen Macmillan in congratulating The Northern Scot , which is an excellent campaigning newspaper, on its support for the Elgin bypass. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I know that the roads infrastructure is crucial to those who live and work in the area as well as to visitors. However, as an Inverness resident, I know that people prefer the much-discussed A9 Inverness to Perth road to the A96 Inverness to Aberdeen route, which is a similar length. When we leave Inverness, a sign tells drivers that Aberdeen is 110 miles away. One could be forgiven for thinking that someone travelling at a reasonable speed could cover the distance in an hour and a half. However, the outskirts to the west of Aberdeen cannot be reached even in less than two hours and Aberdeen has its own congestion problems. I make that point because the relevant authorities should examine the full route of the A96, as well as the Elgin bypass. Prioritisation of upgrading the whole route could then be  timetabled into plans, in contrast to the constant consideration of which area has the best campaign. I say that although I support fully Margaret Ewing's motion and the Elgin bypass. The motion says that Moray Council should make full representations to the Scottish Executive for an Elgin bypass. I support what Margaret Ewing said about the social, economic and environmental factors that must be taken into account. I go further than the motion and ask for an assurance that the Babtie report's recommendation that Moray Council should adopt a more radical approach to local traffic issues in Elgin will be addressed. Maureen Macmillan and Margaret Ewing mentioned the workshop that Babtie and Moray Council arranged, which involved many local stakeholder groups. The report on the workshop said: "A number of stakeholders felt that without complementary improvements to the town's road network, the benefits of a bypass would be short-lived, particularly given the substantial residential and business proposals for the town".

I fully support that. I would not like the member to think that I am saying that improvements in the town of Elgin should be in place of a bypass. I am saying that, in considering the bypass, we should not forget that the report recommended a twin-track approach. It said that the town's infrastructure needed to be improved in addition to a bypass in the longer term. Babtie recommended that the bypass should be pursued as a long-term objective, but it said that that should take place in the context of on-going policies and proposals to improve the efficiency of the road network in Elgin. Others have mentioned the need to carry more freight by rail. I understand that a large railway marshalling yard is located in Elgin and is woefully underused. I fully support the Elgin bypass, but we should not adopt only a single strategy or allow the bypass to detract from the need to address local traffic problems in Elgin, particularly as the Babtie report estimated that 75 per cent of the traffic that uses the A96 is local traffic. Housing plans for the next 15 years should also be taken into account. I understand that more than 1,500 houses are  planned to be built in Elgin. The longer the bypass is put off, the greater the cost to Elgin. I support the motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive how per capita health funding in the Orkney islands compares with that in the Western Isles. (S2O-368)

There is a significant difference of £400 or £500 pounds per person between the figures. Is it not time to consider the historical differences that have developed between the island authorities, rather than apply small percentage changes in funding each year, to ensure more equitable funding and treatment for people living in the Orkney islands, given that the NHS in Shetland, Orkney and the Western Isles must provide the same health services against the same challenges and the same difficulties of geographical remoteness?

I, too, welcome the approach to addressing the drugs problem. I mentioned joined-up working in my speech. Is Maureen Macmillan as concerned as I am that, after over a year, there is still no social worker at Osprey House to support people and families with drug and alcohol problems? I discussed that subject with Mary Mulligan in her previous job as Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care.

Given that this is my first speech on my new brief, I want to use my eight minutes to concentrate on and acknowledge the problems. Unless we do that, we cannot set about addressing them. In the motion, Margaret Curran talks about "the Executive's continuing commitment to breaking down the ... barriers that create inequality". My research leads me to recognise that, although the Executive has such a commitment, the truth is that on so many issues the opportunity gap is not closing, but widening. The Liberal-Labour coalition partners also need to realise that, in order to close the opportunity gap, the coalition needs to give people choice. The truth is that waiting lists have increased by 24 per cent—more accurately, by more than 22,000—since 1999. More taxpayer's money is going into the national health service in Scotland, yet patients are waiting longer and fewer are being treated. My colleague David Davidson will address those issues in his speech. Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education found that 25 per cent of secondary 2 pupils are not reaching appropriate levels of literacy. It is a fact that more than 3,000 pupils leave Scotland's schools with no qualifications. My colleague Lord James Douglas-Hamilton will address the widening gap in education. I will turn to the economy and address the issue of water rates. Over the past decade, household bills in Scotland have risen by about 94 per cent in real terms, compared to a rise of 22 per cent in England since 1989. It is now estimated that Scottish businesses are paying between five and 10 times the cost of equivalent water bills in  England. That is hardly proof of equal treatment and opportunities in Scotland, which has lower standards of drinking water, more pollution leaking from sewers and more wasted water from leaky pipes.

Robert Brown needs to get real and to start reading our manifestos properly. If he examines our proposals for mutualisation of the water industry and our not-for-profit proposals, he will find that what he suggests is certainly not the case. On the subject of strong and safe communities, we need look no further than the Scottish household survey, which found that almost a quarter of Scots felt either "not particularly safe" or "not safe at all" when walking in their neighbourhoods after dark. In fact, 17 per cent of people with incomes of more than £20,000 did not feel safe, while 33 per cent—nearly twice that figure—of people with incomes of between £6,000 and £10,000 did not feel safe. Our justice spokesman, Annabel Goldie, will address those issues later. On measures to reduce debt, I certainly welcome the Executive's support for credit unions and the extension of debt counselling. However, I refer the Parliament to figures from the Scottish Low Pay Unit, which confirm that 76.5 per cent of female manual workers were on low pay in 1998 and that exactly the same percentage were on low pay in 2002. The gap is neither closing nor widening; in fact, no impact at all has been made in that area. Moreover, there has been a 4 per cent increase since 1998 in the number of male manual workers in the low pay category.

Cathy Peattie will need to discuss that matter with the Scottish Low Pay Unit, because I am quoting from its figures. I am happy to give her a copy of them. Of course, no social justice agenda can be addressed unless there is joined-up thinking and working in our public services. In that respect, I refer members to the Highland Council's homelessness strategy, which says: "For people with mental health issues, housing alone is not the answer. Unless support is provided and provision made for risks resulting from their condition, the allocation of housing could simply exacerbate vulnerability."

Although I always welcome the Executive's inputs, I would rather measure matters by their outcomes. The Highland Council has also expressed the same concerns in relation to ex-prisoners. When the needs of a person—patient, pupil, ex-offender or homeless person—are addressed as the driving priority, the service should follow. One lasting memory of my time as a member of the Parliament's Health and Community Care Committee in the previous parliamentary session is of how fiefdoms, bureaucracies, jobs and budgets were protected and prioritised, rather than how public services worked together. This morning the minister mentioned investment in housing; indeed, my intervention was on that very point. However, according to the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors, fewer houses were built in Scotland last year than in any year since records began. As a result, it is little wonder that house prices are escalating and that many young people are excluded from the housing market. Furthermore, even Shelter Scotland has stated: "The investment in social housing in Scotland has hit an historic low since devolution." Using that organisation's figures once again, I remind the minister and Parliament of the widening opportunity gap by pointing out that, in the last full year of Conservative Government, public sector housing investment in Scottish housing stood at £1,106 million, while in 2002 the figure had fallen to £351 million—a third of the investment that was made under the Tories. I am happy to give those figures to the Executive. If all those figures are not enough, I should highlight the Registrar General for Scotland's concerns about fertility rates in his recent annual review. He states: "population decline is often regarded as being symptomatic of poor economic performance and may even reduce confidence in the economy." Moreover, he points out that the "demographic consequences of low fertility suggest an unstable future for Scotland's population with implications for Scotland's economy and society." Given that population decline and aging are being partly driven by low fertility, we must recognise that the rates for those factors are increasing faster in Scotland than they are in the rest of the UK. In dipping back into my previous health brief for a moment, I should point out that many couples obviously choose how many  children to have and, indeed, whether or not they should have children. However, I look for more joined-up thinking and working on this matter and hope that more attention will be paid to conditions such as chlamydia and endometriosis, both of which can lead to infertility. In that respect, I welcome the establishment of Susan Deacon's cross-party group on the issue. As an MSP who represents a Glasgow constituency, the minister should also be concerned that the standardised mortality rate in the city of Glasgow is 22 per cent higher than the Scottish average, which in turn is already 15 per cent higher than the UK average. Let us have debates about the opportunity gap, but let them be based on an honest and factual appraisal of the problems. I move amendment S2M-293.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert "notes with concern that waiting lists are getting longer, children are failing to meet education attainment levels, violent crime is increasing, anti-social behaviour is rising and our economy is lagging behind that of the rest of the United Kingdom; recognises that it is the poorest and most vulnerable in society that suffer most as they are trapped in failing schools, most likely to suffer from ill health and most likely to be victims of crime, and believes ultimately that only by reforming key public services through offering choice and decentralisation, whilst encouraging economic growth by cutting business rates, removing red tape and mutualising Scottish Water, can we close any opportunity gap and give the people of Scotland a better future."

Will the minister take an intervention?

Credit unions are always spoken about only in relation to poverty, but I believe that everyone should have a commitment to a credit union, as the increase in the pool of money from both rich and poor helps everyone. Does the minister agree?

I am grateful to my ex-colleague on the Health and Community Care Committee, Irene Oldfather, for raising the issue of carers. She mentioned a lady whose son had Huntington's chorea. Before I received information recently about a similar case, I had not appreciated how difficult it is for carers when the cared-for person does want strangers coming into the house. If there is one thing that I have learned in the past four years, it is that such things put tremendous pressure on carers, because they feel that they are letting down the cared-for person. I attended a carers' conference in the Highlands last week and was shocked to discover that there are 18,500 carers in the Highlands. I suppose my image of a carer is of an 84-year-old woman who is at home all day. What I had not appreciated is that 11,000 of the carers in the Highlands are in employment. We often forget that carers can also have jobs. We should look at that situation more widely than the carers strategy does. We should also try to achieve more tolerance, understanding and flexibility from employers for carers. If a carer has been up all night caring for someone, it is not always possible for them to make it to work. Highland Council gave a presentation that showed that, where possible, it is adapting its strategies and work practices. I commend the council for that  initiative. When I knew that I was to speak in the debate, I decided that the most important aspect of it would be respite care. Throughout the four years of the previous session, we ensured that carers and their needs were high on the agenda. We acknowledge that the Executive has an excellent carers strategy. However, as members will know, it is not strategies, initiatives or glossy documents that count, but implementation. The most moving oral evidence that we heard in the Health and Community Care Committee—I think that my ex-colleagues will agree—was from Isobel Allan, who is a carer. If there had been a star prize for submitting evidence to a committee, it would have gone to her. Regardless of the commitment across parties in the chamber, and regardless of the good work that we do and the bills and initiatives that we sign up to, we cannot assume that someone out there has the same commitment as we have. I want to continue to monitor the implementation of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 and of free personal care. Highland Council has already tried to adopt its own eligibility criteria for free personal care. We should not be so naïve as to think that because we pass legislation in the Parliament and a glossy brochure is published, things will happen magically at the chalk face—they do not. The second issue that I want to raise was mentioned by the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care in response to a question from Wendy Alexander about the disabled. I refer to direct payments. Many carers do not know that direct payments exist. Many councils do not particularly want them to know, because direct payments give carers the power, freedom and choice to buy in appropriate services that they know are best for the cared-for person. Many councils regard direct payments as a threat to their monopoly provision of services. Like others, I endorse the excellent work of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers. However, I could find no mention of direct payments in the documents that I examined today. When I was at a multiple sclerosis seminar last year, I mentioned the help that was being provided to carers through direct payments. No one had heard of them. We must all do more to give carers the autonomy to buy in proper health care. My final point arises from a case that was brought to one of my surgeries in Inverness last week. It concerns mental health problems combined with drug and alcohol addiction. In the case to which I refer, the parents of a 29-year-old woman were not allowed to be told whether she turned up for appointments and did not know what  medication she was receiving. They were told that their daughter had a mental illness, but they did not know whether she attended the day centre. They wanted to help their daughter and to be given advice, rather than have to step on eggshells. This was a very sad case; eventually, the daughter became so violent that the police had to remove her from the house. Her parents wanted to help, but information was withheld from them and they were excluded from contributing to their daughter's health. I congratulate Irene Oldfather on securing this debate and am pleased to have had another opportunity to talk about carers.

When will the promised additional 29 secure accommodation places be available? Does the First Minister agree that, if a children's panel decides that a child should be sent to a secure accommodation unit, that is what should be done and we should not rely on the next-best option?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to strengthen the national grid to accommodate the expansion of renewable energy opportunities in the Highlands and Islands. (S2O-279)

The minister should meet Highland Council's planning office more regularly. At last week's Highland Council planning meeting, it was claimed that consumers will have to pay more to finance a massive upgrade of the national grid. It was also claimed that the proposed grid upgrade will require pylons to be twice the size they are now, with heavier power cables criss-crossing Highland moors and mountains. Does the minister endorse the concerns of Highland Council? Will he meet Highland Council, those in the islands and the Department of Trade and Industry to ensure a more co-ordinated approach?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

Does the member share my condemnation of the fact that, because of tight financial constraints, those who are self-funding in care homes are being asked to pay between £100 to £200 a week as a subsidy. Is that fair?

When I spoke to the Church of Scotland in Inverness earlier this week, it mentioned the £346 but said that councils paid over twice that amount per person per week in their homes. Is that equality?

Will the minister give way?

Given the fact that patient involvement is at the heart of the health service, how would the minister advise a patient who cannot receive a drug, despite its being passed and recommended on the basis of clinical need? I refer to the drug Glivec.

I noticed that, when he responded to Phil Gallie's  intervention, the Minister for Health and Community Care said that this was the start of the patient agenda. The Conservatives introduced a patients charter in 1991. If that had been continued by Labour, instead of being ignored for the past six years, patient involvement and empowerment would be far more embedded in the system than they are.

I have had it confirmed by the minister before that he has, in fact, ignored that agenda. Nonetheless, I am pleased that he is addressing patients' rights and empowerment. I had thought that a large percentage of the minister's speech might address NHS Quality Improvement Scotland's national overview, particularly as it was published last month. I will give a number of quotes from the overview. First, it states: "Communications, nationally and locally, are not always effective." Secondly, it says that much information "is not readily available." Thirdly, it states: "NHSScotland organisations still do not manage effectively potential risks to patients." Fourthly, it says: "Healthcare staff do not always have ready access to information to help them treat patients effectively, particularly across healthcare sectors." As Christine Grahame said, it is all very well saying that patients are empowered, but they need the right information and knowledge, and the NHS must be joined up. Different parts of the health service need to communicate with each other and with the voluntary sector and other sectors. Those quotes from the national overview really do make poor reading, and they do not inspire one bit of confidence. I wondered whether another document was the one that we were to consider today, entitled "A New Public Involvement Structure for NHSScotland". A health council member from the Highlands e-mailed me today and asked, "How can you be discussing that document if it's a consultation document? The consultation responses had to be in on 9 June."

Och, just let me get on.

The health council member's point was that the deadline for responses to the consultation was six working days ago. If we want to have a meaningful debate, I would have thought that the minister should be moving a more meaningful motion. Having said that, I welcome the involvement with communities and voluntary organisations. I take the opportunity to commend the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, in the light of responses that it has given out. I am aware of how complaints from several people, about care for the elderly, nursery school provision and so on, have been dealt with, and I cannot speak highly enough of care commission staff and their professionalism, at least in Inverness. However, I wonder how many people know about the care commission. If more people knew about it, that would help to empower patients. I also welcome the commitment to advocacy. Health councils have done an excellent job, but members are appointed by the local NHS board, so it is difficult for them to be critical of the body that appointed them. That point has been raised in the Parliament many times over the past few years. Paragraph 16 of "A New Public Involvement Structure for NHSScotland" states: "NHS accountability must be open and transparent, involve independent assessment and include evidence-based clinical and service standards". The document goes on to discuss the new health council being part of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland. Does that mean that the new health council will help to highlight and monitor the incidence of postcode prescribing? Where should patients go? Where should the patient in Inverness whose mother phoned me go? She told me, "Mary, I think my son is dying of leukaemia." After a year on interferon without responding, he has been told by a consultant that Glivec will give him the best chance in life. The consultant has to put a case to Highland NHS Board to see whether it can afford Glivec. Last week, I spoke to Anna Gregor, the cancer tsar, and she said that he should have had Glivec from the start. I understand that Glivec for leukaemia is available in Fife, but is not available in Lothian. Many members have mentioned the bureaucracy. We need a simple path on which patients and MSPs can go forward to end postcode prescribing.

Just a second, Carolyn. The minister might have made the point about postcode prescribing for four years and the Executive might have made it in the partnership document, but, as a question I put to the minister stated, "Highland NHS Board has set up a task group to manage implementation of ... new drugs 'within a cash limited envelope of resource'". The minister replied that NHS Highland manages new drugs carefully, which "includes assessing the cost implications and budgeting for them accordingly. But it does not alter the fact that clinical need, not finance, should determine whether or not a patient receives the drugs".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 12 June 2003; p 144.]  Finance is determining whether patients receive a drug. In fact, it is determining whether or not they live.

I am sorry, Carolyn. I have taken too long. I am in my last 20 seconds. Having spent so much time working on the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill, and knowing the shortages of staff, psychiatrists, mental health officers, social workers and medium-secure units, I ask who will monitor the implementation of the legislation? Will it be QIS? Ten beds are blocked because of delayed discharge in New Craigs in Inverness, simply because the patients cannot get out because there is nothing in the community. In the bureaucratic structure that the minister is organising, where will they go to get the care that we passed for them in the Parliament?

Public sector spending in Scotland is 20 per cent higher than it is in England. The SNP number-cruncher is sitting in the front row of the SNP benches, so can Roseanna Cunningham confirm that, if Scotland were independent, its spending and consequent borrowing would be compatible with the monetary rules of the European Union?

Will the member give way?

I want to elaborate on the point that Carolyn Leckie has just made. I received a written answer this week that confirmed that, in some NHS trusts in Scotland, only 10 per cent of junior doctors are compliant with the working time directive, which must be complied with in two months' time.

I refer once again to this week's The Economist , which concludes that, in Germany, the interest rate is too high and that budgetary rules mean that Government spending will have to be cut at a time when the country is sliding deeper into recession. For next year, the forecast for the biggest driving economy in the whole of Europe—with 80 million people—is for growth of 0.2 per cent. Does that not give Jeremy Purvis cause for concern?

How could it be worse off?

The interest rate in the European Union is 2 per cent, which Keith Raffan is very much in favour of. Why is unemployment in Europe at 8.8 per cent, which compares with ours at 5 per cent, and economic growth at 0.8 per cent compared with our 2.2 per cent growth?

I am a member of the Inverness Credit Union. Many members have said that credit unions need more help with marketing and advertising. I am sure that the minister knows that there is a Scottish Executive fund that can be  applied to for money to help with such matters. The Inverness Credit Union was successful and circulated a free newspaper within the common bond area.

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on raising the issue. In a past life, I worked as a volunteer for a citizens advice bureau; very few people who have debt problems appreciate the service that citizens advice bureaux offer. When people came along with lists of their debts, I was surprised to find that, when I phoned the council or loans agencies, they were agreeable to freezing interest, which made debt repayment more manageable and got rid of people's feeling that their situation was out of control. We must do more to publicise those services. Stewart Maxwell talked about the point in the motion that personal debt is nearly always connected to problems such as loss of a job or ill health. I agree that there is also an enormous amount of hidden debt and stress throughout the public and private sectors—a person does not have to lose his or her job to get into debt. The figure that Stewart Maxwell quoted of 30 per cent of East Renfrewshire CAB clients' being homeowners was probably close to the truth and should be considered. Stewart Maxwell also spoke of the utility debt that is mentioned in the CAB report. Although people who attended CABx said that utility debt had increased by 1 per cent, we should consider water charges; there are no benefits or repayments on water charges. A paper from the Forum of Private Business shows that some businesses face increases of 427 per cent, 626 per cent, 600 per cent and 483 per cent in their water charges. We must consider that small businesses simply cannot pay higher wages when their business costs are so high—significantly higher than is the case in other parts of the United Kingdom. As Sarah Boyack said, we are not just talking about money. We have to note that "a quarter of CAB debt clients were already seeking treatment for stress, depression and anxiety from their GP. Just under half of those who were receiving medical treatment for depression felt that their symptoms had been caused by their debt problems."  That causes further financial problems within the national health service. I agree with the third recommendation in the CAB's summary, which states: "The codes of practice for banks and other credit lenders should include commitments to assess the borrower's ability to repay before lending." I realise that I am running out of time.

I hope that citizens advice bureaux throughout Scotland will keep a supply of information about where credit unions exist and that they will encourage their clients to join those unions. To get a credit union loan, a person has to save for 13 weeks and prove that they can save before they can borrow. Finally, the third recommendation in the leaflet also states that banks need to act responsibly to gauge ability to repay a loan before it is granted. A friend of mine is a bank manager, but his bonuses are based on how much money is loaned, rather than on the ability to repay the loans.

Will the member give way?

First, I pick up on a point that Fiona Hyslop made. Instead of sniggering at it, people should take the subject of fertility seriously and I thank her for raising the issue. I do not want to turn the debate into one on health, but Fiona Hyslop did not mention the dramatic rise in the incidence of chlamydia that was announced last week. Chlamydia is a symptomless sexually transmitted disease that leads to infertility and it is a very serious issue. I note that the motion mentions "work in partnership with young people to help meet their aspirations" and "ensuring that the curriculum is built around the needs" of young people. We should also note that, in 2001-02, approximately 20 per cent of S2 pupils failed to reach level D for reading, writing and mathematics. I also note that the motion says that education should take place "in the most modern facilities" and, of course, all members would sign up to that. Last week, I visited Nairn Academy. I was there a year ago to see its healthy eating options and I am pleased that that project has progressed. Instead of glad-handing and having tea and cakes with the rector, I was taken on a tour of the toilets. I assure members that they were disgusting. The male toilets were closed because of a health and safety hazard. When we talk about education taking place in modern facilities, we should not just be talking about classrooms. Pupils are also entitled to excellent toilet facilities. Another point in the motion mentions "extending access to high quality sport and leisure facilities" that will help young people to reach their full potential. All members could sign up to that.  The motion sounds impressive and I welcome the objectives that it outlines. I hope that the minister does not lose focus on those objectives over the next four years. I note from the partnership agreement the proposal to enable 14 to 16-year-olds to undertake courses in further education colleges as part of the school-based curriculum. Given that more than 3,000 pupils left school in Scotland last year with no recognisable qualifications, surely the partnership with further education colleges needs to be firmed up. I was a lecturer in further and higher education for two decades before 1999 and I am aware of what the further education sector can offer. However, it has generally been quite difficult to get schools to part with their pupils, because the schools fear losing teaching staff due to lower pupil numbers. Many members mentioned discipline problems. I never had a discipline problem in 20 years in further education, which was generally because there were more mature students in classes. The teacher was not needed to sort them out and they sorted out any potential discipline problems.

That is right. I would sort out Stewart Stevenson quickly enough. I ask the new Minister for Education and Young People to put pupils first, and give them the option of education and training in further education. As John Farquhar Munro said, we should get rid of the snobbery of academic qualifications and give greater value to the trades, crafts, skills and apprenticeships that are available in further education. Whether it is hairdressing, plumbing, bricklaying, building or engineering, people will be unlikely to be unemployed for any length of time with any of those basic skills. It is becoming increasingly difficult to implement free personal care or any form of home care simply because the number of available home carers is insufficient, yet anyone entering that profession would be encouraged to do an access course and then a three-year degree course in social care. Many people have to leave after one year due to financial hardship and are unable to complete the course, although one year is likely to be sufficient to get started in a career in care. We should encourage private and public sector organisations to recruit more young people and to give them work-based training as well as further education. I am sorry that Peter Peacock has left. I ask him to take another look at music tuition in schools given that, as the convener of Highland Council, he abolished free music tuition and introduced  means testing for music tuition in schools. Many parents throughout the Highlands do not want their financial details to be in council offices to decide whether they are poor enough to be eligible for free music tuition. A generation of talented youngsters from less well-off families have not been helped to meet their aspirations or reach their full potential. I hope that that will change and that pupils across Scotland will have access to music, drama, arts and sports, in order to realise the talents and potential that are in every one of us. Finally, on the subject of neds, I am pleased to see the Deputy Minister for Justice at this debate. [ Laughter. ] I did not mean that he fitted into the ned category. Nonetheless, I would not pick a fight with him. The level of illiteracy in our prisons is alarming. I welcome joined-up working, social inclusion, aspirations being met and people reaching their full potential, which can best be achieved at school age. That would help to reduce the ned culture, and would give youths confidence in their own abilities to enjoy and contribute to life in Scotland.

Is Mr Mather questioning the medical examinations that determine eligibility for incapacity benefits? Is he saying that those examinations are not rigorous enough and that some people on incapacity benefits are healthy enough not to be?

I am a fellow Highland MSP, and it has been put to me that many school meals are bought in from elsewhere. The Moray firth is the top area in the UK for organic fruit and vegetables. Would the minister encourage the use of more organic food in schools? Would he encourage schools and education authorities to buy more food locally?

What is Bill Butler's estimate for the reduction in bureaucracy to be brought about through the transition to unified health boards?

This is an oddly sad day, when we say goodbye to Kay Ullrich, John Young, Dorothy-Grace Elder, Ian Jenkins and, of course, that grand matriarch of Scottish politics, Dr Winnie Ewing. When I was in Shetland at the weekend, people said, as they do wherever I go in the Highlands, "How's Winnie doing? She used to come up here so often." One thing about proportional representation in European elections is that everyone knew that Winnie was the member of the European Parliament. Her reputation will continue. We have heard so much about social inclusion in recent years, particularly in relation to older people. Many of the soundbites sound very good. Free personal care is free if one can get it. It is free if one can get out of hospital, as Kay Ulrich said. It is also free if one can wait long enough for it. Free personal care is free once someone has had a long wait for an assessment—up to 12 months, but sometimes longer. It is free once the care plan is drawn up, but the care plan can take several months. The care plan should not be a wish list; it should be the basis for the care and support that someone receives. What is free, however, is the watered-down version of the care plan that gives someone the free personal care that the councils can afford and not the free personal care that is outlined in the care plan. I do not think that there is an MSP in the chamber who has not had someone visit their surgeries to say, "Here is my care plan and this is what I get." It must be the responsibility of Parliament to ensure that the legislation to which we sign up is in good faith. I sat through all the meetings of the Health and Community Care Committee, many of which Kay Ulrich contributed to and, in good faith, we thought that free personal care would be quite different from the free personal care for which people have to fight today. Week by week in the Highlands, families are fighting for care for the elderly. A lady came to me last week and told me that she was forced to take her mother out of hospital and care for her at home. I saw her mother walking along the road and it was a tragic sight. That was reality, unlike the soundbites that we often hear from the Executive. I have in my hand a pack from Aberdeen City Council. It is addressed to my colleague David Davidson and dated the end of October last year, which was four months after the implementation of free personal care. It says: "The Eligibility Criteria for Community Care Services Review Group have been considering the revisal of the eligibility criteria and have made comparisons of the eligibility criteria with other local authorities, particularly those of Fife Council".  When the Parliament passed free personal care, we all assumed that there would be consistent standards throughout Scotland, but instead we have a pick and mix. Highland Council has already tried to change the eligibility criteria for free personal care to say that people in the Highlands should be more ill before they receive it. The same situation exists throughout Scotland. Thankfully, the motion lodged by the social work convener at Highland Council was voted down. However, we must ensure that when we pass legislation in the Parliament, every council in Scotland has the same commitment to it. Whoever sits on the successor Health and Community Care Committee after 1 May must make a commitment to monitor the implementation of free personal care, but I ask the minister, too, to make that commitment. I do not doubt his good will, but I believe that he has a serious monitoring role to ensure that pensioners throughout Scotland get consistent access to free personal care.

Yes. In fact I have found the minister supportive when I took information to him and highlighted my concerns. We all have a responsibility to do that where local authorities are writing their own guidelines that are quite different from the legislation we pass in Parliament. The Aberdeen City Council pack to which I referred mentions high priority, medium priority and low priority. The council also admits: "You may be placed onto a waiting list for the provision of some services." It also says: "we are unable to guarantee a particular type or level of service will always be available." At least Aberdeen City Council is honest. I am happy to pass on the pack from the council because its implementation is not the same as the guidelines that were set by the Parliament. However, I must ask whether the council has heard of free personal care. There is no mention in the document of the free personal care provisions that were passed by the Parliament. I am pleased to hear the minister's commitments in that regard. Free personal care should be applied consistently throughout Scotland. There should not be postcode provision. It should not be  dependent on individual councils' priorities. As Kay Ullrich said, the number of beds blocked is over 2,700. When the Scottish Parliament was set up, however, only 1,700 beds were blocked. From his time on the Health and Community Care Committee, the minister will remember when Professor Mary Marshall told us that the condition of elderly people deteriorates considerably when they are held in hospital and are given inappropriate care. Lewis Macdonald knows a lot about free bus travel, but I will tell him about the situation in the Highlands. Someone who lives in Nairn can travel to Inverness, Fort William or Wick for free, but cannot cross the boundary into Grampian to go to Forres or Elgin. Many people in Nairn have a greater commitment to those two towns than they do to what they might term the wild west of the Highlands. In response to a parliamentary question on this matter that was asked by David Davidson, Lewis Macdonald said: "The decision on whether to offer this benefit, however, is for the local transport authority to make in relation to each particular scheme."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 18 February 2003; p 3010.]  I understand that, but the minister cannot stand in this chamber and say that there will be free travel for the elderly and leave it to local operators to decide what is free and what is not free.

No chance. I realise that Sylvia Jackson is desperate for votes, but she should not come chapping on my door. Although, as Ian Jenkins said, pensions are a Westminster issue, I will mention the fact that Help the Aged's briefing, in a section entitled "Creating Tomorrow's Pensioner Poverty Today", criticises the stakeholder pensions. It also says that 72 per cent of final salary schemes have stopped accepting new members, that there is a £27 million black hole in pension provision and that the state pension is diminishing in value. According to Help the Aged, things are not getting better for pensioners; they are getting worse.

Will the member give way?

I appreciate that very much and I am sorry to be contentious, as Ian Jenkins has been nice enough to give way. I must have a different Help the Aged briefing from the one that Ian Jenkins has, because the second paragraph of my briefing says: "Current government pension policy means that in the long-term the situation will get worse rather than better." I wonder where all the positivity comes from.

I was talking about Scottish Executive policy.

We have all received a briefing from Help the Aged this morning. Given the work that the  Executive has done on fuel poverty, does the minister agree with Help the Aged that 58 per cent of Scottish pensioners are classified as living in fuel poverty and that that figure is rising?

I, too, thank the clerks for their incredible work. Like Shona Robison, I noted the time of midnight on e-mails from last week. The Scottish Conservatives will support the SNP amendment, even though it states the obvious—it repeats what many people have said at every stage of the bill. However, if nothing else, it puts down a marker that we need continually to monitor what we are trying to achieve through the bill and that we must ensure that services are provided. I welcome the fact that the Minister for Health and Community Care has put Dr Sandra Grant in charge of the review of service provision. If her review is as good as her Scottish Health Advisory Service reports, it will be an excellent piece of work. I also thank the witnesses. For me, the most memorable users who came along to the Health and Community Care Committee were Maggie Keppie and Marcia Reid from Elgin. As I have been speaking in the past two days, much of what Marcia said about ECT and so on came back to me. I am pleased that Health and Community Care  Committee members succeeded with their amendments, particularly Margaret Jamieson and Bill Butler, who doggedly stuck with the issues at all points in the bill. They have to be commended for that. Shona Robison is to be commended for her amendment on the inclusion of psychology as part of medical treatment. Although the issue came to us late, we welcome the success of that amendment. Of course, I commend myself for the amendments on medium-secure units. The bill was due at the Health and Community Care Committee at the end of January 2002. We received the draft bill of 89 pages in June 2002. The bill as introduced grew to 168 pages; committee members received it in September 2003.

Sorry, there are so many figures. After 1,357 amendments at stage 2, the bill grew to 242 pages. A further 756 amendments were lodged at stage 3. If I do nothing else in this speech, I would like to put on record—especially as the convener of the Procedures Committee is in the chair—a plea to have an updated version of the explanatory notes made available when such a great number of amendments are lodged. I would have found that helpful when I was struggling with the more than 2,000 amendments with which we had to deal. In the week before the dissolution of Parliament, it is almost with a sigh of relief rather than with the pride that I should feel that I contemplate the passing of the bill. Many serious questions about the resources that are available to us when we pass legislation have arisen from our experience of the bill. When I see the ministers at committee meetings with their armies of civil servants and their speaking notes for their amendments and replies to members of the committee, I contrast that sight with the experience of members of Opposition parties on the Health and Community Care Committee, who have no such resources or support yet also carry the burden of the responsibility for scrutinising legislation. I am not putting the case for having a second chamber, but there are arguments for one—indeed, there could be no greater justification for having one than our experience in passing the bill. Like the minister, I believe that the Parliament owes a debt of gratitude to the Law Society, the Mental Welfare Commission and the Scottish Association for Mental Health. The responsibility for scrutinising the legislation fell to them, because I had to assume that, if they raised no concerns, it was okay to agree to certain points. The problem  was that, at stage 3, because the bulk of the 755 amendments were submitted at around 4.30 pm last Friday, those organisations did not see the text of the amendments until the business bulletin was published on Monday, which was far too late to discuss, consult on or measure the full impact of many of the proposals. That cannot be acceptable from a democratic Government. I want to put on record the fact that the Health and Community Care Committee took a non-party-political stance throughout the consideration of the bill. There has been no political point scoring. Given the complexity of the bill, the process has shown the workings of the Health and Community Care Committee at their best. However, the legislation will be effective only if health boards and local authorities give it the priority that it deserves. Time and again, concerns about that have been raised in the committee and in the chamber. I share the view that was expressed about the fact that Carstairs has 29 blocked beds. We also heard that the Orchard clinic could not move people on because there were insufficient numbers of supported accommodation places, day centres, certified paediatric nurses and so on. For example, there are currently 29 vacancies for psychiatrists in Scotland and, in order to implement the bill, we will need an additional 28 psychiatrists. That means that we need 57 consultant psychiatrists. Furthermore, we face shortages of psychologists, psychiatric nurses, social workers, care workers, mental health officers and people to support general practitioners, 30 per cent of whose patients have mental health problems. I struggled more on the subject of advance statements than I did on any other issue. I even fell into the danger of becoming a Liberal by supporting both sides—only for a short time, I must add. It was extremely painful not to be able to make a decision. I am glad that I am a Conservative, as we can usually see things clearly. The Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill is undoubtedly the largest and most complex bill that the Scottish Parliament has dealt with. I have carried out my role in relation to the bill in good faith. I hope that the amendments that I have agreed to on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives will be beneficial to patients and supportive of good clinical practice. Given the size of the bill, the huge number of amendments and the time limitations, I can only hope that we are passing a good bill today. Time will tell.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether funding under the Arbuthnott formula is being used to address poverty, deprivation and access to national health service care and treatment. (S1O-6664)

In recent weeks, it has become apparent that additional moneys received by NHS Highland have been used to pay off its end-of-year financial deficit. How will the minister monitor spending that is allocated through the Arbuthnott formula, and what will he do in future when health trusts use the money for purposes other than those intended?

I, too, support amendment 736. There may be a shortage of clinical psychologists in Scotland, but—my goodness—they got their act together in the final week. They are certainly all talking to each other. To confirm that point, I have with me today letters that I have received from psychologists in Lanarkshire, Ayrshire and Arran, the Lothians, Argyll and Clyde, Grampian, the Borders, the state hospital at Carstairs, greater Glasgow, the University of Dundee, Gartnavel hospital and the Orchard clinic and from the British Psychological Society. There may be few clinical psychologists, but they have come to the debate. I am sorry that we received their letters late, because we could have done much to acknowledge psychology and to integrate it into the bill at previous stages. I will make the point that Margaret Smith has just  made. I quote from a letter from a psychologist in the Lothians: "The major difficulty is that 'medical treatment' is used to cover all care for mental disorder. Within the area of mental health, medical treatments clearly differ from psychological therapies ... In many areas of mental health, evidence-based research suggests psychological therapies to be as effective or more effective than medical treatment". Too often, people came to the Health and Community Care Committee and said, "Nobody talks to me. All I get is some pills—more pills—and I just want to talk to someone." As a result, I have a lot of sympathy with the points that the psychologists make. The letter from which I just quoted goes on to talk about treatment for moderate depression, anxiety, personality disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Another clinical psychologist from Argyll and Clyde talks about "the applicability of psychological interventions like anger management, substance abuse therapy, sex offender treatment, cognitive behaviour therapy for psychosis, dialectical behaviour for borderline personality disorder". A psychologist from the state hospital at Carstairs—which we have debated in the past—says: "treatment plans now regularly include ... 'Anger Management', 'Sex Offender Treatment', 'Cognitive Behaviour Therapy ...' and 'Substance Abuse Therapy'." My final point comes from the a clinical psychologist at the University of Dundee, who says: "As the Bill stands now, I think that it will be unworkable and could lead to an ineffective and poor quality of service provision for patients"— unless, of course, psychology and psychologists are given their rightful place in the treatment of patients.

As a true Gemini, I see both sides of the argument clearly. I want to show members how difficult it is not to inhibit clinical judgment while giving patients rights.

As my colleagues on the Health and Community Care Committee have witnessed,   this is undoubtedly the issue with which I have struggled more than any other during the passage of the bill—the issue is crucial. I support Adam Ingram's amendments. A patient's rights, as stated in an advance statement, will form the basis of controversy for years to come. To be honest, I agree with both sides, and I find the matter to be enormously complex. Once again, the issue is the balance between patients' rights and allowing clinicians to make good clinical judgments. I do not wish to deny patients respect and dignity, as has been done in the past, because when they are fit and well, many patients wish to have a say in the type of treatment—for example ECT and other treatments—that they want when they fall ill. I do not wish to deny any patient in Scotland that right, but neither do I wish to deny a psychiatrist the duty of care or to inhibit his or her right to make a clinical judgment. Although I support Adam Ingram's amendments, we also want service users to be encouraged to go through the formality of making an advance statement in accordance with the requirements of section 187. We do not want them to wonder what the point is of making an advance statement when that statement can be overridden at the discretion of professionals, with no means being available to service users to challenge such decisions. We want to empower service users and to treat them with the respect and dignity that they have gained through their experience of the service.  However, to do so is undoubtedly difficult when one receives a letter such as that from Professor Owens. I would like to share one or two comments from that letter—I make no apologies for the time that I will take because this is such a difficult and  complex issue. Professor Owens states: "I am concerned about the potential conflict for doctors with regard to their duty of care. I wonder what will be the expectations of someone such as myself when a clearly stated advance directive represents in my clinical judgement an inappropriate plan for management. I strongly believe that the whole principle of advance directives is based on a false assumption—namely, that the circumstances in which psychiatric disorder presents remain static and predictable. This is totally contrary to my clinical experience. What may be an appropriate treatment plan in one set of social and clinical circumstances may be totally inappropriate in another. There are a series of further practical difficulties—e.g. over 90% of my work is concerned with emergency cases. The idea of a 'cold' psychiatric case is rapidly becoming a thing of the past. In these circumstances, it may be impossible to confirm the details of any extant advance directives—or, worse, establishing their presence in volumes of past clinical records, may unduly delay the implementation of an optimal treatment plan. The proposal, contained in this amendment"— which I support— "to refer dispute in these matters to a Tribunal for, in effect, arbitration, fills me with horror. This is in effect, the act of handing over professional—and CLINICAL—judgement to the legal process, something which I ... abhor ... Should Parliament accept that advance directives must be, in matters of dispute, arbitrated by Tribunals, I MOST FIRMLY believe they must also give psychiatrists the LEGAL right to refuse to accept on-going management responsibility for cases in which their clinical plan is over-ridden by a review Tribunal. To fail to do so, would in my view place psychiatrists in the invidious situation of being forced to supervise treatment they believe to be sub-optimal or worse, positively harmful, something that is contrary to every principle of medicine in which they have been professionally raised and nurtured—and something I do not believe Parliament has the right or authority to impose our profession." I cite Professor Owens's letter because I want MSPs who are not, or have not been, members of the Health and Community Care Committee to understand the difficulties that the committee has had in trying to give patients more rights and a say in their medication or treatment; in trying to reduce the stigma that we all know is associated with mental health and in trying to treat patients as worthwhile partners in the partnership of care. I find it very difficult to give patients the authority that I want to give them while respecting the clinical judgment of people such as Professor Owens.

On this great historic occasion, I think that a cheer is appropriate. I am delighted that the Executive has accepted amendments 740 and 741. The thread that ran through all the proceedings—this came up in what Margaret Jamieson and Bill Butler said yesterday—is that, despite the fact that mental health is unquestionably a priority of the Parliament and the Executive, it is not always a priority at health board and local authority level. There is almost a domino effect with Carstairs. People cannot get out of Carstairs and up to 29 people have been blocking beds through no fault of their own. When they get into the only medium-secure unit—we all visited Carstairs and the Orchard clinic—they cannot get out, because there are not sufficient day centres or places in supported accommodation. MSPs might like to jump on a bandwagon and say that we do not want medium-secure units in our backyard. All of us who agree to pass the bill must be more tolerant and understanding of, and more sensitive to, this unique client group. It might be all right to get a few petitions to the Public Petitions Committee and a few votes locally before an election—

We have certainly received petitions from Father Stephen Dunn in Glasgow,  which Paul Martin has talked about. Greater Glasgow NHS Board and other health boards have a lot to learn in the consultation process, which should not be about the presentation of a fait accompli. However, notwithstanding all the arguments for consultation, we still must be much more sensitive, tolerant and understanding. Let us have less of the nimby culture for medium-secure units. Frankly, if it is all right to have the Orchard clinic in Morningside in Edinburgh, I expect the people of Glasgow to be equally tolerant of that client group.

Will the code of practice and the guidance go further than having regard to or listening to service users? What role will the advance statement play in the code or guidance? How much weight will be given to the advance statement in the judgments that are made on whether to use ECT?

I am sorry if this sounds like a daft lassie question, but I have struggled to understand the bill. At what point does a capable patient with mental illness become an incapable patient?

I support Shona Robison's amendments 216 and 217. I also ask for further clarification from the minister. I am very much at one with Shona Robison's comments. When opinion is so divided on the benefits and the side effects of ECT—the potential side effects are inestimable for each individual—how can anyone recommend that the treatment is beneficial? This controversial issue is probably the one that patients with mental illness who spoke to  us feared the most. They feared that their lives would get out of control and that they would be given ECT, although it is difficult to predict whether it would be beneficial or, as Shona Robison said, whether it would wipe out all long-term memory. Those are serious concerns. I am minded to support the Executive's amendment 656, because I think that it is a good compromise, but I have difficulties in respect of the points made in the 1984 act, which provide the basis for urgent treatment under section 171(3). That section states that ECT can be given to save a patient's life, alleviate serious suffering or prevent deterioration. I am not a clinician, but I would have thought that, in any circumstances, any treatment surely has to be intended to save a patient's life, alleviate suffering or prevent deterioration. My fear is that the use of those three phrases could open the door for any patient who has mental illness to be given ECT, as it would only have to be stated that its use would prevent deterioration of the condition. I struggle with this issue because although we have heard that ECT is beneficial for many people, it has serious, detrimental and long-lasting side effects for many others. The minister must clarify exactly what the phrases mean, as they could be interpreted widely. The bottom line is that I would like patients to have faith and trust in the advance statements that they write. If, when they are well, they write that they do not want ECT, I hope that at the point at which they need help someone does not overrule their advance statement on the basis that the purpose of the treatment is to save the patient's life, alleviate serious suffering or prevent deterioration. Those phrases could be used to justify the use of ECT treatment in any case. I seek the minister's assurances on those three phrases, but I am minded to support amendment 656.

In a moment. People are fearful of ECT because of the potential side effects, such as memory loss. If a patient writes in an advance statement that they do not wish to have ECT, will the fact that the tribunal has only to have regard to the wishes and feelings of patients but retains flexibility in the interpretation of those wishes mean that the advance statement can be totally ignored?

In that case, I do not see why the minister has any problems with my amendment, which I intend to press.

Not at the moment. This is about treating the users of mental health services with some respect. Many of the people who will be liable to receive compulsory intervention are those who have been in and out of mental health services over many years and have built up an enormous amount of expertise. Amendment 114 asks that their wishes be treated with the respect that is due them because of their experience of the service. I will take the minister's intervention now.

In that case, I have nothing to add.

Amendment 114 would give the tribunal the power to exclude particular treatments from being given to patients who are subject to a compulsory treatment order. The amendment would allow the tribunal to provide a general treatment authority that would be subject to such exclusions or limitations as it may consider appropriate. That would allow the tribunal to have regard to patients' views. The patient could put all the arguments to the tribunal, which could then exercise its discretion in recognition of the patient's views. Amendment 114 is supported by the Scottish Association for Mental Health and 63 other organisations that support people with mental health problems. Those organisations believe that the tribunal should consider whether a particular treatment should be given only when an individual has expressed strong wishes about the treatment. That brings us back to the need to strike a balance between the views of the patient and the views of the clinician. It also brings us back to the point about advance statements, to which we will return either later today or tomorrow. Amendment 114 is important to users of mental health services. The experience of being subject to compulsory powers under the mental health acts can be extremely traumatic for many individuals, not only because they may be deprived of their liberty but because they may be compelled, sometimes forcibly, to accept treatments that may be controversial or invasive or that may involve unpleasant and distressing side effects. Service users who have been in receipt of services for a  significant period of time often build up considerable expertise about which treatments work for them. Many service users feel that the distressing effects of certain treatments are such that they do not wish to accept them under any circumstances, regardless of any benefits that such treatments may have. Again, we come back to the recognition of the power and autonomy of patients to express their wishes. The bill should reflect that. The Millan committee proposed a scheme whereby compulsory intervention would be tailored to the needs of the individual patient. The framework for such intervention was to be a plan of care that would be submitted to, and approved by, a tribunal. The plan of care would be a single document that would set out what treatments and care were proposed by the range of agencies and it would identify which of those treatments would require compulsion. The Millan committee envisaged that, if the patient had concerns about particular kinds of treatment, those concerns could be taken into account by the tribunal before it decided whether to approve the plan of care. The Scottish Association for Mental Health and the other organisations that support amendment 114 believe that the implication of the Millan report was that, if an individual expressed strong wishes not to have a treatment such as electro-convulsive therapy, the tribunal could take those wishes into account when it decided whether to approve the plan of care. Disappointment has been expressed about the fact that the tribunal will not have the power to exclude specific treatments from being given, regardless of an individual's wishes and feelings. The effect of section 54(1)(b) as currently drafted would be that the tribunal would be faced with a blunt choice: it would have to decide whether to grant or refuse a general authority for treatment that was given in accordance with part 13. During stages 1 and 2, I often spoke about advance statements, which are all about patient power. However, I am sympathetic to the arguments that were made by Professor David Owens of the University of Edinburgh to the effect that an advance statement could in fact inhibit the level of care and the treatment that could be given to patients. Again, we need a balance between the wishes of patients and the duty of clinicians. As I said, many patients have long-standing experience of the service, which should be taken into account. We also need to take cognisance of the clinician's duty of care against the rights of the patient. A similar amendment at stage 2 caused a vote in the committee. It is not often that I quote John McAllion—I do not think that I am qualified to do so—but he argued that the amendment  "would increase the tribunal's flexibility and improve its ability to put the patient's interests first."—[ Official Report , Health and Community Care Committee , 21 January 2003; c 3672.] That is an important factor for all members to consider and I ask them to support amendment 114. I move amendment 114.

Can the minister clarify whether, if an individual had strong wishes against a particular treatment—for example ECT—and that view was contained in an advance statement, the tribunal could overrule that wish?

I will certainly press amendment 114. The point that I made is that if we are to reduce stigma, which is one of the principles of the bill, we must treat the users of mental health services with the respect and dignity that their experience accords them. Their views about their treatment should be taken into account fully. As I said, service users build up considerable expertise about the treatments that work and do not work for them.  I accept what the minister says about the fact that, under section 171, urgent medical treatment can be given to a patient but I noticed that she said that the matter was not about having additional safeguards but about the need to "have regard to" the patient's wishes. There is an awful lot of talk about having regard to things. To be honest, having regard to something could mean taking on board the patient's every wish or reading the patient's wishes then throwing them in the bin. I am not a lawyer, but I do not think that the phrase "have regard to" means much. If I were a service user, I would have to ask why I should bother writing an advance statement.

I listened carefully to what the minister said. It is difficult for us to know whether the Scottish Association for Mental Health, the National Schizophrenia Fellowship (Scotland), Depression Alliance Scotland, Children in Scotland, the Scottish Human Services Trust and the 63 other organisations that signed up to Shona Robison's amendments are satisfied with the minister's amendments, given that they were lodged so late. I hope that the minister appreciates that that presents a difficulty for us. I empathise with him on this point, because the bill is about balancing the needs of the patients and the duties of health and other professionals. Nowhere is that more important than in the advance statements. Amendments 74 and 75 are intended to define which patients could be considered. The 284 per cent rise in the section 18 orders between 1985 and 2001 should give us cause for concern. Concerns were raised at stages 1 and 2 about the fact that there has been no research into why that rise occurred. There is a worry that that trend is likely to continue or even escalate when the community-based compulsory treatment orders are introduced. As Shona Robison said, the guidance is generally unclear, and with no clear guidelines as to who is suitable, it is difficult to assess whether CTOs are under or over-used. However, taking a balanced view, I note that the Royal College of Psychiatrists sent in another last-minute submission. I find this area difficult to deal with because the late lodging of the Executive amendments means that I did not have time to get back to the organisations and ask whether they are satisfied with them. The submission from the Royal College of Psychiatrists states: "Essentially they are seeking to limit the applicability of CTO's by defining the 'type' of patient and the kind of situation in which a CTO would be most appropriate. While  Millan did comment on the kinds of clinical situations where a CTO might be helpful, we think it would be very ill-advised to enshrine these descriptions in an Act that is likely to be in place for decades to come." The final point states: "decisions made by Psychiatrists will have to balance the need for patient autonomy and 'least restrictive alternative' against an individual's need for treatment or public safety. These decisions are always difficult ones, and in our view can only be made on an individual case-by-case basis." I fully understand that point. Those are the difficulties in balancing the patient's needs and wishes against the psychiatrists' duty to care. Amendment 343 would allow ministers to specify in regulations the additional conditions that must be met before community-based treatment orders are made. The amendment would also impose on ministers a requirement to consult. Indeed, the minister seemed to make that point. The Millan committee suggested that the new order should be used, as Shona Robison said, for patients "who have relapsed whilst off medication in the community in the past, presenting a risk to themselves and others" and "who have a history of refusing to take their medication once there is no legal compulsion to do so." Therefore amendment 343 would enable those and other conditions to be specified in regulations. That would introduce some flexibility, and if it were decided over time that those conditions could be changed, amending the regulations could achieve that. The minister talked about the least restrictive alternative to compulsory treatment orders. Many of those who gave evidence at stage 2, particularly Maggie Keppie of the Edinburgh users forum, stated that they did not want their homes to become hospitals. For many people, their home is a private place in which they wish to live in dignity with respect and privacy. The home is, for many people, not the least restrictive alternative. For some people, the hospital is the preferred choice. I appreciate the difficulties, but we must not lose sight of the patient's needs and the enormous patient experience that dealing with mental health produces. We all recognise that that voice has not been listened to sufficiently in the past.

I would like clarification on amendment 282. What would constitute a conflict of interest in relation to a medical examination?

It is my understanding that the Executive included in the bill a requirement on individual persons exercising functions under the bill to "have regard to the importance of the provision of appropriate services". What does the minister regard as an appropriate service? How can the minister judge what is an appropriate service? Who makes that judgment—the patient, the clinician, the tribunal or mental health officers? The minister criticises Shona Robison's amendment for using the words, "appropriate services", but he also uses them. We  need to know what "appropriate services" means.

If a service user is given a care plan that outlines all the care, support and treatment that they need, and they do not get that care and treatment, the minister says that they can go to the tribunal. If the tribunal bats that back to the local authority, which says that it does not have the staff, resources or wherewithal to provide what is necessary, the matter is batted back again to the tribunal. Who takes ultimate responsibility for providing appropriate services for the needs of people with mental health problems?

I support Shona Robison's amendment on reciprocity. The Health and Community Care Committee supported the inclusion in the bill of all 10 Millan principles and, in the course of its discussions, singled out reciprocity as being particularly important. Reciprocity is not separate from the debate that we have just had on the provision of services and accommodation. However, it is totally vague and meaningless to include in the bill the words "have regard to the importance of the provision of appropriate services". As has just been said, the Scottish Parliament may pass legislation with the best of intentions, but if health boards and local authorities decide not to comply, then it is meaningless. As a member for the Highlands and Islands, I note that Highland Council is already trying to change the eligibility criteria for free personal care—a local authority has tried to rewrite an act of the Scottish Parliament. It is fortunate that there were enough sensible councillors to vote down the change. I go along with Margaret Jamieson's point that we cannot make vague and meaningless statements in Parliament and in legislation under the assumption that health boards and local authorities will comply. We are dealing with one of the most vulnerable groups in Scotland. The mental health service is undoubtedly a cinderella service. Amendment 69 would place a duty on health boards and local authorities rather than on individuals. I ask members to support amendment 69. It is not only crucial, but reflects what should be a basic principle of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill, as outlined by Millan.

I support Margaret Jamieson's amendment. My colleagues on the Health and Community Care Committee have made most of the points that I wished to raise. The main point in Margaret Jamieson's amendment 34 is its reference to "such services and accommodation as are sufficient for the particular needs of that child or young person." We heard in evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee that we need  services that are appropriate to the needs of children, and that the services that children currently get are detrimental to their needs—they actually frighten children and make them worse. Existing services are not even adequate, sufficient or beneficial; they are detrimental to the needs of children. We have to make that absolutely clear. Margaret Jamieson raised the points that were made by the Royal College of Psychiatrists. I have only one other point to make. A submission from Children in Scotland states: "Scotland has only 35 psychiatric beds for adolescents, after 12 beds in Fife were recently closed." Therefore, not only is the number of children and young people suffering from mental health problems increasing, as Margaret Smith said, the number of psychiatric beds for adolescents is decreasing. We have an increasing demand and a decreasing supply. I ask every member to take on board the points that have been made by supporters of amendment 34 and to vote for it. I support Bill Butler's amendment 106, as I supported his members' business debate. Like amendment 34, it also calls for the provision of appropriate services. As a member for the Highlands and Islands, I am aware that women do not want to be separated from their newborn child and that the least restrictive alternative principle must apply. It might not be appropriate to build more buildings and so on if people from Wick and Thurso have to be hospitalised in Inverness, away from their family and children. I emphasise the fact that psychiatric services are just that—services. During my research for Bill Butler's members' business debate, I found out some frightening things about post-natal depression. It affects not only the woman but the family. If it remains untreated, it can have a prolonged, damaging effect on the relationship between mother and baby and a detrimental effect on the child's psychological, social and educational development. A shocking figure is that 10 to 15 per cent—undoubtedly, a gross underestimate—of mothers suffer from post-natal depression. The other frightening statistic that I discovered during my research is that many women who are given anti-depressants after the birth of a child are still taking them decades later. There has never been a better time or a better opportunity for this Parliament to support mothers and children in relation to the services that are available, such as community psychiatric services, and which are essential for their future. I support both amendments.

I am delighted to support David Mundell's motion, which is not the first members' business motion  that he has lodged on post offices. I also welcome Cathy Walker and Liz MacFarlane from the Highlands. The time that they have taken to travel here to listen to the debate highlights the strength of feeling on the issue that exists throughout Scotland. Given the disappointing lack of support for "Your Guide" from the Scottish Executive and our post offices, there is no doubt that there is an enormous threat hanging over sub-post offices. I have been sent information from a post office in Inverness that states that the Post Office card account is welcomed by pensioners, particularly as they can withdraw £10 per day, or twice a day, rather than have to take out their full pension, and that that is obviously of great interest to many customers, given the muggings that have taken place. There are currently 140,000 retirement pensioners who do not have a bank account, as Dennis Canavan said. Organisations such as Help the Aged are concerned about the new type of account for members of society who have not been used to operating a bank account. If they accidentally become overdrawn, the charges can be as high as £30 per day, which is a huge amount for someone in receipt of a small weekly income. Mike Dow and Cathy Walker, two sub-postmasters in Inverness, conducted a local survey around various banks in the city to see how easy or difficult it would be to open the basic bank account. Only one major high street bank knew about these accounts and had the application forms readily available. Another suggested that bank staff could phone their man in London, and another knew that the accounts existed but was still awaiting paperwork from head office. Although all the major banking institutions have signed a contract with the Post Office, it seems almost impossible to open one of those accounts. It is a national, UK-wide problem, not simply one in Inverness. I have a letter sent from the Department for Work and Pensions to retirement pension customers. It is dated 9 February 2003 and, as other members have said, it states that "What we ask you to do now" is simply to pick up the telephone and dial a freephone number, and that customers who do that can sign up very easily. However, for customers who wish to open a Post Office card account, there are 21 steps after the phone call before they receive a swipe card and four-digit PIN. Why does not the Department for Work and Pensions include an application form for the Post Office card account with the original letter and provide post offices with a level playing field?

I put on record the appreciation of those who attended the Scotland against cancer conference last Friday for the Presiding Officer's speech about being a cancer patient. Given that men are reluctant to attend their doctor to present early with symptoms, as Scott Barrie has said, I ask the minister to ensure that GPs and local national health service teams are included in the early detection of male cancer. I also ask that the excellent work that is being carried out by Dr Barlow, who is a GP in Glasgow, be built on.

Does the member disagree with Audit Scotland, which recently reported that 50 per cent of wards in Scottish hospitals are understaffed by nurses and others?

rose—

Does Bristow Muldoon agree with me—it would be difficult not to, as I lectured economics for 20 years—that the period between 1992 and 1997 was the first time since statistics began to be collected that unemployment and inflation both fell, disproving the Phillips curve?

Where did that come from?

They pay in the end, though.

After listening to that brilliant speech by George Lyon, I wonder when he last listened to people in Argyll and Bute about the state of the roads, the health service and education. They are certainly not singing from the same hymn sheet as he is. The Government's own figures from its information and statistics division, which were published last week, have confirmed the differences between the situation at the start of the Parliament and the situation now. The total NHS waiting list is up by more than 18,000 and the median waiting time has increased by 10 days. The percentages of patients who are seen within  nine, 13 and 26 weeks are all down by an average of 10 per cent. The total number of out-patients seen, including those on the deferred list, has fallen by more than 83,000; the number of emergency in-patients seen is down by 561; the number of elective in-patients seen is down by 7,945; and the number of day cases is down by 14,899. Unlike George Lyon, who would get 0 per cent for his homework, I have done my homework and I am quoting the Executive's figures, which have cost taxpayers an extra £2 billion. The recent Executive document "Recording Our Achievements" should be renamed "Cataloguing Our Disasters". I will raise several other points in the time that I have left. The first one is on public health, which can work in a fully co-ordinated manner in an integrated programme only if inputs and outputs are fully held to account. A coalition promise on page 70 of "Recording Our Achievements" is: "We will ensure that all schools have a sports co-ordinator by 2003." However, in the next column, in a paragraph on progress on that promise, the Executive states that the promise "May not be achieved" because "not all local authorities provide the required match funding." That is another Labour failure. Hospital-acquired infections cost the health service £186 million and take up 11 per cent of hospital beds. How often have we heard Labour, Liberal and SNP MSPs say in the chamber that that rise is due to contracting out? However, nothing could be further from the truth. A written answer on 7 February from the Minister for Health and Community Care showed that of the 31 hospital trusts in Scotland, 24 have in-house contracts for cleaning; another five trusts mainly have in-house contracts, but each of those trusts has at least one hospital that has contracted out; and only two hospital trusts have fully contracted out their cleaning services. The two bodies that have contracted out are Grampian Primary Care NHS Trust and NHS Shetland and both have hospitals that are in the top NHS category in Scotland for cleanliness. In category 1 are the Royal Aberdeen children's hospital, Aberdeen maternity hospital, Aberdeen royal infirmary, Aberdeen city hospital and the Royal Cornhill hospital. The hospitals that are the best in Scotland for cleanliness are those that have contracted out their cleaning services. Like other MSPs in the Highlands, I welcomed  the increased Arbuthnott funding. The Highlands got the highest increase in Scotland and were the biggest gainer. However, all the money that the Highlands were given has gone to balancing the books and reducing the year-end financial deficit. Not one penny went to service development or to tackling poverty deprivation and improving equality of access. On the patients charter, the Minister for Health and Community Care spoke last week in the chamber about the report "Partnership for Care: Scotland's Health White Paper" and said that patients' interests are at the heart of the health service. Under the Tories, patients' interests were at the heart of the health service when we launched the patients charter in 1991. Labour ignored the patients charter from 1997 and the patients charter that was launched last week has been cancelled—I wonder why. The television advertisements in Scotland about drugs and alcohol abuse ask parents to be more sensitive, tolerant and understanding when their children have a drugs problem. We all assume that services exist to support those who have drugs and alcohol problems. However, when families in the Highlands seek advice and support for their sons and daughters who have heroin and alcohol addictions, the support is simply not available. I was pleased that Mary Mulligan met parents in Inverness this week. She heard a parent say, "When I went along to ask for help, advice and support, they took away any hope I ever had." When alcoholics turn up for detoxification and rehabilitation, they are turned away if they smell of drink—but alcoholics sometimes do smell of drink. They are told to come back in a few weeks, when a place might be available. However, in Moray, they are told to come back in six months. Despite the increase of £2 billion in health spending, matters are definitely not getting better under the Liberal-Labour coalition in Scotland.

I find the white paper interesting. It feels very familiar to one who has read the Executive's health plan, "Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change". As we have received the white paper only in the past hour, I have examined the summary, which is the best thing to do when time is short. The white paper proposes: "Unified NHS boards", which have already been delivered, under section 4 of the health plan; change and innovation centres, which are promised in section 9 of the health plan; "A Patient Information Initiative and a new complaints  procedure", which are mentioned in section 5 of the health plan; health improvement initiatives, which appear in section 2 of the health plan; "New Community Health Partnerships", which is a new name for the joint future agenda; "A new Scottish Health Council", although health councils already exist; and guarantees and targets for waiting times, which the Executive has been giving us for four years. My question for the minister is this: what is new?

When the Parliament was set up, the commitment to GP fundholding, financing and incentives was taken away. The Executive promised a joint investment fund, which never existed. GPs never had any access to that fund, so in fact it was the Executive that starved GPs and primary care.

rose—

What about Highland?

First, I should like to comment on the Scottish Executive's amendment to the motion. Over the past four years, we have been deluged by health motions congratulating the Labour and Liberal Democrat management of the health service. Today, the tone has changed. The amendment includes phrases such as "concerned about waiting times" and "tackling unacceptably long waits"; it also refers to looking forward to further reductions in the number of patients waiting longest for treatment. We all look forward to those reductions. The 107,382 people on the true and deferred waiting list are very much looking forward to a reduction in their wait. At least the failure is admitted; the Executive cannot argue against its own figures. The Conservatives welcome the fact that the Executive now supports the strengthening of the primary health care sector—better a sinner who repenteth. We also agree with that part of the amendment that congratulates staff throughout the national health service in Scotland on their hard work, dedication and commitment. Providing such a service against the odds and lacking support has to be commended. However, let us be fair. What has been done? A waiting times database has been set up, which, according to weekend press reports, promised one wait of four weeks, but which takes up to 18 months. That tool to improve patient choice and to drive waiting times down has resulted in one Aberdeen GP saying that most people have looked at the website, fallen about laughing and not looked again. Inventive as ever, our Scottish Executive admitted that it had filled the gaps with what it called "historic information". Historic information, in particular from the Tory years, might be what patients would like to see, but, after six years, it is time for ministers to admit the Executive's figures. In 1999, Labour promised to cut waiting lists by 10,000; instead they increased by 12,000. It promised to end mixed-sex wards; 36 still exist at the last count. It promised to reduce bureaucracy, but that has increased. It promised to reduce waiting times for in-patient care from 12 to nine months; 6,500 people are still waiting more than nine months for treatment. The average waiting time to see a consultant is up by 12 days.  Last week in Inverness, we heard that a person could wait up to 86 weeks for a diagnosis of diabetes. Some 7 per cent fewer patients are seen within 26 weeks. Bedblocking has increased by more than 1,000, and cancelled operations are up by 4,000. The number of beds has fallen by 637 and the number of administrators has risen by 1,190. The total number of out-patients who are seen is down by 9,000 and more than 15,000 patients were turned away from surgery last year. A recent Audit Scotland report found that 50 per cent of wards were understaffed, and that money spent on bank and agency nurses had risen by £10 million. Another promise was to increase heart bypass operations by at least 500; the Executive has managed an increase of 67. The Arbuthnott funding was welcomed in the Highlands until it was discovered, as I read last week, that 30 per cent of that funding will pay for financial deficits. It takes amazing incompetence to spend £2 billion extra and achieve longer waiting lists, longer waiting times, more hospital-acquired infections, more rotten teeth and the worst life expectancy in Europe.

The main cause for concern is undoubtedly in the area that the member represents—Caithness and Sutherland—and Arbuthnott is very much needed there. When we read how much it could help, and that 30 per cent of funds has gone into balancing the books, people in the area have a right to feel let down. All is not lost; things can get better. Indeed, the situation was getting better under the Conservatives—[ Interruption. ] The figures speak for themselves. General practitioner fundholding empowered GPs in the primary care sector to offer more services nearer to the patient's home. More chronic disease management could be carried out for epilepsy, asthma, heart disease and diabetes. The Conservatives would make greater use of Scotland's community hospitals instead of ignoring their potential. We would give GPs the power to respond to the priorities of their patients rather than to centrally imposed targets and directives—not to mention the "initiative of the week". Only 15 per cent of GPs believe that local health care co-operatives have improved the quality of care; however, small practices or LHCCs could manage budgets and develop services if they were only given the chance. It seems incredible that the primary care team is expected to provide  access to a health professional within 48 hours while a six or a 12-month wait for secondary care is deemed acceptable. Moreover, given that the whole world is online and that IT systems in all businesses are integrated, why does it take four weeks for a consultant to get an asthma patient's discharge letter typed and sent out to the GP? A communications system has to be a priority. By making more information and choice available, the Scottish Conservatives would empower not only GPs and the primary care team, but the patient. We should tell people that flu and childhood vaccines contain mercury, inform them of potential side effects and the efficacy of the vaccine, and let them make the choice. Empowered patients will soon become the most effective standards of quality. The Conservatives would allow patients to choose the hospital in which they wish to be treated and then let the money follow the patient to reward hard work and patient care. We would also involve NHS staff in the decision-making process. Furthermore, we would let the independent sector bid to provide health care, as long as the quality and the price were right. However, that approach should not be used as a panic measure two months before an election when the waiting figures become an electoral embarrassment. Instead, we would put out tenders in advance, take advantage of economies of scale and negotiation and allow the independent sector to plan ahead and the patient to plan for surgery—in short, there would be forward planning, not crisis management. The Scottish Conservatives would introduce greater autonomy for hospitals to apply for foundation status. Quite honestly, if such a step is all right with new Labour in England, why can it not be introduced in Scotland? Such hospitals would continue to be part of the NHS and would operate as not-for-profit companies with their own directors and with far greater freedom to make clinical judgments. They would be able to set their own pay scales, borrow money and keep the proceeds of land sales. Money would follow the patient, which would ensure that well-run hospitals were well-funded hospitals. The single budget in community care—which is a measure that I supported throughout the passage of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002—would ensure that patients were appropriately cared for in accordance with their needs. In the Highlands, the level of bedblocking has risen for the past three months. At every surgery that I hold, I see more cases of families at their wits' end, desperate to fight the bureaucratic system that stops elderly parents receiving care for their needs.  As for drug and alcohol treatments, we need better integration of services and access to detoxification and rehabilitation facilities where needed. There is no point in sending patients away for a few weeks or months and telling them to come back when the NHS is ready. In this case, what should count is when the patient is ready. Finally, according to the British Medical Association Scotland, Scotland's tradition of training and exporting doctors also seems to be at risk. Funding for better teaching facilities is needed, and more attention must be given to the recruitment and retention of suitably qualified academic staff. Furthermore, we must address the competing demands of NHS work, medical research and teaching commitments. The BMA has said that unless these issues are addressed quickly, the future training of Scotland's doctors and medical advances will be jeopardised. This devolved Scottish Parliament has always been proud of the country's medical history and faculties. I am pleased to have brought this matter to the minister's attention, and I hope that he will enable doctors to do their job. After all, we have been so proud of that job in the past. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges that funding for the NHS in Scotland has continued to increase since the Parliament was established; regrets, however, that this increase in funding has only come about as a result of an increase in the tax burden imposed on everyone in Scotland and that it has not led to an improvement in the service for patients, who have to wait longer for treatment and face the prospect of being forced to go abroad to get the treatment they need in a reasonable time; believes that the Scottish Executive's centralising approach is not working because, despite the best efforts of NHS staff, the current centralised, monopoly system of providing healthcare wastes too much money and therefore does not result in an improvement in front-line patient care, and calls on the Executive to match the extra investment with a sustained and coherent programme of reform that builds on the NHS's fundamental values of high-quality healthcare available to all, irrespective of their ability to pay, and seeks to realise these values by putting the needs and expectations of patients at the heart of the service by ensuring that money follows patients so that they have real choice over the treatment they receive, creating a partnership between the NHS and the independent sector so that all our facilities are used to cut waiting lists and times for NHS patients and devolving power to GPs and local hospitals so that NHS staff have far more say in how the health service is run so that it responds to the real needs of patients.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support is being given in order to ensure that Castle Tioram will remain an asset to tourism and culture. (S1O-6473)

Given the importance of Castle Tioram to our mercantile history—it was an important centre during the economic era of the lords of the isles—and the risk of significant further collapse of the building, will the minister urge Historic Scotland to work with the owner to ensure the place of Castle Tioram in Scotland's cultural heritage?

I welcome the committee's report. As an economist, I was drawn to specific figures in paragraph 58 of the report. I was alarmed at the reduction in tourism in Scotland between 1997 and 2001. The minister talked about the situation in 2002—perhaps the figures have improved, but I can judge only by what is in the report. In 1997, there were 23.3 million trips to Scotland; in 2001, there were only 19.1 million. In 1997, there were 97.3 million nights' accommodation in Scotland; in 2001, there were only 78.2 million. In 1997, tourism expenditure in Scotland was around £5 billion; in 2001, it was down to around £4 billion. This week, the Scottish Tourism Forum's manifesto confirmed that there was a decline of 24 per cent in the number of overseas visitors to Scotland between 1997 and 2001, along with a 21 per cent loss of spend in that period. I am, therefore, delighted to speak in the debate, as I think that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report has come not a moment too soon.

Yes, I certainly welcome any increase. However, Mr Fitzpatrick's statistic emphasises the problem—if business tourism in Glasgow is going up by 200 per cent while the overall decline in Scotland is 24 per cent, we must ask what is happening in constituencies such as Jamie Stone's and elsewhere. If the average reduction is 24 per cent but there is a 200 per cent increase in Glasgow, there are serious problems outwith Glasgow and Edinburgh. Paragraph 104 of the report says of Estonia and Slovenia: "Both countries saw an increase of around 25% in 2000 compared to the previous year." It continues: "Scotland on the other hand, experienced the largest decline in ITAs"—  international tourist arrivals— "of 11% in 2000". We certainly need to work together to do something about that. An issue that is guaranteed to infuriate people living in the Highlands is extortionate air fares, particularly those for going to the Highlands. Things have improved in recent years, but when airlines advertise seats at £29, for example, they do not always tell people that the price applies only to a few seats, which must be booked months in advance. I note that the committee report states that low-cost airlines have "created a new dynamism within tourism." I acknowledge what members have said about PSOs, particularly the PSO that safeguards the air link from Inverness to London. Given that tourism contributes to more than 11 per cent of employment in the Highlands, the recommendation that the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning should aid HIAL is fitting. I have prepared so much but I do not have enough time. There was great enthusiasm for doing business with Ryanair because all its seats are cheap and the airline would give people in the Highlands the same access to cheap flights as is available to people in cities elsewhere in Scotland. I will leave the issue of HIAL just now by saying that the problem always was that HIAL cried for more subsidies. However, I bring to the minister's attention a farmer in Orkney called Andrew Banks, who bought a second-hand Caledonian MacBrayne ferry, built two piers, offered cheaper trips to and from Orkney and, as a result, increased tourism enormously there and gave local people the opportunity to visit the mainland at a reasonable price. That example shows the difference between public organisations waiting for more subsidies before doing anything and a true entrepreneur working to benefit his business and his community of Orkney and the Highlands. The difference could not be starker.

Like Ian Jenkins, I have listened to parents. I will make two points today, both of which arise from  representations that parents in the Highlands have made to me. My first point has been made in particular by school board chairmen in the Highlands. Although the McCrone report was widely welcomed, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities estimated that there would be a shortfall in funding of £150 million. At the time, many of us thought that COSLA might be exaggerating. However, now that McCrone is being implemented, the actual shortfall is £147 million. For Highland Council, the underfunding for McCrone implementation is £6.6 million, which means that the council can implement the pay settlement but little else. Classroom assistants and continual professional development are now dreams, aspirations or targets—to use the Executive spin. Given that the McCrone funding formula was based on pupil numbers, it is hardly surprising that there should be a shortfall in an area that has so many small schools. The result is that teachers in urban areas will receive all the support and classroom help that was outlined in McCrone, whereas rural teachers will receive only minimal support. If the minister were job hunting after graduating from teacher training college, where would he choose to go? The Highlands already faces a crisis in recruiting general practitioners and dentists, but the Executive is now creating similar problems in respect of teachers. We will have a two-tier system in Scotland. How can schools and education authorities be given a legal obligation to pursue continuous improvement when they have no funding to implement it and no staff to cover the resulting teacher absences? Highland Council's education convener said only this week: "This financial year will not be good for education, culture and sport. £3.58 million was removed in 2002/03 from our service to help balance the council's budget which was not replaced. That meant a 10% cut in the money schools get per pupil ... and a freeze on recruiting visiting teachers." Highland teachers also have to deal with the fact that their levels of administrative and support staff are among the three lowest in Scotland. The second point that I want to make relates to what was said by Colin Campbell, who made his points extremely well. However, my concern is not only with class sizes. A problem that is constantly brought to the surface is discipline and bullying in schools. That could be tackled by joined-up government. It takes far too long to identify vulnerable children and bullying, too long to diagnose and assess education needs and an impossible time to get the necessary psychological support. Young offenders are simply becoming old offenders because there is no help or support for  them, so they carry on offending. If addressing offending behaviour were a higher priority than the publication of glossy brochures, that would be of great benefit. There is a critical lack of residential care for children with psychiatric problems. Without facilities and support near home, young people's problems become more acute. Those with drug and alcohol problems cannot be treated in adult facilities until they are 16—that wait is just too long for many. In Inverness, fast-track referrals to the department of health and child psychiatry take more than six months and normal referrals take 18 months. I have raised those points because of the effect that disruptive children can have on other children and because of the demands that they can make on teachers.

Can the minister confirm whether a mercury-free vaccine is available in Scotland? I previously mentioned Infanrix, which is produced by GlaxoSmithKline.

I want to be absolutely clear on this point. In terms of efficacy, is Infanrix an equal substitute to the vaccine that contains mercury? Is it available to all parents in Scotland?

In a written answer dated 24 January, which I quoted earlier, Malcolm Chisholm stated: "It is anticipated that thiomersal-free vaccines will be considered for provision in the routine childhood immunisation programme after they have been licensed ... and have demonstrated that they are as effective in protecting children against the real risk"— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 24 January 2003; p 2844.]  Tonight the minister is saying that the vaccines must be licensed, or they would not be on the shelf. He is also saying that they are as effective as vaccines that contain thiomersal. Within a fortnight, we have the Minister for Health and Community Care saying that thiomersal-free vaccines are not effective and the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care saying that they are just as effective as vaccines that contain thiomersal. There seems to be a contradiction.

I thank Nicola Sturgeon for securing the debate and Fraser Nelson of The Scotsman for his thorough investigation of the issue, which has raised awareness and has led to many parliamentary questions and perhaps even to this debate. As I follow Lloyd Quinan in the debate, I must say that, having been the Health and Community Care Committee's reporter on MMR, I was frightened when I read some of the detailed research on the vaccines containing thimerosal. The comparisons with MMR were not very welcome. I am joined by my colleague Jamie McGrigor, an expectant father whose child will be born any day now. He sits here looking for advice on vaccinations. I fully support an immunisation policy that treats parents and patients with respect by giving them the fullest information and choice possible for each vaccine. Thimerosal has been used in vaccines since the 1930s. What major studies have been carried out to demonstrate proper safety limits for exposure to ethyl mercury in small infants, who have received 75 micrograms of ethyl mercury by the 16 th week of their lives? As thimerosal was taken out of all child vaccines in the United States and Australia in 1999, its use in the United Kingdom is shocking. We need answers on why it remains in UK vaccines. Since the topic was first raised, I have asked several questions and have been told in ministerial responses that no research links thimerosal to Alzheimer's, that the regulation and control of vaccines is a reserved matter and that thimerosal is being removed from vaccines as a precautionary measure. Against what is that a precaution? I was told that many vaccines contain thimerosal, that four out of seven flu vaccines contain thimerosal and that the Department of Health states that flu vaccines should not be given during pregnancy, although, in the same reply, I was told that the vaccine does not affect the foetus. If it does not affect the developing foetus, what does it affect? A reply from the Minister for Health and Community Care said: "It is anticipated that thiomersal-free vaccines will be considered for provision in the routine childhood  immunisation programme after they have been licensed for use in the UK and have demonstrated that they are as effective in protecting children against the real risk presented by vaccine-preventable diseases".— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 24 January 2003; p 2844.]  In another answer, the minister said: "manufacturers are required to ensure that the replacement or elimination of thimerosal does not affect the safety or efficacy of the final product."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 13 November 2002; p 2231.]  That answer also said, "This may take time". That reply was received in November last year, yet I understand that, as Nicola Sturgeon has said, the current DTP vaccine stocks in Scotland include the mercury-free vaccine. In fact, I believe that, out of 110,000 units of the vaccine, 30,000 are a mercury-free vaccine called Infanrix—I hope that I have pronounced that correctly. Surely that vaccine would not be in stock if it was not fully tested for safety and effectiveness, so why can parents not be given the choice of mercury-free vaccines when they clearly exist? I further understand that one in four Scottish doctors is choosing mercury-free vaccines, so why not give everyone the choice? Parents need information. They need to know what to ask before making that choice. Reports also state that the mercury-free vaccine is 10 times less likely to have side effects, and children are vaccinated at two, three and four months. Surely parents have a right to all that information. Parents should also be told the efficacy ratio of the mercury and mercury-free DTP vaccines. The current information needs to be updated because, as other members have said, we are almost the last developed country in the world with mercury in the DTP vaccine. Or is it the case that the whole vaccine policy is based on cost? The current mercury vaccine made in France costs £10.17. The mercury-free vaccine made in the UK costs £19. In a devolved health care system in Scotland, surely we can at least tell parents the efficacy ratio of vaccines, which vaccines may trigger side effects, which vaccines contain mercury and what choice is available for mercury-free vaccines. I ask the minister to agree to give patients the information that they need to make an informed choice on the basis of efficacy and potential side effects.

Given that the research base for the directive is not known and that food supplements on sale work very well, will not further regulation on such products simply encourage more people to buy lower-quality products over the internet? In the long run, that will have the opposite of the intended effect.

To ask the First Minister what action is being taken to address the incidence of critically ill patients being turned away from hospitals because of a shortage of beds and staff at accident and emergency departments. (S1F-2454)

Does the First Minister, on behalf of the Liberal-Labour coalition, still support the Tories' 1991 patients charter? In particular, I am thinking of one of the 10 basic rights, which guaranteed patients emergency medical care at any time from hospital accident and emergency departments.

Given the fact that two recent reviews into a link between thiomersal and childhood development by the Committee on Safety of Medicines and the Institute of Medicine in the United States were inconclusive, may concerned parents in Scotland now choose a DTP vaccine that does not contain mercury?

Given the continued increase in hospital-acquired infections with a cost to the NHS of £186 million a year and the increased diversion of resources from health care to negligence claims, will the minister tell the Parliament whether the increase in resources for the payment of such claims is a result of cases involving hospital-acquired infections? Would it not be better to invest that money in infection control?

Kenny MacAskill has spoken about peripheral areas being brought into the hub. I draw to his attention the fact that members of the Health and Community Care Committee—Duncan Hamilton, Margaret Jamieson and I—visited Barra, where we had the pleasure of landing on the beach and where we heard about the health care needs of the people of the island. We were later met by the member for the Western Isles, Alasdair Morrison, in Stornoway, where we discussed our findings from the other islands. We made much use of our experiences on Barra during all stages of our consideration of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill. Many committees attach great importance to island communities and that has particularly been the case with the Health and Community Care Committee in relation to health care. Although I do not just want to talk about the impact of transport links on health care, I point out that the Arbuthnott formula is based on equality of access to health care. It takes eight hours to travel from Barra to Glasgow over sea and land, whereas a flight takes an hour. Given that, and given the time that it takes to travel to Stornoway or to Raigmore hospital in Inverness, the inequality of access to health care is obvious. The difficulties that people who live on remote islands face in accessing cardiac and maternity services or services for elderly people—not to mention the provisions that we aim to secure under the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill—are quite worrying. As has been mentioned, there were 300 return trips to Glasgow for medical reasons in 2002 and 120 return trips on the Benbecula to Stornoway route. As the minister is appraising and reviewing the air service, he should also appraise and review those cases and consider the health hazards and loss of life that might occur if travel time is increased. [ Interruption. ] If there is an increase in the travel time for health professionals working in podiatry, for example, those professionals can spend less time with patients and the provision of health care in the Western Isles becomes more expensive. [ Interruption. ]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. That takes me back to my time as a teacher—but I am glad that you dealt with it. Increased travel time also makes employing new staff more difficult. The expense and difficulty of  travelling are a disincentive to prospective employees, who will require higher expenses for getting to interviews on Barra. My final point is about school pupils. I noted in the survey that was brought to our attention that school pupils in Barra are absent from school for longer and more often than children elsewhere are. That is not because they are more ill than other school pupils, but because, when they have a medical appointment, they require to spend more time outside the classroom. I ask the minister to take that issue into consideration, as well as the fact that the air ambulance was used 86 times in 12 months.

Given that the York review confirmed that the benefits to oral health from fluoridation of the water supply were at best inconclusive, on what research basis is the minister promoting fluoridation?

Given the development of managed clinical networks in the NHS, will the staff employed in them be able to negotiate pay and conditions that are different and separate from those of existing NHS staff?

I still do not get the feeling that the minister will do something positive to monitor and audit local authority spending, particularly on free personal care and mental health services. The Executive has allocated £79 million to tackle delayed discharge over four years. However, in a parliamentary answer, Frank McAveety says: "It is not possible to extract from total discharge numbers those discharges funded directly" from the £79 million. You are not making an effort to hold local government accountable for  implementation and spending.

I want to make a quick point about Nicola Sturgeon's amendment. I have said this already, but the amendment is more about political opportunism than political judgment. When we have a cross-party committee that has worked rigorously over three years to examine the  problems of hepatitis C sufferers, it is discourteous for one member to break ranks and hijack the issue. That is especially the case when she knows perfectly well that if her amendment was agreed to, the payments could be clawed back through social security.

No, I will not. I have heard enough from the SNP today. There must be concern that although health spending in Scotland has been 25 per cent greater than in England for the past 25 years, waiting lists and times in the past five years have increased and fewer people are being treated. However, instead of measuring outcomes, the Scottish Government still measures our health by the amount of money that is spent on it. The budget debate should not only be about headline figures, but about placing more emphasis on best value for taxpayers' money and on the effectiveness of spending. As a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, I assisted with the passage of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002. The committee recommended a single budget for care in the community and it recommended, in particular, free personal care. I lodged amendments at the appropriate times whose purpose was to avoid buck-passing between the NHS and local councils, but the amendments were defeated. Their basis was the Sutherland commission's findings that £750 million that had been earmarked for care of the elderly throughout the United Kingdom had gone into a black hole at local council level and had been diverted to other budgets. Malcolm Chisholm's own care development group discovered that £63 million that had been earmarked for care of the elderly was also diverted to other council budgets. Six months into the implementation of free personal care, there is neither the means nor the intention to monitor local government spending on free personal and nursing care, which would ensure that those who are assessed as eligible for such care get it. I want to draw Parliament's attention to three written answers that I received last week from Frank McAveety. The first one confirms that "Anyone assessed as needing personal or nursing care will receive it." My second question was about measuring unmet need for home care, and the answer was: "The Executive does not measure unmet need." My third question was to ask about the waiting lists for home and residential care, to which Frank McAveety answered: "The information requested is not held centrally."—  [ Official Report , Written Answers , 9 December 2002; p 2477.] It is hardly surprising that 2,920 beds are still blocked in the NHS or that waiting lists are rising. We are currently debating the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill, which has two separate sections for NHS services and local government services. That represents total demarcation, and it is already clear that the commitment to supporting in the community people who have mental illnesses will not be achieved unless councils become accountable for their spending of the community care pound. I raise those two issues because, last week alone, three people came separately to my surgeries to discuss them. One stated that their elderly parent was on a waiting list for free personal care, while another's parent had been assessed months ago for free personal care but was still in Raigmore hospital. The third case was a lady who had found a place for her mother in a private care home in Nairn, but was told by the social work department that her mother's personal care would not be funded because she had taken her mother out of hospital and had jumped the list. On top of that is Highland Council's proposal to rewrite our act of Parliament by changing the eligibility criteria for personal care. I am thankful that the council's social work convener was voted down by many decent-minded councillors, so the proposal was not proceeded with. I mention those cases because successful implementation of acts that are passed by Parliament depends on the co-operation and commitment of local councils, but we have no means of openly and transparently holding them to account for their spending. However, when people complain that they cannot access free personal care or mental health services in the community, it will be Parliament and the Government who are blamed, not local authorities. If we want successful implementation of policies and acts of Parliament, ministers need to ensure that local councils accept responsibility and accountability for spending and that they are open and transparent, as members of the Parliament and, increasingly, the civil service have accepted they must be. We can pass any act of Parliament and be as well-meaning as we like, but unless we can hold councils accountable for care in the community, we will not succeed with free personal care and mental health services.

Does the minister welcome the reply that I received to a parliamentary question this week saying that the Skye bridge is likely to be paid off as early as 2009, after which people will be able to travel across to Skye for free? That is something that they would never have been able to do on the ferry.

Given that there is unanimity in the Health and Community Care Committee and given that we were working on what is a difficult inquiry before Nicola Sturgeon joined the committee, why did not she discuss her approach to the Finance Committee with the other members of the Health and Community Care Committee? Why has she broken ranks in a politically opportunistic way while we are considering the serious point of ex gratia payments for people with hepatitis C?

I thank the clerks, the committee's adviser and all those who gave evidence. We took evidence from the Carstairs state hospital, from Dundee and from people in the Highland users group, who probably travelled the furthest. I hope that the bill addresses the isolation and stigma of people with mental illness. If it addresses those who say—to quote the chaplain—"I telt ye. I need nae help", that will be a mark of success. I shall state our concerns. The bill was due to be considered by the Health and Community Care Committee at the beginning of February. We received a draft bill of 89 pages in June. The amended bill, which arrived in September, had almost doubled in size to 168 pages. I understand that there are 1,400 amendments by the Executive alone and that we can expect several hundred more amendments to be lodged by various organisations. The Mental Health (Scotland) Bill is possibly the most extensive and complex bill to be faced by the Parliament. It will affect a huge number of people, and we need time to get it right, not deadlines. When the Law Society of Scotland came to the committee, it stated that it found the bill confusing and ambiguous. If the Law Society found the bill confusing and ambiguous, perhaps the minister should have more consideration for members of the committee. That justifies our concerns over the timetable. Having said that, the Scottish Conservatives will support all provisions to end stigma and to bring respect and dignity to the care and treatment of people with mental illness. Most of those who gave evidence said that they wanted the principles to be made explicit in the bill. I accept the minister's point—that he has accepted that wish in the committee's report, on the basis of what works—but I think that we will look at what he decides works and see how different that is from the principles that were set out in the Millan committee report. If the principles were stated in the bill, that would help us to decide what the bill is designed to resolve, what wrongs will be righted by the bill and how its success will be judged. The main concern is about resources. I find it difficult to believe the financial estimates. The financial memorandum states that the additional costs associated with the bill will be £23 million a year, with a further £9 million in start-up costs. I wonder how those figures were reached. The minister has said that the Executive will undertake an assessment or audit of current mental health provision. How can the Executive accurately assess what is needed unless it knows what it has got already? As has been mentioned, the basic infrastructure to treat people with mental health  problems is simply not there. In Carstairs state hospital, 29 patients on average are waiting to be discharged. We need more medium-secure units. We also need more understanding from MSPs, who will vote the bill through. They must look more positively to contribute to the consultation and help to get rid of the myths that surround medium-secure units, which Shona Robison mentioned. We need more supported accommodation and day centres. We also need to reconsider the treatment of children in adult wards. Last week, Bill Butler's members' business debate dealt with the provision that is needed to help mothers cope with postnatal depression. There is also a grave need for provision for people with eating disorders. Tremendous infrastructure needs to be put in place simply to implement the bill. Our next concern is over staffing. Currently, there are 29 vacancies for psychiatrists in Scotland. To implement the bill fully, we will need a further 28 psychiatrists. We also need mental health officers, against a background of a serious shortage of social workers. I was pleased to hear the commitment that the Minister for Health and Community Care gave to Shona Robison about financing the bill. I can understand that money is much easier to find than staff. We cannot magic 57 psychiatrists out of thin air to fully implement the bill. Generally speaking, I can accept compulsory treatment and community-based compulsory treatment orders, based on the principle of the least restrictive alternative. However, Maggie, from the Edinburgh users forum, told us in evidence that she did not want her home and her privacy invaded. She did not want her home to be used as a hospital or for her treatment. We also heard evidence from Marcia from Elgin, who stated: "If people are ill enough to be sectioned, they are ill enough to be in hospital."—[ Official Report, Health and Community Care Committee , 30 October 2002; c 3263.] Although I agree in general with compulsory treatment orders in the community, we should not assume that they will be appropriate for everyone. It will be difficult to provide the level of support that will be needed for people in remote and rural areas. The bill is intended to reduce stigma and isolation; I hope that the minister understands that, in remote and rural areas, the bill will hardly reduce stigma and isolation if a community psychiatric nurse turns up twice a day. I hope that the minister will take that into account. I also hope that health boards and trusts will not use community-based CTOs to justify the loss of beds for mentally ill patients. The police did not give evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee—perhaps they gave evidence to the Justice 1 Committee. I understand that, if a patient fails to turn up for  treatment or is absent from home for treatment, the community psychiatric nurse will initially go to neighbours and look in likely places. If the patient is not found, the police will be alerted to look for a missing person. The role of the police needs to be addressed and resourced and the police need to be included in all discussions at the outset, particularly as the bill states in section 205(4)(a)(ii) that patients can be taken into custody. I do not want that issue to be overlooked, because for many patients it gives rise to the fear that it will not be a nurse who comes after them, but the police. I hope that the police's role will be handled sensitively. The bill tends to state that there will be a "care plan". That term was appropriate for elderly people in the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002, but given that more than 70 per cent of people recover from mental illness, could we not accept the suggestion that there should be a recovery plan rather than a care plan? Having listened to all the evidence on advance statements, I find that I agree with the patient and with the psychiatrist, yet their views differ. The issue of advance statements is one of the most controversial that the bill covers. I agree that patients should be given the opportunity to state in advance what treatments they do and do not want; I found the arguments on that most compelling. That is a mark of openness, democracy and treating the patient as a partner in their own treatment. However, when Professor David Owens came to the committee and talked about his duty of care, he said that an advance statement would inhibit his ability to treat a patient. He pointed out that drugs and therapies could advance between the time of writing of the advance statement and the time of care, and that it would be difficult for the patient to change her wishes. I found both arguments compelling. I agree with them both, but I know that that is not possible. The convener of the Health and Community Care Committee gave a good example when she talked about her wish for natural childbirth—until the labour pains started, when her advance statement changed rapidly. I do not mean to make light of the matter. That is an example of the difference between making a statement in advance and facing the reality. I find it confusing that, as Shona Robison mentioned, there are advance statements and there are advance statements. For example, if someone says, "I would prefer not to have treatment", that is a different advance statement from, for example, "I do not want that treatment if my life depends on it." We need more clarity about advance statements. I accept the principle that patients should be advised and respected, but we must all respect the psychiatrists' duty of care.  There has been considerable concern about the fact that, although the bill would place a duty on councils to provide advocacy, an individual would have no right to receive the service. Many groups who gave evidence to the committee highlighted that anomaly. The minister said that all those who need advocacy services should be able to obtain them, but we must be a bit firmer on that issue. How can assessing a need assess a demand? For example, someone could be told that they could not see an advocate for six months. Unless we know the need for advocacy services, and people have the right to those services, we cannot assume that supply will match demand. It is not enough for the minister to say that those who need advocacy services should be able to obtain them. We would hope that everyone who has a need for advocacy would have a right to receive that service. Much of the Health and Community Care Committee's time on the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill was spent in looking at the lack of partnership working and joint planning. Of course, the minister was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee when it dealt with the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill and I am sure that he remembers the points that were made by representatives from social work and the NHS. Members of the committee spent hours considering the lack of joined-up thinking and planning between the NHS and social work. Given that the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill gives us a wonderful opportunity to consider joint planning, resourcing, managing and budgets, it is rather strange that the bill has separate sections for social work and the NHS, with clear and distinct lines of demarcation. The minister has many grand words on issues such as joint futures and partnership, but we still have 2,900 blocked beds. The minister was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee when it discovered that £63 million that had been earmarked for the elderly was spent on other services. The bill provides an opportunity to ensure that all the resources that are earmarked for the mentally ill will, indeed, go to help them. I will conclude on time, Presiding Officer, by giving my party's commitment to the general principles of the bill.

I thank Fergus Ewing for giving me the opportunity to speak on this subject. Fergus raises this issue persistently every time that MSPs from different parties meet the health chiefs in the Highlands. He does not always get the answers that he wants, but that does not stop him from raising the issue of osteoporosis as regular as clockwork. I, too, would like to commend the National Osteoporosis Society on its strategy document "Reducing fractures and osteoporosis in Scotland: A strategy for Health Boards, Local Health Care Co-operatives, Acute and Primary Care Trusts", which was published in November 2000. I was heartened by the comment on the inside page from the chief medical officer for Scotland, who states: "I hope that Local Health Care Co-operatives and Health Boards, Primary Care and Acute Trusts make its implementation a priority as part of their work in reducing osteoporotic fractures." The strategy is also commendable because it is based on the principles of prevention and investment to save costs in the long run. Too often, we only consider issues such as how to cure fractures, but if we spent more money on prevention—which is at the heart of Fergus Ewing's motion—we would save money in the long run. The £150 million cost of osteoporosis to the NHS in Scotland cannot possibly measure an individual's loss of independence or the impact of bedblocking—or delayed discharge, as we call it. The most recent figure for that was 2,920 in July 2002, which represents a spending of millions of pounds. Given that osteoporosis is treatable and preventable, any investment will undoubtedly save the NHS millions in the long run. I was shocked when I read the figures to find that only 50 per cent of osteoporosis patients return to full, independent living. The 50 per cent who do not do so represent an enormous amount of patients.  The SIGN guidelines are due in spring 2003 and will be welcome. I hope that they will be based on the NOS's strategy. All SIGN guidelines are welcome, but only if they are adhered to. If they gather dust on a shelf, they are of no great benefit. However, I am pleased to see that pharmacists are included as one of the agencies in the NOS's strategy. The strategy document states that pharmacists should "encourage adherence to pharmacological treatment" and "ensure patients understand their medication and adhere to dosage." I raise that matter in relation to a fact about which I got confused, which is that calcium is recommended to reduce vertebral fracture risk, but only if it is combined with vitamin D. When one gets to a certain age in life and is considering how to avoid osteoporosis, one might read the following statement from the NOS's booklet: "Osteoporosis: Causes, prevention and treatment": "There are some risks associated with HRT,"— which is of course a common means of preventing and treating osteoporosis— "such as a slight increase in both the risk of breast cancer (after five years of HRT use) and the risk of a blood clot (deep vein thrombosis)." That is a wee bit confusing. I welcome the fact that pharmacists are included in the NOS's strategy. One might consider hormone replacement therapy as a means of preventing osteoporosis, but that would have to be measured against the risks that the booklet outlines. As Michael Matheson said, much more can be achieved by health professionals working together to address osteoporosis. I also hope that the SIGN guidelines will give clear, unambiguous guidance because I found that the guidance is certainly not crystal clear. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate. I hope that the underlying principle of prevention will be adhered to for osteoporosis and many other conditions.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many children under the age of six have been prescribed the drug Ritalin. (S1O-6033)

Is the minister concerned about the increasing number of children, including very young children, who are being prescribed Ritalin? Does he have concerns about the long-term effects on those children as they reach adulthood?

The Health and Community Care Committee's consideration of the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill gave us a great opportunity to focus on the lack of  provision of many services for people with mental illness. Debate arose about the lack of medium-secure units, about problems with placing adolescents in adult psychiatric wards, about the need for units and support services to treat eating disorders, and about the subject of this debate—the lack of services for mothers with PND and their babies. I am grateful to my colleague on the Health and Community Care Committee, Bill Butler, for raising the topic and for giving the Parliament another opportunity to discuss mental health. If we are to get rid of the stigma that surrounds mental health, that can only be helped by all of us openly discussing the issues. I am particularly delighted that a man has raised the issue of PND. That proves—if proof were needed—that men can equally, adequately and passionately address women's problems. PND is not just a women's problem. If it remains untreated, it can have a prolonged, damaging effect on the relationship between mother and baby and a detrimental effect on the child's psychological, social and educational development, as well as on the rest of the family. Mothers often delay seeking help because of the stigma or shame that they feel. They may also experience intense feelings of guilt, failure and inadequacy when they are presented with a bundle of joy and congratulations all round. I was shocked to hear that between 10 and 15 per cent of mothers have PND, as I know that that statistic is likely to be a gross underestimate. As Kenny Gibson said, the requirement for 30 to 45 beds for mothers with their babies does not seem a tall order in the grand scheme of things in the NHS. However, I stand by the principle of the least restrictive alternative, as outlined in the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill, because hospitalisation may not be the most appropriate option for all. Day care or community psychiatric nurse support may be appropriate or adequate in some cases. There is no shortage of drugs for depression, but serious consideration must be given to the fact that the drugs affect not only the mother but, through breast feeding, her baby. There is also concern about side effects and mothers sleeping through a baby crying. I am sure that we have all heard of people who started on anti-depressants following the birth of a child and who, decades later, are still on those drugs. The support of CPNs and health visitors is crucial in cases of PND. The SIGN guidelines are welcome, but only if they are implemented. Even within health board areas, the implementation of screening is patchy. I commend NHS Argyll and Clyde on holding a PND event on 5 September in Erskine. I  understand that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, Mary Mulligan, was there. The commitment by that health board to addressing PND in an area of considerable remoteness that includes 26 islands undoubtedly is commendable. I look forward to the minister's response to the debate.

At the outset, I say that, although I condemn the comments that were reported last week, I do not think that any of us could criticise Richard Simpson's commitment to addressing one of Scotland's most difficult problems. [Applause.]  I served on the Health and Community Care Committee with Richard Simpson for two and a half years and his commitment to and knowledge of health issues and Scotland's health are second to none. Nonetheless, I look forward to working with Hugh Henry. I will concentrate on point (b) in Bill Aitken's motion, which addresses "treatment to undergo rehabilitation". I have three points to make. The first is on the effect of the effective intervention unit. Last week, I read a paper on support for families and carers of drug users. Several families in Inverness have tried to get support and advice, but a social worker has not been available for families since January this year. I know that there is a national shortage of social workers, but unless all the key personnel are in place, the support systems do not work. People are told to go to Al-Anon. Although it is an excellent organisation, which operates at no cost to the taxpayer, we should ask where public money is going and how people are being served by it. We know that the Executive allocates money to address the drugs problem. I say to the minister that, when people look for doors to chap on to find help, they get the serious run around. During the recess, I phoned Richard Simpson on that point to ask for help and found him extremely helpful in understanding the problem. Mothers Against Drugs has set up many support groups throughout Scotland to enable mothers of drug  users to support each other. There is a particularly good group in Alness, with which I know Maureen Macmillan is familiar. My second point is about Ritalin. This week, I met representatives from the Overload Network. If its figures are correct, the increase in the use of the drug is seriously worrying. I know that Ritalin is not the subject of the debate today, but the Overload Network raised the issue of the effects that taking Ritalin can have on children as they move into adolescence and adulthood. I highlight the long-term effects of taking the drug. My third point is about the methadone programme. I fully support the comments that Annabel Goldie made about doing what works. Many members are trying to address cases in their constituencies and, because we are not experts, we look around to try to find information on what works. Last week, a pharmacist told me that one of her regular methadone users had expressed a desire to reduce the dose and work towards a drug-free lifestyle. His request was met by him being given a full week's supply of methadone. He was sent home with no support and left to his own devices. As he had a bottle of methadone in his home, the temptation led to increased not decreased use. He is now back to stage one and believes that he cannot reduce his dose. Last week, I received a letter from a parent who lost their son to methadone. He was not a heroin addict but was put on methadone all the same. The substance of my concern stems from a parliamentary answer that confirmed that it was more difficult to come off methadone than heroin.

I appreciate that point, but today I am asking questions. Any politician makes judgments only on the basis of knowledge, as I am sure Keith Raffan appreciates. I have asked questions about the number of people in Scotland who are on the methadone programme. The answer was promised by the end of October and the previous minister with responsibility for drugs assured me that it would now be available by the end of November. Surely we need to know how many people are on the programme, how long they have been on it and how many people have progressed through it to gradual dose reduction. We know that there is insufficient advice and support for many people  who are on the programme. We also know that detox and rehabilitation options are rarely offered. I asked the Executive how many places are available in Scotland for drug and alcohol rehabilitation. I was told, as MSPs are often told: "The information requested is not held centrally." I say to the minister that more information is needed so that politicians can make correct judgments on the basis of accurate information. There are alternatives to the methadone programme. I understand that drug addicts in France are offered buprenorphine, which is a substitute treatment for opiate dependence. I also understand that recent research in France illustrated that 47 per cent of people who are on the programme are in stable occupational activity. How many people on the methadone programme hold down jobs? I also understand that buprenorphine results in the marked reduction or elimination of the effects of additional methadone use. France may not have got it all right—I do not know, we are here to learn. I do know that 8 per cent of drug addicts in France are on methadone and 92 per cent are on buprenorphine. Why cannot we have similar pilot studies to manage opiate withdrawal? Not only would they be of benefit to patients, they would help families, improve employment status and reduce drug dealing and theft. Given that the success or failure of the drugs strategy rests largely with the drug action teams, what effective audit and monitoring is taking place to ensure that the drug action teams deliver in addressing Scotland's drugs problem?

We had an excellent debate yesterday on the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee report on lifelong learning. Many points from that report spill into this debate. My first point is that there should be a level playing field in order to provide equality of opportunity. However, that is difficult to establish when the McCrone report is based on pupil numbers rather than teacher numbers. This morning, I spoke to the director of education in Highland Council. Highland Council, which still faces a £6.6 million shortfall over the next three years, has to use the money to pay the 21 per cent salary increase. The council can have no new support staff, there is no winding-down allowance and there will be limited participation in the probationer teachers scheme. The council will not be able to implement the McCrone report in full. If we want there to be a level playing field, we should consider schools where there is not enough money coming in on the back of pupils to fund the teachers' settlement. I ask the minister to talk again to Argyll and Bute Council, the rural schools and Highland Council in particular, because if we want equality of opportunity there  should be equality of funding based on pupil numbers rather than teacher numbers.

No. The bleating was about the eligibility criteria; that is a matter for another debate. It is wrong of Highland Council to suggest that there should be postcode prescribing and that people should have to be more ill in the Highlands to get free personal care. My second point is about specialist schools. I am pleased that Ian Jenkins raised the subject of music tuition. How can talent be discovered and nurtured when councils such as Highland Council implement a humiliating means test? The city of culture bid included a promise of free tuition in schools. Surely free tuition could be provided in schools throughout Scotland. My third point, which Brian Monteith perhaps did not have time to mention, is that the Scottish Conservatives favour third and fourth year pupils being given the chance to move from school to further education. As a further education lecturer for 20 years, I taught 15-year-olds on what I seem to remember was called the link scheme. The schools often wanted rid of those pupils because they were rather undisciplined, but putting them in a class of mature students soon sorted them out. It gave them social skills, better skills and the type of training that suited their individual needs.

Further education's reputation for fulfilling individual needs in education and training is without comparison in Scotland. Members have only to sit on the Health and Community Care Committee—like my colleague, Margaret Jamieson—to see the enormous needs for the caring profession that have arisen through care in the community and the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill. Many school pupils could benefit from entering further education, not only in third and fourth year, but in fifth and sixth year; they might go through a full academic secondary school education of six years and leave with nothing. The further education sector is more than capable of widening choice, fulfilling training needs and giving younger people a wider range of options. I hope that we take further education into account in every education debate.

I am grateful to John Swinney for raising the debate and for giving members from the Highlands and Islands and elsewhere an opportunity to discuss the issue. Whenever I have surgeries and conduct surveys in Strathspey, Badenoch and Inverness, the main concern is always roads. As a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, I tend to think that people are concerned about health and education, but in the Highlands the main issue is undoubtedly roads. Someone mentioned that Inverness is the fastest growing city in the United Kingdom. Planning permission has been given for another 10,000 houses and the part of the proposed national park that contains Badenoch and Strathspey has planning permission for over 700 homes. When they look at the old A9, people can be forgiven for thinking that the current A9 is actually quite good. When one drives through Kincraig, one can see the advantages of the new A9. When the Conservatives were doing the upgrade of the A9, the emphasis was not on dual carriageways; it was mainly on bypassing villages such as Dunkeld and Pitlochry that were chock-a-block with traffic. Perhaps more emphasis should have been placed on the future and on dualling the A9. I will answer a question that I think Keith Raffan asked. A year or two ago, I met Gordon Campbell, an ex-Secretary of State for Scotland, who said that sufficient land had been purchased on both sides of the A9 to allow it to be dualled without the purchase of additional land. I will quote from a letter that I received from Mr Fraser in Inverness. He has surveyed the full length of the A9 and he says that, starting from Inverness, "It can be seen that for the initial 16 miles there is 10.6 miles of dual carriageway" and in the 47 miles north from Perth, there are 13.4 miles of dual carriageway. However, if we remove the 0.75 miles of overtaking opportunities at Crubenmore, overtaking is impossible for 44 miles in the middle of the A9. We should emphasise that today. I support the A9 upgrade, but we should not consider it in isolation. I hope that the minister will progress other incentives, such as those to get freight off the road. Now that we have three Tesco supermarkets in Inverness, the road seems to carry a convoy of Tesco lorries whenever I travel up and down it. I ask the minister to encourage and provide more incentives for public transport. I am probably  the greatest fan of Great North Eastern Railway travel. Not only is railway travel cheaper, but GNER considers customer safety and makes rail travel more attractive. When the minister considers future franchises, I ask him to look towards GNER. It is undoubtedly an incentive to take traffic off the road.

I am pleased to support the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report on lifelong learning, which I find comprehensive. I would like to highlight some of the points that it contains. Although I did not contribute to the committee's inquiry, my speech is based on my experience in further and higher education as a lecturer in  economics and business studies for the past 20 years. I taught mixed ages and abilities and never taught the same subject two years in a row. I taught university-level courses for the university of the Highlands and Islands, the University of Abertay Dundee and the Open University. In further education, we were all expected to teach 24 hours a week, whereas someone who lectures at a university would be unlikely to be asked to teach 24 hours a month. I raise that point because, in the past two decades, further education has been flexible and innovative and, in many ways, has met all the challenges that have been set through business, industry and education. There is a concern that we are beginning to look to FE for education and degrees on the cheap. Last week, I went to Inverness College's graduation ceremony. I heard the principal say how much he was struggling to get rid of the college's financial deficit at the end of the year. Some of my ex-colleagues from Inverness College told me that they were the lowest-paid lecturers in Scotland. When they see that teachers have a 21 per cent increase, their morale is affected. I am not saying that the teachers' increase is not deserved, but it is important that we think of other sectors. Many of us looked with envy at teachers who taught the same subject and often the same grade year after year. I was delighted by the recommendation in paragraph 157 of the report, on the promotion of learning among elderly people. I recently visited a care home in Edinburgh for the Church of Scotland, where I discovered that internet access and e-mail had been set up for elderly residents. The fact that those facilities were set up at the request of the residents shows that they are moving forward. The recommendation in paragraph 215 is on the development of lifelong learning through the workplace, which the minister and many other members mentioned. We need to do more about integrating and articulating business training. Many years ago, two young chaps came along for an interview for the national certificate, HNC and HND in accounting. Rather than undertake the course, one of them decided to take up a youth training scheme apprenticeship in the Royal Bank of Scotland. At the end of all his training, the one who took the qualifications in accounting went for a job in the Royal Bank. His manager turned out to be the person who started as a YTS trainee. That confirms much of what many members have said. I felt passionate about the recommendation in paragraph 169, which is about the early identification of special needs. I can add nothing to what Lloyd Quinan said. It was shocking for many of us in further education, who had no training on  dyslexia, to see garbled letters and words. The first time that students with dyslexia saw an educational psychologist was at the age of 18 and 19. Much more has to be done about that. As has been mentioned, paragraph 235 recommends the establishment of a centre of excellence for e-learning. Nowhere is more innovative than the University of Abertay Dundee. I feel strongly about the recommendation in paragraph 141. I recognise that the committee has highlighted good practice in community education in North Lanarkshire and Fife. However, councils throughout the country should be asked why they are allowing community education to wither on the vine. Health and fitness centres are becoming the environment of the elite because they are so expensive to join, while community education facilities are grossly under-utilised. I am not sure that access to learning for prisoners was highlighted in the report, but prisoners should have the same access to learning and self-respect as others have.

My final point is about class. For many people in further education, the issue was not the class that they came from but the fact that their confidence had been knocked out of them because they had been humiliated by a teacher in their youth. As an FE lecturer, I was delighted to help to bring back that confidence for many.

I said to St Ninian's Primary School in Stirling that I would choose the word "girning". I chose that word because I thought that I would get ample opportunities to use it in the Parliament. Linda Fabiani, who has come the closest to girning for five minutes, is the girning champion this afternoon. I will send that to St Ninian's to prove that I have used a Scottish word. I recently supported the debate on the Inverness Highland bid for the European city of culture. Although many people thought that the bid was an ambitious project for a new city, many others—including me—thought that it could only be a win-win situation. That has been the case, even though Inverness did not make the shortleet. What the team achieved was to get people, groups and organisations together to undertake an audit of culture throughout the Highlands. From that audit of culture, a cultural pledge was stated. One of the pledges from the Inverness Highland bid was for free music tuition in schools, rather than the current system in the Highlands, which uses means testing. Many parents would rather not ask for music tuition than participate in a means test. However, I had some hope when I saw a quotation from the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. Mike Watson—I am sorry to see that he has left the chamber—said that it was disappointing that the Inverness Highland bid was not successful. He also said: "Several initiatives deserve to be developed even though the Inverness bid did not make the shortlist."—[ Official Report , Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee , 30 October 2002; c 2953.] My hopes were raised until I saw the national cultural strategy. On page 39, it says: "Work with education authorities to maximise opportunities for instrumental tuition in schools, free to those unable to pay."  That is hardly encouragement for those who feel that, throughout Scotland, children in all schools should receive free tuition. On page 41 of the national cultural strategy document, I note that there has been an "audit of youth music provision". I welcome that. The audit has been commissioned by the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, the Scottish Arts Council and the National Foundation for Youth Music to "consider opportunities across all styles of music and in both the formal and informal education sectors." I understand that the report will be published next month. I hope that the Executive will be committed to addressing issues that have been identified by the audit, so that we do not have postcode music tuition fees throughout Scotland. I hope that the audit will also highlight a cultural pledge to school pupils, as the Highland one did. If social inclusion and equality of access are to mean anything, surely it is not acceptable to means test pupils for music tuition in one area and to give such tuition free in other areas. My second point concerns Castle Tioram. My colleague Rhoda Grant has raised the matter several times. It is important that all the quangos and organisations share the minister's vision for culture—and I include Historic Scotland. Castle Tioram is a part of our culture that most of us have never heard of, belonging to the mercantile days of the lord of the isles.

Yes. Well done. I very much support that. My third point relates to the role of business in the arts. It would be stifling to innovation and culture if we assumed that Governments and local authorities could or should organise all cultural events. The cultural strategy places emphasis on the relations between the arts and business. Recently, through the business exchange, I spent a day at Deutsche Bank, which is one of the largest collectors of art; its offices look wonderful and one is faced with beautiful paintings at every turn. That not only helps the artist, but benefits the employees and the wider community, with more people being exposed to, and becoming appreciative of, art. Deutsche Bank also sponsors the Scottish Chamber Orchestra. I use the example of Deutsche Bank to highlight the significant role that many businesses in Scotland play in contributing to culture. We do not  always recognise and acknowledge that role. I hope that, both now and in the future, the minister will acknowledge and encourage partnerships between the arts and culture and businesses throughout Scotland.

Given the fact that 50 per cent more people die from hospital-acquired infection than die on our roads, and given the fact that the Executive has made a commitment to reduce road deaths by 40 per cent, will the minister give a similar commitment to reduce deaths from hospital-acquired infections?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many people are currently being prescribed methadone on a regular basis. (S1O-5810)

Given that methadone is more addictive than heroin, is the minister concerned about the rising number of people who are on the methadone programme, the discretionary amount that is being prescribed and the fact that the programme is increasingly a containment rather than a harm reduction one? Furthermore, will he take this opportunity to put forward his views on using heroin instead of methadone for harm reduction purposes?

The current consultation document on fluoridation of the water supply states that the Executive is impartial on the issue. How does the minister square that statement with a contribution of £26,000 to the British Fluoridation Society—a society that exists solely to promote fluoridation of the water supply?

I am pleased to support and endorse the motion proposed by Kenny MacAskill, particularly where it concerns the development of closer political ties with the Nordic Council and between the Scottish Executive and the nordic council of ministers. Geographically, Scotland is on the periphery of the European Union. In nordic terms—taking into account Iceland and the Faroe islands—it is pretty central. I admit that I had never visited the Orkney or Shetland islands before I became a Highlands and Islands list member, although I am sure the minister had. I have enjoyed the privilege of visiting the northern isles to discover that so much of the culture, the language, the traditions, even the law, is more nordic than Scottish. Others have mentioned the pronunciations, the place names, the street names, the accents and the dialect. On my most recent visit to Shetland, we attended a concert by the Shetland Fiddlers. I thought I would recognise all the tunes—no way, they were quite different. I also saw some Shetland dancing and I expected to see the dancers in tartan, but there was none. The traditional clothes, the stories we were told and the history were more different than I had appreciated. We talked to the enterprising Shetland Council, which has a share in the Smyrill line ferries that sail from Denmark, Shetland and the Faroe islands to Iceland. The route cuts out all the parts of Scotland with which I was more familiar. Probably the most striking difference is in udal law. When some ladies came to me—Jim Wallace knows the ladies to whom I refer—to say that they own properties but do not have title deeds, I said, "I'll sort that one out." Then I realised that udal law is the law of the ancient Scandinavian empire. Just as we hold on dearly to our Scots law, equally, people in Orkney and Shetland want to hold on to their udal law. That was a learning experience for me, as I had not even heard of udal law until then. There has been a recent change in the law and proof of ownership must be established by next April. I hope that talks with the Nordic Council will help us to ensure that people without title deeds in Orkney and Shetland will establish the ownership of their properties.  I use those examples to highlight the diversity of culture in Scotland. The northern isles often have more in common with nordic countries than we realise. One of the greatest successes I have heard of since becoming a member of the Scottish Parliament—Dorothy-Grace Elder, my colleague on the Health and Community Care Committee will acknowledge this—is a public health project in North Karelia in Finland. During the past three and a half years, I have stated that I would like to visit Finland to learn about its excellent practice in public health. We are never too big to learn from other people. That is one example of an area in which Scotland could learn a great deal from the nordic regions. I am pleased to join in the congratulations on the 50 th anniversary of the Nordic Council.

I support Mr Stone's comments as a member for Caithness and Sutherland. On this national poetry day, does the member say that Caithness, Sutherland and all of Ross-shire are worthy of being capitals of culture? [Interruption.]

I, too, congratulate Rhoda Grant on securing this debate in support of the Inverness Highland bid to become European capital of culture in 2008. On this historic occasion, I fully endorse everything Rhoda Grant and Fergus Ewing have said. Highland MSPs often leave their politics aside and work together. Like them, I congratulate Bill Sylvester, the chief executive of Inverness and Nairn Enterprise, on his role leading this bid. Such is Bill's enthusiasm that, if people do not support the bid when they meet him, they certainly will when they leave him. This bid gives us a win-win situation. If we win, it could generate up to £230 million of additional income for the Highlands—a figure that is based on a 30 per cent increase in tourism. If we are short-listed, a benefit of £80 million could accrue. If we are not short-listed, we will have the benefit of having 23 partners across the Highlands working together and the benefit of probably the most extensive audit of culture, heritage, sports, environment, arts, language and music ever done. The bid will help to raise awareness, to develop innovative ideas on culture and to show the city's contribution to regeneration, social inclusion, education and business. At lunch time, the bid was likened to the Scotland in bloom competition: if we win, it is wonderful; if we do not win, it is still beautiful. The cultural pledge is an example of joined-up thinking and partnership. Free music tuition was enjoyed in the Highlands in the past. It is now based on a means test. I also raise the example of Caithness United: a young and able football team that has been banned from the Highland League due to travel distances.

I take Jamie Stone's point and commend the work that he has done on the matter. I listened to Tommy Docherty on the radio this morning. He talked about the fact that managers of the Scotland team used to go to watch Scottish players playing for all the big football clubs in England, but now it is very difficult to get the team together. If we believe in social inclusion, we should believe in giving the young lads in Caithness the opportunity to play not only for their own club, for Caley Thistle and for Ross  County, but for Scotland. I believe that Caithness United is an excellent team. I hope that the minister will investigate the secrecy around the decision. The cultural pledge includes drama workshops, free access to swimming and creative arts or crafts courses. They should be the pledges not only of the cultural bid, but of every councillor who is elected on 1 May next year. I welcome the bid and I support it. I wish the bid team all success in showing and highlighting the confidence of the Highlands as the European capital of culture.

We saw your legs.

Given the commitment in the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill to the least restrictive alternative, will the minister guarantee that there will be a medium-secure unit in the west of Scotland that could take appropriate patients out of the state hospital at Carstairs?

I commend Kenny MacAskill for pitching for a job as a marketing assistant for Ryanair from 2 May next year. He must be top of the list. I will concentrate on the future of air transport to and from the Highlands and Islands. I note that the Executive motion "notes the consultation process ... on the future development of air transport". I hope that the minister's responsibility for HIAL  will include conducting a similar consultation process. In Aberdeen, significant consultation and debate surrounded the late opening of Dyce airport. However, I understand from constituents in Nairn that HIAL carried out no such consultation prior to announcing 24-hour opening. There is also concern about increased freight on the Inverness to Aberdeen road. I ask the minister to extend the culture of consultation to HIAL. To compare the lack of growth at airports in the Highlands and Islands with the growth at airports in the rest of Scotland is interesting, given the current subsidy of £21 million. If we take the eight HIAL airports that were in operation in 1991 and note their expansion—or otherwise—over the decade to 2001, we find that the number of passengers has reduced by 23 per cent. As the minister said in his opening speech, that compares with a doubling of passenger numbers at BAA airports over the same period. I hope that that figure will be used when HIAL is asked whether it is making the best use of its subsidy and whether it is working fully with all partners to utilise the potential of its airports to provide cheap flights for visitors, residents and business. While there has been a 23 per cent reduction in the number of passengers at HIAL airports, passenger numbers at Prestwick airport have increased thirty-fivefold in 10 years, from 35,000 to more than 1.25 million last year. I appreciate the particular local circumstances in Shetland—I am sure that Tavish Scott would be jumping up and down on hearing that word were he here—but it is interesting to note that, over the same 10-year period, there was a sixteenfold increase in the number of passengers at the Shetland Islands Council-owned Scatsta airport. However, it is still the case that crossing the Pentland firth is more expensive than crossing the Atlantic. This week, I was trying to get back to Inverness for a meeting having been to Carstairs hospital on Monday. The flight to Inverness from Edinburgh airport cost £182, and was not at a time of day that would favour business travel.

Inverness is one of the few airports where there has been any expansion over that period. I do not want to waste my time over this, but other figures, including those for Kirkwall airport, are very worrying. I understand that HIAL and Highlands and Islands Enterprise have funded a study into the economic and social benefits that low-cost airlines  would bring to the area. Although the report on that has not yet been published, it is hoped that, with a partnership approach that emphasises the economic and social benefits for the whole of the Highlands and Islands, and with seasoned negotiators in place, people in the Highlands may reap the benefits of low-cost travel in the future. There is much talk about landing charges, but I do not think that they are the only factor. However, we do need a financial structure that will give incentives to HIAL to increase traffic at Inverness and throughout the network. There are many times of day when Inverness airport is quiet, and surely it is better to have cheap flights than no flights. I ask the minister, when summing up, to appraise the performance of Highlands and Islands Airports in its use of the public subsidy, in its accountability to Government and in its ability to represent the interests of the Highlands and Islands in air travel.

I congratulate Keith Raffan on the excellent work that he does in the Parliament on drugs and alcohol. In the absence of other mentions of alcohol abuse, I would like to acknowledge the excellent work that is done by Alcoholics Anonymous. Scotland has 9 per cent of the UK's population and Alcoholics Anonymous provides 30 per cent of alcohol abuse support groups at no cost to the taxpayer. I welcome the excellent work that is being done in Dumfries and Galloway towards the establishment of a managed clinical network, particularly in relation to the development of primary care standards for coronary heart disease and the Highland stroke strategy for the review of stroke services throughout the region. The last sentence of the Executive's motion mentions: "the development of more integrated services". There is often a feeling that coronary heart disease and stroke treatment begins and ends at acute hospitals. However, during my members' business debate last week it was acknowledged that, if the patient could be treated in primary care,  they should be. I would like to emphasise prevention, which was highlighted by Des McNulty. In a recent paper from the Scottish Association of Community Hospitals, Dr Joan Noble of Nairn discussed the completion of a successful screening programme of Nairn and Ardesier local health care co-operative's 65 to 75-year-old male patients. Unlike in Colin Campbell's area, the uptake was 93 per cent and the screening took place at the community hospital in Nairn. As well as ultrasound screening, a vascular nurse provided a full well-man check that covered blood pressure, height, weight, urine, smoking and lifestyle issues that arose during the appointment. At the end of the MOT, patients were given a pack of specially selected health promotion leaflets. Out of 624 patients, 24 aortic aneurysms were detected, six of which required immediate treatment. Those patients were referred to the local vascular surgeon. Four were successfully operated on, and the other two are still being assessed. The remaining patients, who have smaller aneurysms, are receiving continuing annual supervision. The screening also uncovered 99 possible new hypertension patients and two new diabetics. That holistic approach in primary care—rather than a single-disease approach—not only saves the national health service money, it saves the patient time from multiple appointments and gives peace of mind. The Nairn practice will now invite for screening all male patients over the age of 65. I use that example because men in Nairn were much keener to come to come in to the general practitioner and the community hospital. Members should compare that with the example that Colin Campbell gave of an acute hospital. However, if the Executive really means to develop an integrated service, it needs to ensure that community hospitals, GPs and the full primary care team are fully integrated into the managed clinical networks. It must also put greater emphasis on prevention and aftercare where patients are treated as near to their homes as possible. The Conservatives agree with and endorse the strategy. However, it is one of many strategies, glossy brochures, consultations and action plans. Will the minister now—after three and a half years of the Parliament—start to give us an update on the strategies? Will he monitor and publish what has been achieved? Will he let us know exactly what comes out of the strategies? I agree with Paul Martin and endorse his comment: let us ensure that the glossy brochures make a difference.

I am not an expert on the Glasgow acute services review, but does Paul Martin agree that Glasgow needs a medium-secure unit in order to release people who are inappropriately detained in Carstairs?

I have not read every word in the strategy, but I was quite surprised at page 17 of the strategy document, which states: "NHS Boards should give consideration to making innovative appointments to MCNs, rather than to institutions." Will the managed clinical networks be a new form of employer?

Will the minister give an assurance that she will advise the people of Scotland about the research that has been done on the potential impacts on health and on cancer of fluoridation of the water supply?

As joint convener, with Kenneth Macintosh, of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on cancer, I welcome this debate. I welcome in particular Brian Fitzpatrick's emphasis on living with cancer. We must try to communicate the message that many more people are now living with cancer. All members are likely to have had a friend or relative who died of cancer. Around 20 years ago, my mother-in-law had lung cancer. We were told that she had the disease, but she was not. That was the way in which things were done at the time. We had to pretend that she was fine. Eventually she discovered that we all knew—her response was not good.  I am thankful that we now treat cancer patients with more dignity and respect. I am also delighted that in February next year Maggie's will start to build in the Highlands and that the Macmillan centre at Raigmore hospital is under way. Both Maggie's Centre and Macmillan Cancer Relief are very supportive organisations. With the assistance of those organisations and with the expansion of CancerBACUP, the conspiracy of silence that was referred to is ending—cancer is being kicked out of the closet. On behalf of the Conservatives, I welcome the opening of the new CancerBACUP service in Glasgow. Many patients do not take in the information that consultants and nurses give them. Some patients tell me that they did not hear anything after the word "cancer" was mentioned. When they get home, the nagging questions that they wish they had asked arise—that applies not just to cancer patients, but to their families. CancerBACUP's freephone helpline is welcome throughout Scotland, especially in remote and rural areas. It is a cause for concern that the incidence of cancer in Scotland is higher than the European average and that survival rates are lower. It is important that patients are given new drugs that specifically target cancer cells, rather than healthy cells. Many people are frightened to come forward for treatment because of the horrendous side effects that used to be associated with it. We have moved on from that situation. That is why information is so crucial. I hope that CancerBACUP information is now available in all general practice surgeries and cancer treatment centres throughout Scotland, so that all patients have the opportunity to use the service quietly and peacefully, in their own home, with their own list of questions. CancerBACUP has recently given the assurance that there is no link between abortion and breast cancer. I am sure that many women phone the helpline to ask for advice about the scare stories that we all hear. I was concerned by the prediction this week that cases of breast cancer will increase by 28 per cent in the next 10 years. We need more information and advice on the alleged link between hormone replacement therapy and breast cancer. We are for ever being told of an alleged link. Women deserve to be treated with dignity and to be told whether a link exists. The Sunday papers outlined the alleged link between fluoridation of the water supply and cancer. That may be erroneous, but it is enough to make people worry and wonder. In welcoming CancerBACUP, I ask that all is done to help to give advice on cancer prevention as well as curing cancer and advice to reassure women and men who phone up having seen such scare stories in the press.

An increasing number of the children to whom Adam Ingram refers are now being prescribed Ritalin. Will the minister assure us that adequate research has been carried out into the health effects that the drug may have on children in the short and long term?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give a commitment—a commitment that he did not give in the health plan—to provide money for more GPs? I welcome the announcements that have been made about primary care. However, people in the Highlands have told me: "As far as the additional funding for primary care is concerned: no money has of yet been handed down to practice levels or even LHCC's." The minister may be allocating money, but how can he be sure that it reaches LHCCs and primary care providers?

I am delighted to have secured the debate today on primary care. This is national general practice week, which is led by the Royal College of General Practitioners with support from the British Medical Association, the NHS Alliance, the Royal College of Nursing, the Royal College of Midwives and many others. The idea of national general practice week is to promote the work that our general practitioners and their colleagues do for the general public and to celebrate the strengths of family medicine. I am delighted that Richard Simpson, who is a GP, is sitting beside our health minister for today's debate. Primary care has now evolved into a health team in which GPs work with community and practice nurses, midwives, reception staff, managers, pharmacists, physiotherapists, occupational therapists and chiropodists to name but a few. Today I want to emphasise the role of GPs. They undergo five years of undergraduate training followed by three years in a hospital and a year in general practice. It takes nine years before they qualify as general practitioners. Ninety per cent of contacts with the national health service begin and end in primary care. That figure must be right—it is in the health plan. GPs provide a huge range of services, which expand constantly. Those services include chronic disease management of conditions such as diabetes, asthma and heart disease, minor surgery services and intermediate care. More patients are now cared for by GPs than were previously cared for in hospital. There is no doubt that general practice and the primary health care team is the heart and the cornerstone of the NHS in Scotland. Why then are we facing such problems in the recruitment  and retention of GPs? The health plan gave a commitment to recruit an additional 1,500 nurses and 600 consultants, but no such commitment was made to increase the number of GPs. Although we may all agree to the primary care team approach, GPs have unique skills in diagnosis and treatment. Those skills have been gained through years of education and training; they cannot be delivered by anyone other than a medically qualified GP. To prepare for the debate, I asked some individual GPs for advice. I will quote from their replies, although I do not have permission to give their names. If I am given permission to do so, I would be happy to hand them to the minister. One respondent commented on the current state of the health service, saying: "The rubbishy reforms ... brought forward to date are at the very root of its current failure ... Creation of 'The Government Doctor' under PMS, is truly soviet in its concept and practice." A GP from Lanarkshire responded: "there used to be 20 applicants for each job, now you are lucky ... to get 1 or 2." He went on to state: "if I'm not writing ... medical letters then I'm trying to explain to a patient that there is still a 52 week wait to see an orthopod or 6 months to see a psychologist, even if they are only 5 stone or agoraphobic ... more and more consultations are generated by the consequences of long waiting lists and a patient expectation that they are being 'duped' by a government telling them how much money they have poured into the NHS." On the subject of primary care modernisation—which has formed the basis of an excellent booklet—the chairman of a Highland local health care co-operative said: "as yet we have not received one penny of the extra resources that the report mentions. More importantly we have not received any encouragement from either NHS Highland or the Primary Care NHS Trust to redesign services according to the report or even to plan its implementation. On the contrary senior management seem to want to prevent us from taking any initiative that in our view would improve services or streamline administration. We are in many ways disempowered." The chairman goes on to say that the LHCC is currently receiving "the worst funding" since it was formed and that it has had to curtail services to "save money". In 1995, the number of GPs in training was 282; last year, that number had increased by one to 283. In a recent job satisfaction survey conducted by the BMA, 78 per cent of GPs said that they had a neutral or negative attitude towards LHCCs. When asked about the value of LHCCs in improving clinical care, 82 per cent had a neutral or negative view. The most shocking figure was that 86 per cent reported that LHCCs had provided  reduced quality or no change to the quality of patient care. The same research highlighted that 48 per cent of GPs who were more than 55 years old intended to leave their posts within two years. Why do we have such problems recognising GPs' contribution to patient care? Why are GPs constantly left out of decision making and why do they keep talking about a mass exodus from the NHS? Like so many others, I welcomed the introduction of NHS 24. Indeed, I still do—it is an excellent project. However, is the minister listening to the concerns that have been raised by GPs in Grampian? Is he aware that, although their service has experienced a 30 per cent reduction in the number of telephone consultations, there has been no reduction in the number of call-outs? Moreover, I understand that the Grampian doctors' on-call service ran at a fraction of the cost of NHS 24 in Grampian. Although I welcome the roll-out of the service to the rest of the country, I hope that the minister will listen to comments about how it can be improved in other areas. That said, I should point out that the BMA remains unconvinced that NHS 24 is an effective use of scarce NHS resources. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I could hardly speak about GPs without mentioning the crisis in the north of Scotland. I am sorry that my colleague Jamie Stone is not present, because he has been carrying out sterling work on the matter. There should be eight GPs in Wick, but by the end of the year there will be two and a part-time post. Further down the coast at Lybster, there will be no doctor by the end of the month. I understand from a written paper submitted to the Health and Community Care Committee last week that when the Helmsdale community raised concerns about the loss of its doctor, it was threatened with a Shipman and told that if people did not like the service, they did not have to use it. However, people who live in Helmsdale, Loth or Kildonan do not have a lot of choice. Given that 2 million appointments are missed in Scotland every year, we can all help our GPs by ensuring that we turn up for appointments and that we cancel when we cannot make them. That might give GPs the consultation time for patients that they would like. Although I understand that the new contract is still out for negotiation, I ask the minister to speak and listen to the GPs and primary care teams. By addressing their problems, he will show us that he values them as much as the patients do. I also ask him to reassure communities throughout Scotland that they can look forward to security of access to a family doctor in years to come.

By June this year, 1,000 fewer hip replacements had been carried out than had been carried out in the period ending in June 1999. In addition, 4,000 more people were on the orthopaedic waiting list in June this year than were on it in June 1999. Will the minister admit that his opposition to allowing NHS patients to use the private sector has led to pain and suffering for thousands of orthopaedic patients in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what is being done to address the 36 per cent rise in chlamydia diagnosis in females in 2001. (S1O-5537)

Will the minister ensure that information and advice that is given on chlamydia includes information and advice on potential infertility problems? Will she encourage young men to present for screening, given the low numbers of young men who have done so and the 50 per cent increase in diagnosis last year?

Will Mr Fitzpatrick accept an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

I am pleased to have secured tonight's debate. I trust that the dignity that has pervaded this afternoon's proceedings will continue into this debate. I visited Orkney during the summer recess and returned with pages of notes about the ferry issue. It seemed more appropriate to raise the issues in a members' business debate than by writing screeds of letters to the minister. There has been much speculation over the new ferry contract. I hope that members will appreciate from my careful use of "alleged" and "I understand" that the main communication channel for people in Orkney has been the local media, in particular The Orcadian . There has been considerable local speculation. Today, I look for an assurance on the long-term security of transportation of goods, livestock and passengers to the northern isles. I am not looking back to find out who was, or was not, to blame for the current situation. I understand that a Scottish Executive tender document to replace the P&O service did not mention the movement of livestock. That seems to underpin the problems that we face today. I further understand that NorthLink Orkney and Shetland Ferries Ltd advised the Aberdeen harbour authority that lairage would not be required because of the cassette system coming into operation. Lairage was promptly dismantled. New lairage is now being installed in Aberdeen—at, naturally, a considerable cost. I also understand that, because the P&O  contract ends this month, the Scottish Executive has had to hire two boats. One is coming from Australia and the other from South Africa—again at considerable cost to the public purse—to maintain consistency in the transportation of livestock. Bearing animal welfare considerations in mind, have all other routes been considered fully, especially given the existence of the new abattoir facilities at Dornoch and the new regulations on the transportation of animals? Orkney farmers and businesses seemed to like the previous Orcargo system to Invergordon. I would like to be assured that all the options have been explored. The new piers at Scrabster, Stromness and Kirkwall are well behind schedule and, apparently, well above their original budget. May we have a clear statement about those costs, as well as about the cost of the linkspan from Invergordon, which has been taken to Stromness as a temporary measure? The company with the subsidy for the northern isles ferries will be NorthLink yet, in the middle of all this change, we have a new shipping company representing the interests of Shetland—Norse Island Ferries Ltd—including main contractors such as Jim Brackenridge (Transport) Ltd, Gulf Oil Ltd, Shetland Transport Ltd and Northwards Ltd. Those developments, alongside the progress of Smyril Line, which is partly owned by Shetland Islands Council, provide excellent opportunities for Shetland, but Orkney tends to be left out of the equation. NorthLink has a subsidy of £11.5 million while Pentland Ferries Ltd and Norse Island Ferries have no subsidy. Both those independent operators are carrying substantial volumes of traffic. It has been suggested that subsidy should be based on the amount that each operator carries. Retrospective payment of subsidy seems to respect customer choice and reward the operator that is providing the lifeline service. Farmers, businesses and passengers have said that they would like to choose which ferry to use. They say that companies should earn their subsidy. NorthLink is slashing its freight rates now that Norse Island Ferries is in operation. Given that its business case was based on original costings, will the minister tell us the effect on NorthLink of a decrease in revenue? Can it continue to provide the promised service? Will NorthLink continue to cut charges to price other operators out and then rest back on the subsidy? That question has been raised with me and I would appreciate an answer from the minister. I have also been told, today, that the new Norse Island Ferries is undermining confidence among people in Orkney now that Shetland has decided to go it alone. There is a feeling that Orkney will get the crumbs from the table. A Sunday-only  service for the transportation of livestock, with any spare capacity being used for Orcadian cargo, is hardly the way forward. I am sure that the constituency member for Shetland will enlighten the Parliament about the new service. I am pleased to see that both Tavish Scott and Jim Wallace are here. Unfortunately, the new service leaves the profitability of the Orkney-Aberdeen route in doubt, as it depends on Shetland through traffic. The Norse Island Ferries service may lead to financial problems for NorthLink or, it has been suggested, a massive increase in Orkney fares. We must also ask why Orkney Marts has to pay off a £4.3 million loan for the new cassettes when that is a lifeline service. In the midst of all the public money for hired boats, high subsidies and massive, multimillion pound investments into piers and linkspans, we have Andrew Banks, a farmer from St Margaret's Hope in Orkney, who bought a 30-year-old CalMac ferry, dredged the sea, built two piers and now runs the service from Gills Bay, near John O'Groats to Orkney, which is cheaper than the subsidised route and takes only one hour. I can testify to the quality of that service, as I used it during the summer. I understand that Andrew Banks has applied for the livestock subsidy, but has not yet received a response from the Scottish Executive. I was also given the figures for Pentland Ferries. From April to November last year, the passenger numbers were 45,000 with more than 16,000 vehicles. Both those figures were exceeded by August 2002, with a massive increase in tourism business for Orkney. This week, Mr Banks purchased a second vessel, the Claymore. The Claymore has the same capacity as the Pentalina B and will operate freight and livestock between Caithness and Orkney every day of the week. That is all without a penny from the public purse. There are many issues at stake. I will mention one more—a topic on which we could spend a whole debate. P&O employees understood that Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations would apply to their change of employment. I now understand that NorthLink is stating that P&O workers will be taken on as new employees and that their previous service and conditions will not be taken into account. I would like clarification from the minister on that point. I understand that the Transport and the Environment Committee is looking into the ferry services. Will the minister ensure that all parties get round the table in talks to ensure proper consultation and communication about the changes? Will the minister give me an assurance that costs are being monitored against the original  estimates and that costing is based on best value for the public purse? I look forward to the minister's positive response, to update and assure people in the northern isles who are deeply concerned about the change in the service.

Does the minister acknowledge that Mike Rumbles's suggestion that there should be a new dental school in Aberdeen would be extremely difficult to implement, given that there is a need for a wide range of training, skills and experience to set up such a school? Does she agree that it simply would not be possible to do that, given the shortage of dentists in Scotland now?

I, too, am delighted to see Margaret Ewing back. If I may say so, Margaret looks very well. It is nice to see her back in her stride, as feisty as usual, for the people in Moray. I picked up the following figures in the tea room about 10 minutes ago. I was actually quite shocked to see the fall in the number of registrations for general dental services. Since 1997, the registration of children has fallen by about 64,000 and the registration of adults has fallen by 197,464. When comparing health board areas, we see that the percentage of adult registrations in Highland is 38 per cent and in Grampian is 46 per cent, while in the Borders it is 58 per cent. The situation is mixed throughout Scotland. We often talk about access to dental services and I have come across something that has surprised me. Will the minister confirm that there is no guarantee of access for patients to general dental services, unlike the case with general medical services?  As Margaret Ewing has outlined, the position in Moray is particularly critical. I, too, draw members' attention to the Consumers Association report, which notes that more than 50 per cent of dentists in Moray are over 55. Unless action is taken, the position is likely to get worse rather than better. In the same study, the Consumers Association pointed out that in Edinburgh, 40 per cent of dental practices were not taking on all NHS patients and in Aberdeen 80 per cent of dental practices were not taking on all NHS patients. That means that if Moray patients are seeking NHS dental treatment in Aberdeen, they will have to seek out the 20 per cent of practitioners who will welcome them as NHS patients. The Consumers Association report also states that dentists had commented that it was not worth taking on NHS patients because of the low fees that dentists get from the NHS. In the Highlands and Islands, one practice had not taken on an NHS patient for five years and another practice quoted charges of £105 an hour. Several dentists in the Highlands said that NHS work did not pay enough to make it sustainable. Like many members, I welcome the dental action plan, "An Action Plan for Dental Services in Scotland", which was introduced in August 2000. I know that we can all be quite carping and critical about the glossy brochures, but the action plan is excellent and two years later it is probably time to carry out a progress report and produce an update. If everything in the plan had been implemented, people in Moray would not face the problems that they do today. The other point that has come to my attention in the Highlands is the statutory obligation on authorities to provide dental checks for schoolchildren three times throughout their education. It was confirmed quite recently at a meeting between MSPs and NHS Highland that NHS Highland does not meet that obligation. Looking back at my file on dentistry, I found several letters from dental therapists, who were seeking to review the dental auxiliaries regulations under the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978. The regulations allow them to practise in the public health services but forbid them to work in general dental services. I understand that dental therapists are not the answer to the shortage of dentists. Nonetheless, given that they can carry out some extractions, some fillings, cleaning and polishing, scaling and giving advice, the removal of those restrictions would be very helpful. I understand that Westminster is currently considering that issue. The dental action plan proposes the establishment of drop-in centres in the major cities and enhancing the role of mobile services. I understand that a drop-in centre is being  established in Edinburgh. The use of mobile units would undoubtedly be helpful in rural areas. Can the minister confirm that NHS 24, given that it is up and running in Aberdeen, is giving advice on dental problems, as promised in the action plan? Can the minister confirm that NHS 24 is also giving advice on access to dental services, which would be so helpful for the people in Moray? Page 13 of the action plan says: "Primary Care Trusts should review locally how GDS and CDS"— that is general dental services and community dental services— "can work together effectively to complement each other's services" and draw up a local service plan. Do all areas in Scotland have a local service plan? Are they doing what the Executive has asked them to do and are such plans sufficient to meet the needs of patients? Finally, I am sorry that Ian Jenkins is not here tonight because he regularly makes the point that the difficulties in accessing dental treatment mean that in many cases oral cancer is not picked up.

Will the member take an intervention?

The business cases for NHS 24 call centres were based on the premise that no nurses would be displaced from the NHS. Will the minister outline the effect on nurse recruitment and retention in the NHS trusts where call centres exist?

As my speech comes late in the debate and many issues have already been raised, I shall be able to do so. I will raise two issues. First, I want an assurance that the water that flows out of our taps is safe to drink and that there are adequate safeguards to protect public health. I would like such an assurance about the water in both the private and public sectors. Secondly, I ask the minister whether the provision of water and sewage treatment plants is sufficiently taken into account when planning applications are dealt with. As I looked through some of my son's textbooks last night, I noted that in 1842 the secretary of the poor law commission recommended clean drinking water and the efficient removal of waste water as a means for promoting better health among the masses. One hundred and sixty years later, we are still looking for the same thing. Given that few of us are experts on water filtration systems, we look to the minister to ensure that the Executive works with the universities, public health bodies  and Scottish Water to ensure that all the knowledge is applied. Among all the mathematical equations, I notice that various systems can be used to remove 99.9 per cent of cryptosporidium. I also note that, in the report "Drinking Water Quality in Scotland 2000", the Executive promised to eliminate cryptosporidium by 2005. To pick up on Des McNulty's point, we need a progress report on that promise. Will the minister also give us an assurance about chlorine? How is it known whether enough chlorine is used to purify the water? Is the minister absolutely sure about the levels of chlorine, which is potentially carcinogenic? Given the problems that we have experienced in Strathspey this summer, will the minister also assure us that private water supplies are inspected? Paragraph 6.3 of the report "Drinking Water Quality in Scotland 2000" states: "Local authorities should have procedures in place for ensuring that they are meeting the requirements of the 1992 Regulations." Are those procedures now in place? Are they monitored in order to ensure that private water supplies are fit for public health? Finally, I want to ask about a planning development in Aviemore. The development is for 500 houses, but there are already concerns about odours from the existing water treatment plant. Constituents have asked me whether such airborne odours are monitored and whether they are safe for public health. I know that that is not quite the issue that we are considering today, but people need to be reassured. Should not the planning permission for large developments take into account water and sewerage needs and the impact on the existing infrastructure? That should be done not as an afterthought, but as a priority before planning permission is given.

In the introduction to the "Drinking Water Quality in Scotland 2000" document, the minister promises to put in place "a systematic risk management process to effectively eliminate the risk" from cryptosporidium "by 2005." Is he saying that those measures are not adequate and that what has been done is not sufficient to eliminate the risk?

When the minister opens up dialogue with optometrists, will he consider revising the fees for domiciliary visits for eye tests, particularly for elderly patients in remote or rural areas?

I am sure that Mr Stone receives the same mail that I do about the roads in the Highlands. Given that bringing the roads and bridges up to normal standard will cost £180 million—and I point out that Highland Council says that it can afford to resurface roads only once every 180 years—how is the council to maintain the critical road network on £6 million a year?

Does the minister share my concern that, although we are making progress on openness, accountability and transparency in the NHS, we are making very little progress on local  government's accountability in delivering care in the community? Given that free personal care will be introduced on 1 July, will he do something to help the Health and Community Care Committee hold local councils to account for the huge amount of care that they will deliver?

I appreciate the minister's efforts to clarify the situation regarding the deferred waiting list. If the definition has not changed, why are fewer than 15 per cent of patients on the waiting list in Tayside on the deferred list, whereas more than 30 per cent of patients in the NHS trusts in the north and south of Glasgow are on the  deferred list? If the definition is the same throughout Scotland, should the percentage not be the same throughout Scotland?

Does the member recognise that we need those figures to be able to plan manpower in the NHS? We must recognise and acknowledge the unmet need and the demand for a service. Some form of measurement is essential. Does not the member share my concern, given that the Audit Scotland report states that the reason for the deferred list is unclear and yet over 30 per cent of patients in north and south Glasgow are on the deferred list?

Does the member share my concerns that although when we talk about delayed discharge, we often think about the elderly, many patients with mental illness are subject to delayed discharge, and that the discharge of 29 patients in Carstairs has been delayed because of the lack of a medium-secure unit in Scotland?

It is a bit rich for Malcolm Chisholm to talk about other people having a brass neck when he has shown his own brass neck today. Mr Chisholm's motion accepts the Audit Scotland report; we all accept that report. It is a welcome clarification—

I know that Mr Chisholm is excited, but I hope that he will let me get started. He has put me off my stride. The report considers reclassifications, closed lists and deferred lists. Mr Chisholm's brass neck is evident from the first line of his motion, which refers to "reductions in waiting lists". He knows perfectly well that that is not truthful; it does not accord with Audit Scotland's report. I welcome the minister's ambitious targets—we all welcome ambitious targets—but what really counts is how many patients are treated, how soon they are diagnosed, how soon they are assessed and how much all of that impacts on their health care. I am pleased that he accepts the recommendations of the report, because it is crucial that the debate moves forward. Over the past few years, much has been promised and said by the Executive on the subject of waiting times and waiting lists. Scottish Conservatives very much welcome the new report. However, it is shocking that—despite the report—the minister presents us with a motion suggesting that there have been significant reductions in the last quarter whereas what has taken place is significant reclassification. Despite claims that no closed waiting lists exist in Scotland, Audit Scotland's report states: "Where there are significant staff shortages or other constraints, it is not acceptable to close lists or leave the list to grow ever larger". That is a clear acknowledgement that lists are closed. On page 8 of the report, Audit Scotland confirms that, from 1999, deferred lists have increased at a rate of 8 per cent per year. More than 30 per cent of patients on waiting lists in South Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust, North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust and West Lothian Healthcare NHS Trust are on deferred waiting lists. The minister has fudged on the issue of reclassification, but the Audit Scotland report confirms the extent of reclassification. In a recent meeting in Highland, it was confirmed to MSPs from different parties that, had reclassifications been carried out in accordance with the minister's guidance, waiting lists of 3,000 could have been reduced by 300. That would have been a reduction of 10 per cent simply as a result of a paper exercise—but no more patients would have been treated. Again from the Audit Scotland report, we learn that only Highland Acute NHS Trust and the Yorkhill NHS Trust did not follow the guidance on reclassification. Therefore we can assume that all other acute trusts in Scotland have reduced their waiting lists by 10 per cent because of  reclassification rather than because of an increase in patient care.

I do not think that Mr Chisholm has read the report clearly. Pages 29 and 30 illustrate the extent of specialty procedures in which there has been reclassification. In Argyll and Clyde Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, only dermatology was affected; in Grampian University Hospitals NHS Trust, it was cataract removal, vasectomies, in-growing toenails, removal of cysts, general surgery and ophthalmology. There is not even a consistent approach across Scotland. We are not simply considering day-case procedures and new procedures. The Executive's position is quite misleading.

That is exactly the point and the Executive would gain more respect if it were a bit more honest. Serious questions also have to be asked about performance assessment frameworks and the targets set by trusts. We need to know how much has been achieved by distortion of the figures, reclassification, deferred waiting lists and closed waiting lists, and how much has been achieved by treatment of patients. When patients move from one classification to another, that is a matter of concern, given the performance-related pay issues for some managers in the NHS. Today we have two waiting lists: a true list and a deferred list. We also have closed lists and significant reclassifications. On top of that, the latest figure for bed blocking is 3,116, despite  millions of pounds being poured in to alleviate the problem. Direct payments would obviously help the situation and I hope that every person who has their discharge from hospital delayed will now be offered a direct payment so that they have freedom, choice and control over their care instead of having to wait for local authorities to pay. Will the advent of free personal care on 1 July alleviate bed blocking so that more people can be treated? Yesterday I visited the Church of Scotland home in Edinburgh. Staff confirmed that two care homes across the road—Bruntsfield and Pitsligo House—had been closed in the past two years. There is an undoubted reduction in the number of residential and nursing care homes, reducing places for the elderly. It is hardly surprising that the Church of Scotland closed those homes given that it faces a £5 million loss within the next year. Whatever the minister says, however brassy his neck is, and despite all of the fiddling, according to Audit Scotland and the information and statistics division, more than 11,000 fewer people are receiving home care since 1998, 50,000 fewer people are seen by a health visitor since 1997, and 13,000 fewer people are seen by a district nurse since 1999. When we consider the acute sector activity by quarter we see that, since the opening of the Parliament, more than 6,000 fewer in-patients are being treated, 10,000 fewer day cases are being treated, the median wait is up by five days, the number on deferred waiting lists is up by 5,000, 64,000 fewer out-patients are being treated, 10 per cent fewer patients are being seen within nine weeks, and the median wait for out-patients is up by 12 days. Despite all the minister's efforts to distort the figures, and despite his brass neck, the figures for activity in the NHS are still against him. I move amendment S1M-3248.2, to leave out from "in delivering" to end and insert: "; regrets the fact that waiting times are longer than they were when the Scottish Executive took office; notes with concern a simultaneous drop in NHS activity; particularly regrets the political interference within the NHS which has led to the inconsistent and unclear record keeping within the NHS discovered by Audit Scotland; and further notes that while the Executive continues to exert political control over our health service waiting times and delayed discharges will only get worse and that the best way to deliver improvements is to put patients first by giving them real choices and devolving power to local hospitals and GPs so that decisions are taken on the basis of clinical priorities."

We can all agree that children should receive a nutritious meal, and we can all support the elimination of stigma. I am sure that we would all agree with the conventional wisdom that nutritious meals undoubtedly yield health benefits. The point is that school meals are not always nutritious. The stigma associated with free schools meals that children experience could be overcome quite easily with better management of the system. In evidence from the Public Health Institute of Scotland, we heard that there was no evidence that the universal provision of free school meals will benefit health. In their submissions to the Health and Community Care Committee, Glasgow City Council and Angus Council were not in favour of the bill. A survey from One Plus on why children do not take school meals found that 5 per cent of children go to the shops, 14 per cent go home, 30 per cent like packed lunches, 33 per cent dislike school meals and 16 per cent cannot afford them. Given the fact that 16 per cent of children said that their choice was related to cost, we may conclude that only 16 per cent may benefit from free school meals.  We welcome the underlying principles and the key and guiding recommendations of the expert panel. We welcome particularly the setting out of Scottish nutritional standards. We would welcome also the monitoring and implementation of those standards and the maximisation of anonymity for recipients of free school meals. It is also within the guidelines that schools should not overtly promote food or drink with a high fat and sugar content. We welcome the refurbishment of dining rooms and other recommendations. Is it not sad that money has been spent to allow an expert panel to make recommendations with which we all agree, when all that was needed was for the Executive to heed the publication "Eating for Health: a Diet Action Plan for Scotland", which the then health minister, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, issued in 1996? After five years of Labour, we have recommendations that that document contained six years ago.

It is interesting that the Minister for Health and Community Care says that there are 52 beds. There are also six operating theatres, MRI and CT scanners and an increase in the use of diagnostic equipment. As a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, I have heard much evidence this week and last from cancer patients and cancer centres. Why has the minister's ideological opposition to HCI prevented patients from using the facility for many years? The failure of admissions is a clear admission of the minister's failure. Patients in Scotland today face a longer wait for treatment and a longer wait to see a consultant; the waiting lists have increased and fewer patients are being treated. Nonetheless, we welcome the full use of that first-class health facility for patients throughout Scotland. It could have been in use for many years. We regret that patients in Scotland have had to suffer and languish on waiting lists because of the Executive's opposition to HCI, with a health minister more concerned with the health of the state rather than the state of our health. First, why was the Clydebank facility considered to be at the margins of health care when it was privately owned, while it is considered to be at the centre of health care now that it is publicly owned? Perhaps today's announcement comes as a result of the ticking off that Malcolm Chisholm got from Alan Milburn at the weekend for his lack of vision. Secondly, given the shortages of key NHS staff and the minister's plan to extend services and access to HCI, will the transfer of new staff not simply lead to shortages in existing NHS hospitals? Will today's statement result in the closure of other hospitals in greater Glasgow?

On managed clinical networks, will the minister also consider a national centre for assessing young people with epilepsy and behavioural problems? I understand that those young people have to be sent to England, a process that takes six weeks and costs more than £25,000. Will the managed clinical networks deal with the high percentage of those with learning disabilities who also suffer with epilepsy? Will the impact of their epilepsy on their behaviour be examined?

I am grateful to Fergus Ewing for his comments. Quite often in the Highlands people from all different parties are capable of putting party politics behind many of the health issues that we care about. When the Parliament was in Aberdeen, Tom McCabe, Gordon Jackson and I went along to the epilepsy action group meeting. I could not help thinking what my Tory members in Inverness would think of me going off with two Labour members when other MSPs were piling on to the bus to the Grampian reception. That is another example of how, in this Parliament, MSPs from all parties are capable of putting political hats aside and concentrating on issues. As Fergus Ewing said, one of my ex-students came to a surgery I had about a year ago. She said that she had been diagnosed with epilepsy and told to go home and get on with it. She said that she wanted to talk to someone, but that there was no support group. The nearest groups were in Lossiemouth and Dundee. She did not understand the condition and was frightened to go out. She did not know whether she was able to drive. She said that she did not know what she was supposed to do, that she was scared and ashamed and did not know to whom she could talk. We went about setting up a support group. I contacted Epilepsy Action Scotland in Glasgow, which wrote to its members. I used some of my parliamentary allowance to book rooms for the initial meeting of the group. I can honestly say that nothing in the world could have prepared me for the individual accounts of the experiences of people with epilepsy who turned up that evening. I could not even start telling members about them. I was left with an enormous feeling of having undertaken something that I could never fulfil. I had a huge feeling of responsibility because I had to address those problems. Gordon Jackson referred to drugs. Many people said that they had been on the same drugs for 20 to 30 years. We had a visit from Dr Rod Duncan, the neurologist from Glasgow. When he heard of the drugs that people were on, he said that he had stopped using them decades ago. That is how the Highlands have been neglected. I set about writing to the Highland health chiefs about specialist nurses and so on, but I did not get much response. I wrote to the primary care lead clinician to ask about services for epilepsy. The reply letter, which is now a historical letter in the  Health and Community Care Committee, consisted of such comments as "Not a hope", "No chance" and "No comment." Fortunately, when the Health and Community Care Committee called for evidence on a petition from Epilepsy Action Scotland, Hilary Mounfield and Dr Roberts from Dundee referred to that letter. The following week the Health and Community Care Committee was in Inverness. We questioned the local health officials on their approach to treating people in the Highlands who had epilepsy. Since then, the minister has made a commitment on managed clinical networks. The Health and Community Care Committee, in its deliberations on the budget, decided to recommend that the Executive allocate more resources for the care and treatment of people with epilepsy, given that there are 30,000 epilepsy sufferers in Scotland. I support the emphasis on cancer, heart disease and mental health, but when priorities are being set it is important not to ignore other chronic conditions. That is exactly what has happened in the case of epilepsy. Many MSPs have talked about postcode prescribing for beta interferon. Dr Roberts said that to assess whether patients should get beta interferon would take up huge amounts of neurologists' time, which would mean that the services to those with epilepsy would suffer further. I fully support Gordon Jackson's motion. I am delighted that he has raised the issue in a members' business debate. We need to be concerned about the 25 per cent misdiagnosis rate for epilepsy. We must support all the minister's proposals for managed clinical networks to allow equality of access and get rid of the social exclusion that people with epilepsy suffer throughout Scotland.

Gordon Jackson is talking about consistent standards for Scotland. Is he aware that a Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline came out five years ago and that it has been largely ignored? Does he know that the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland does not intend to carry out any review of epilepsy services in the foreseeable future?

In a recent meeting with MSPs, Highland Council stated that £90 million is required to address the structural condition of non-trunk roads and that £55 million is required to strengthen bridges. Highland Council also stated that it could only "resurface a road once every 181 years". What is being done to ensure that enough resources are allocated and used to maintain safe roads in the Highlands?

I associate the Conservatives with the comments that have been made about Margaret Ewing. I ask Fergus Ewing to pass on our very best wishes. As the Scottish Conservative spokeswoman on health and as joint convener, with Kenneth Macintosh, of the cross-party group on cancer, I welcome the debate. I am pleased that Richard Simpson is in the chamber. I pay tribute to his excellent work on the cross-party group before he was appointed as a minister, in particular for his vision and for the success of the whole-day cancer conference in Edinburgh last month. MSPs from all parties attended the conference, which was fully subscribed. Richard Simpson should know that we received several complaints from people who could not obtain tickets. The conference is an example of the achievements of the cross-party groups and of the ability of members to work together, particularly on such important issues as cancer. Well done, Richard. The motion must be commended for acknowledging the excellent Clinical Standards Board for Scotland reports on cancer services. More money is being spent, but the outcomes show little sign of improvement. I do not want to be negative, as that is not helpful, but I do want to raise one or two points that are made in the report. At the time of the review, only four trusts were part of the managed clinical networks, which means that not enough lung cancer patients were included in the clinical trials. I hope that the additional money will go towards treating lung cancer patients. Only one hospital in Scotland met the national guidelines for waiting times. Most trusts were unable to provide the audit data against which performance could be measured. It is difficult to describe cancer services fully until progress is made in that respect.  Given that the cancer plan is not yet one year old, it is early days to judge it. Managed clinical networks take time to put in place and the new money is open to bids, which again takes time. I hope that the bids that are successful are those that will bring the greatest benefit to patients. The first issue of the Health and Community Care Journal states that the overall survival figures for lung cancer have changed little since King George VI died of lung cancer 50 years ago. Our survival figures lag behind those of many European countries and the United States. Only 7 per cent of lung cancer patients in Scotland survive over five years compared with up to 14 per cent in other countries. It is too early to judge the efficacy of the cancer plan, but I want to highlight concerns that have been raised on the current cancer policy development plan. I am concerned about oral cancer, which is a particular problem in the Highlands and Moray where it is difficult to access an NHS dentist, let alone a private dentist. It is obvious that regular dental check-ups provide dental hygiene benefits, but they are also when the early stages of oral cancer can be detected. Any cancer strategy should support and advise people on access to dentistry. Concern exists about the lack of inclusion of general practitioners in the cancer strategy, as they have a key role in delivering the strategy. The Royal College of General Practitioners produced a paper, which states: "there was little in the cancer plan relating specifically to developing services in primary care." The RCGP is also concerned that less than 4 per cent of the new money is to be targeted at primary care. I hope that the minister's commitment to local health care co-operatives will extend to bringing them into the managed clinical networks. We expect more nurse specialists, but the Royal College of Nursing has stated that the variation in clinical and educational preparation for the role of clinical nurses is concerning. The RCN has also noted that there is a lack of clarity around the role of cancer nurses. We should not expect nurses to take on more responsibility without giving them the resources, training and support that they need to carry out those functions. I ask the minister to address in his summing up a point that arises from the figures that were released today. If we compare the most recent figures, which are for March 2002, with those for December 2001, we see that the numbers of emergency in-patients, elective in-patients and day-case patients are down and that the numbers for total out-patients and first out-patients are also down. Why is that? Given that fewer patients were treated in the past three months and that patients  are waiting longer for treatment, how have 8,000 people fallen off the waiting list?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to create national health service foundation trusts. (S1O-5285)

That is not a surprise. Given that the success of such hospitals is based on achieving high performance-assessment targets, better patient outcomes, value for money and good financial management, will the minister consider allowing Scottish hospitals the freedom to manage their affairs for the benefit of patients?

The minister may not be ignoring the evidence, but is not the main problem as far as public health is concerned the fact that we do not have evidence? There is no monitoring, auditing or baseline data at Munlochy. How can the minister reassure people who are worried about the public health concerns?

The language in the letter may have been intemperate, but does the member agree that it would have been wiser and more professional if HIAL had responded to that letter professionally and confidentially instead of taking it to the press and upping the ante?

Will Alasdair Morgan give way?

I did not complain about oil revenues. I pointed out that the SNP is selective in choosing years to suit its purposes. I asked the SNP to take an average over 20 years—I certainly did not complain.

Unaccustomed as I am to speaking in oil and gas debates, I want to make three very brief points. I dare say that, over the past two decades, members will have become aware of the SNP's claims that oil revenues to Scotland are phenomenally wonderful and stable, and form a basis for independence or separation. The final page of the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing paper illustrates how taxes and royalties attributable to UK oil and gas production vary and what a volatile source of revenue they are. The figures for 1985, which are often used by the SNP, show that the revenues were more than £12 billion. The figures for 1992  show that the revenues were just over £1 billion. When we are debating in a mature and professional manner the royalties from UK oil and gas, I ask the SNP to take as the basis for its argument an average over 10, 20 or even 30 years rather than simply the high revenues of 1985.

The one thing that would not create stability is an SNP policy based on variable and volatile oil revenues.

Alasdair Morgan may care to look at the figures in the SPICe briefing paper that I am looking at. We can agree or disagree about them, but I have the Inland Revenue figures as well. My second point is about the Highlands. In the first year of the Parliament, there were 3,500 redundancies from the Barmac yards at Nigg and Ardersier. I noted that Iain Gray mentioned Motorola. Although we all have sympathy for people in the central belt, 3,500 redundancies can have an enormous impact on a remote and rural area. The rate of unemployment in the Highlands may not look too bad at around 4 per cent, but there is undoubtedly hidden unemployment and underemployment in the Highlands and Islands, given that many people are not using the skills that they have. In addition, many of the former Barmac workers are on short-term contracts abroad. The Ardersier yard is still in mothballs, but the expertise would be there if the contracts came back to the Highlands. That is an important point that is not necessarily shown in the unemployment figures. My final point is that there is enormous investment, innovation and creativity in the oil industry in Aberdeen. There is also scope for diversification and for the work that the planned Scottish energy research institute will do. None of us can doubt the expertise that has been gained in the north-east and throughout Scotland. Last week, a cross-party delegation of MSPs went with Baroness Smith to the very poor region of Smolensk in Russia. I would like to think that we could export our skills and expertise to countries  with natural oil resources to allow them to gain the revenue streams to build their infrastructure and build economic prosperity.

I welcome the 50 nurses from the Royal College of Nursing in the gallery. I know that they are keen to train and play their part in infection control. This morning, the minister mentioned that he would pursue escalated intervention in respect of hospitals that did not reach the Clinical Standards Board's standards. Will he explain what such intervention is?

To ask the First Minister whether VisitScotland is maximising tourism opportunities. (S1F-1912)

Given that I did not get to use the supplementary question that I had prepared for question 15 at Executive question time, I will now use it for this question, which I did not expect to be reached. Will the First Minister welcome the completion of the Great Glen walk, which runs for 73 miles from  Fort William to Inverness, and which, with the West Highland way and Speyside way, is one of Scotland's three premier walks? Would he like to join me on one of those walks? [MEMBERS: "Oh!"] Will the First Minister look at VisitScotland's walkingwild website, which I understand now lists five members who run walking holidays, rather than listing the walks by area and degree of exertion required, which was much more helpful to visitors?

Perhaps I could give Karen Whitefield a wee lesson in devolution. The Scottish Tories—members of the Scottish Parliament and members of the party—decide on health policy in Scotland. Unlike the Labour party, we have autonomy and we understand devolution.

I have participated in most of the health debates in the past three years and I am interested to note a slight change of tone in today's debate. Rather than the 100 per cent self-congratulatory tone that we have become used to over the past three years, a wee bit of honesty is creeping in. The Executive motion acknowledges the progress that is being made, looks forward to further improvements, supports a collaborative approach  and welcomes priorities. I welcome that honesty, although, unlike David Blunkett yesterday, the Executive does not go as far as apologising. The only progress that has been acknowledged is that of the national waiting times unit. It is interesting to note that the progress of the national waiting times unit is due mainly to more than 2,000 NHS patients being treated in the private sector. Where there is spare capacity, that is progress indeed. I welcome much of what the minister said. The Conservatives welcome the diabetes framework, the cancer plan, the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland assessments of cancer and managed clinical networks. No one could refuse to welcome those. More than anything, I welcome the improvement in patient outcomes. The plans are good and the ideas are good, but we have to see improvement in patient outcomes before we can acknowledge the action plans. Although the motion mentions community care, the minister said very little about it. Given that there are only six weeks before free personal care is implemented, I hope that we will continue to monitor developments and debate the issue in the Parliament. I note that the motion also refers to "investment" in the health service. We should remember that the Chancellor of the Exchequer received an £18 billion boost to his war chest from the mobile phone licence auction. Although there is no doubt that "further improvements" are required, the minister's motion points out that reform must be "focused on the ... expectations of patients and service users". Much of the problem in that respect may arise from the expectations that Labour itself created as it showered the electorate with grandiose promises that Blair's new Labour wizards and its members in the Scottish Parliament would provide a panacea for all the ills in the NHS. The 1997 Labour general election manifesto stated that waiting lists would be reduced. By 1999, the future Labour leaders of Scotland felt able to be more specific and promised that waiting lists would be reduced by 10,000 by 2002. It is now 2002 and, according to the latest published figures, waiting lists have increased by 10,000, with a further 6,000 on the deferred waiting list. Although no one denies that more money is being spent, one would not expect to find that the more we spend, the less we get. Other great bluffs include the promise in 1997 to end waiting for cancer surgery. That initiative failed. In its 1999 manifesto for the Scottish Parliament elections, Labour promised to "end postcode prescribing"—it has failed to do so. It promised to spend money on patients, not  bureaucracy—it has failed to do so. It promised an airline-type booking system where patients would know when their hospital appointments would be before they left the surgery—it has failed to introduce that. Furthermore, where are the walk-in, walk-out hospitals that Labour promised for Scotland? In the same manifesto, Labour promised to reduce waiting times to see a hospital consultant. The median waiting time was 46 days; it is now 57 days. Labour has failed again. The percentage of out-patients seen in nine weeks has fallen from 63 per cent to 53 per cent—Labour has failed in that as well. In fact, in Highland and the Borders, 67 to 68 per cent of patients are seen within nine weeks, but in the Fife, Forth Valley, Grampian and Lanarkshire health board areas, fewer than 50 per cent of patients are seen within the same time. In its manifesto, Labour told us that we would have "a centre of excellence ... in Inverness to ensure that rural communities ... get access to the highest standards of care". I welcome the minister's regular visits to Dundee, but I ask him to visit Lybster, Dunbeath or Wick. Many Highland health officials were fairly traumatised when they left those areas, and they would welcome the minister's support.

I am pleased that the minister visited the sedate town of Nairn, but I ask him to extend his visits further north. Last night, one of the local GPs in Wick explained to me why the accident and emergency hospital in Thurso has had to close. Quite often, members of the Parliament talk about primary and acute care as if they are two quite separate aspects of health care. Indeed, I have been guilty of that in the past. We do not realise that GPs provide accident and emergency services in remote and rural areas. I was quite shocked to find that, until last November, doctors were paid £1.60 an hour for out-of-hours accident and emergency calls. Even Tommy Sheridan would be shocked at that rate of pay. After recent negotiations, GPs' wages for attending an accident and emergency call at Dunbeath have risen to £4 an hour, but they are still the lowest-paid in the room. Furthermore, the money to fund the wage increase has been taken from other services in the hospital. The minister needs to discuss the matter with Highland  NHS Primary Care Trust. Although I am pleased that Labour is now embracing the private sector, it is still not doing enough. If 2,000 NHS operations have been carried out since the waiting times unit was set up, how much more could have been done with forward planning? At a recent The Herald debate on the BMA's premises, the minister was told that planned use of the private sector in England and Northern Ireland has meant that there is no need for panic measures when a patient reaches the dreaded 12-month waiting time. It is also much cheaper for the public purse and will enable spare capacity to be properly managed in future. If we are to improve the health system, we must tackle health inequalities. Although the minister recently stated that he was focusing on the issue, I was quite shocked by his comment at a recent meeting of the Health and Community Care Committee that he had no proper way of measuring benefits to health inequalities. That does not concern areas that have lost out because of Arbuthnott, but areas such as Highland, which have benefited enormously from the formula. I would like to think that the money is used to address problems such as poverty, deprivation and inequality, but there is a fear that it will not be used for that purpose because there is no way of measuring it.

I hope that that is the case, because the minister should be holding health boards and trusts to account for the money that they have been allocated. The mention of delayed discharge in the motion at least gives me the opportunity to refer to community care. It is clear that delayed discharge remains a problem; indeed, according to the latest statistics, the figures for delayed discharge have doubled over the lifetime of the Parliament and it accounts for more than 3,000 beds a day. I am also concerned that the care development group, which the minister chaired, highlighted that £63 million that was earmarked for care of the elderly had been diverted to other budgets. I hope that the minister's joint planning and joint action will ensure that moneys earmarked for care of the elderly will be used for that purpose. The community care system is crumbling. It is a matter of concern that the independent sector closed 100 homes last year. The Church of  Scotland recently announced the closure of nine services, simply because it could not afford to subsidise them from its own funds.

I really do not have the time—I have taken a couple of interventions already.

I certainly agree that the Church of Scotland had commercial reasons for announcing the closure of services. It was not able to provide £1.34 million a year from its social fund to subsidise its homes. Can Margaret Jamieson justify the fact that councils pay £83 a week more to their own homes than they do to those in the independent sector? She has a wee bit more to learn about the concept of commercialisation. It takes a good Tory initiative to address many of the problems. The benefits of direct payments, which were introduced in 1996, have been acknowledged by Malcolm Chisholm, Hugh Henry and—I hope—Frank McAveety and the measure was included in the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002. Such payments present an opportunity to address many of the current problems in community care. With direct payments, elderly people receive their own money to buy their own services. We must harness such opportunities and allow people the freedom and the choice to control their own budgets. It is disappointing—to say the least—that, until the new act was passed, only 200 people in Scotland received direct payments, mainly for learning disabilities. I ask the minister to offer direct payments to everyone who is left in hospital because of delayed discharge. Such a step would certainly end bedblocking as carers could access payments for home care following the assessment in hospital. Such a regime would free up an enormous number of beds in the NHS. Lyndsay McIntosh will talk about hospital acquired infections. It is shocking that more than 450 Scots die from hospital acquired infections—that is more than die in road accidents. I welcome the work done by the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland and its interim report into hospital acquired infections. Nonetheless, it is shocking that, after five years of Labour Government, infection control in Scottish hospitals is inadequate and disappointing. The interim report is scathing about Scottish performance and highlights the lack of a national  strategy. I quote from the report: "The information provided indicates that infection control is an area of concern ... Most Trusts do not have plans in place to address the full implications of healthcare associated infections." Patients are now more worried about infection than they are about surgery. The figure for added stays for elderly patients is 24 days, which is quite incredible. The surgical patient added-stay figure is 12 days and the orthopaedic patient added-stay figure is 11 days. That is not just a cost to the NHS: it is also a cost to the patient. There is no denying that the funding of the Scottish health service will rise to unprecedented levels in the coming years. Unfortunately, the more that the Labour Government spends, the worse the system gets. Since 1997, waiting times for operations have risen, the number of out-patients being seen has fallen by 63,725 and the number of in-patients being treated has fallen by 5,000. Medical activity has decreased while waiting times have increased. At this rate, and because there seems to be some sort of inverse proportionality between spending and performance, one wonders how much money Labour will have to spend before the NHS treats no patients at all. I move amendment S1M-3106.3, to leave out from first "welcomes" to end and insert: "agrees that investment in health must be accompanied by reform that is focused on the needs and expectations of patients and service users; supports a collaborative approach to reform which involves patients, staff and the wider public; believes that improving health and tackling health inequalities in both urban and rural Scotland should be central features of the reform agenda; regrets the failure of the Scottish Executive to deal with delayed discharge and hospital-acquired infection; notes that medical activity has decreased, and further notes that the Scottish Executive's National Waiting Times Unit has only achieved success after utilising the independent sector."

Christine Grahame raised a good point. I have heard anecdotally that many marriages do not survive the bringing up of an autistic child. It has also come to my notice recently that many mothers with autistic children cannot work due to their commitments, so it leads to financial problems as well. I welcome our new Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care to what I think is his first health debate in his new post. When reading the Scottish Parliament information centre's research note on autism, I noted that the majority of parliamentary questions on the matter have been asked by Margaret Ewing. I hope, Presiding Officer, that you will not mind if I pass on the best wishes of my group and, I am sure, of many other members to Margaret Ewing and her family, who are in the chamber. I fully support Lloyd Quinan's motion and agree that there should be a seamless service. I also agree with Kenneth Macintosh's motion S1M-2428, that we should recognise "the everyday challenge faced by children and adults on the autistic spectrum, and their families, in gaining appropriate support from the statutory services". As a former lecturer in further education, I am aware that the learning difficulties of many teenagers and adults were discovered in further education. The phrase "slipped through the net" is often used. I did not understand what Asperger's syndrome was until about five or six years ago. That sort of thing is a cause for great concern. I produced a report for the Health and Community Care Committee that was  unanimously accepted. It was not only about the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine. It examined the need to integrate health statistics and recommended that a special needs register be set up; that parents, health visitors and general practitioners be given more extensive and accurate information; and that a system of consistent assessment and diagnostic checks be introduced. All of those recommendations were accepted by the Minister for Health and Community Care a year ago. The situation has moved on and I hope that we will get an update on that movement today. A document produced by the Scottish Society for Autism recommends that the Scottish Executive fund and encourage improvements in diagnosis and assessment and that the national initiative for autism screening be implemented. I am also aware of the checklist of autism in toddlers system—CHAT—that was successful in diagnosing and assessing children under school age. I understand that that pilot project is on-going, that there are no recommendations and that it misses certain people. I understand that there is a Westminster working group on the matter as well. Lloyd Quinan mentioned the Public Health Institute of Scotland. It recommends that there be a Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline, a local audit, clinical networks and so on. Recommendation 28 of my favourite document, "The same as you? A review of services for people with learning disabilities", says that "The Scottish Executive should commission research into the number of people with learning disabilities in prison or in secure accommodation and the arrangements for assessing and providing them with care." There are lots of booklets and recommendations, but I think we are a long way away from providing a seamless service. In the brief time that Frank McAveety was on the Health and Community Care Committee, we discussed supported accommodation and housing support in relation to the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill. It has come to my notice recently that people with mental health problems and learning disabilities in Inverness are being moved from the category of supported accommodation to that of housing support. That may be for the best reasons. I would like to think that it is. I would like to think that it is not because there is fearfulness about the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001. I would like to think that those vulnerable people will not be taken advantage of. I hope that the minister will keep an eye on that.

Another week, another health debate, and this week another health minister, too. I welcome this debate on recruiting, retaining and valuing nurses, given that nurses provide 80 per cent of direct patient care. I must apologise, Presiding Officer, because I have to leave early to catch a train for the three-and-a-half-hour journey to Inverness, so I am afraid that I shall have to leave after my speech. In speaking to my amendment, I note that the information and statistics division figures for 2000 show that nursing and midwifery staff numbers  have fallen by 244 since Labour came to power and that hospital nurse numbers are down by 740. It is interesting to note that the new nurse numbers are due out tomorrow, as the minister said, and it would have been more appropriate to have this debate next week in the light of the latest figures. Understaffing and sickness levels lead to even more pressure for existing staff, which affects nurse retention and morale. That problem is exacerbated by the fact that half of school nurses, practice nurses and health visitors are eligible to retire within the next decade. That is serious in itself, but it is even more serious given the predicted demographic patterns for elderly people and the need for more care at home. Too often we hear, as we heard from the SNP today, that the NHS is too rigid in employing staff, and nurses are no exception. However, I give credit to Highland NHS Board, which seems at least to be facing up to the issue. In last week's Inverness Courier , I noticed an advertisement for a research nurse at grade E for 15 hours a week, staff nurses at grade D for 15 hours and 20 hours a week, and a nursing auxiliary for 15 hours a week. That is the kind of flexibility and family-friendly policy that we have all been asking for to bring back the many trained and experienced nurses who are not currently working in the NHS. I also noted the pay scales for a nurse at grade E—from £17,000 to £20,000—and I could not help noticing the post that was advertised at the bottom of the group, for an audio typist "providing secretarial cover throughout the Directorate, moving between the General Office, Medical Secretaries Office, Clinical Genetics Department and Nursing Administration." The salary for that full-time post was £9,000 to £11,000. Although I fully support the emphasis on recruiting, retaining and valuing nurses, let us not forget the whole NHS team, including essential administration, secretarial and laboratory staff. Let us bear it in mind that one of the Beatson consultants cited the fact that he had to do his own typing as one of the reasons for walking out. Nurses are at the forefront of breaking down restrictive practices and old-style professional boundaries. They are prepared to take on more responsibilities and are capable of doing so, but we should not take advantage of their good will and commitment to care. Recently, more emphasis has been placed on specialist nurses for multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, asthma and diabetes. At a recent Health and Community Care Committee meeting, Dr Roberts, a neurologist from Ninewells hospital, stressed the need for more specialist epilepsy nurses for counselling and support. That would also help to free up consultant time for crucial diagnosis and assessment of new patients. However, it is a  matter of concern that 20 per cent of specialist asthma nurses do not hold the appropriate qualification. I welcome the additional money that has been allocated today for training, because we cannot expect nurses to take on more responsibilities without giving them the training and support that they need to carry them out. Last week, nurse shortages in Orkney led to the proposal to close Macmillan House, which caters for terminally ill cancer patients, and St Magnus day hospital, which offers rehabilitation for patients such as stroke victims. In a large city, there is a larger pool of qualified staff for bank and agency nursing. In Orkney and other remote areas and islands, the flexibility simply does not exist. The proposed closure has been averted temporarily, but the decision arose following staff resignations and retirements that coincided with training sessions for five nurses on family health nursing. I have spoken to the local member, who has stated his concerns and, I understand, has spoken to the Minister for Health and Community Care. I quote from The Orcadian on 25 April, when the Stromness doctors said: "The staff retention, recruitment, job security, educational needs and working conditions have been consistently ignored by senior management of NHS Orkney with the inevitable results that we now see." Ironically, there was no shortage of Macmillan nurses, but they were moved to acute wards. The Orkney crisis could be replicated elsewhere in Scotland if we do not tackle nursing shortages. All parts of the NHS team need to be valued, not only nurses. I move amendment S1M-3078.2, to leave out from "and supports" to end and insert: "notes with concern, however, the recent decrease in nurse numbers; acknowledges that better staffing levels and conditions will lead to better morale and therefore higher levels of nurse retention, and therefore urges the Scottish Executive to promote a more flexible system that would recruit and retain appropriate numbers of nurses and midwives to serve Scotland's needs."

I also congratulate Margaret Smith on securing this debate. One of the tremendous strengths of the Parliament is that we can use members' business to highlight an issue that is of serious concern throughout Scotland. I welcome the fact that the motion emphasises that the National Asthma Campaign highlights childhood asthma. When I read the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing, I was shocked by the increase that it outlined in childhood asthma. It shows that for males aged up to four there has been an increase of 198 per cent over 10 years and for those aged five to 14 there has been an increase of 135 percent. For females  aged up to five there has been an increase of 295 per cent and for those aged five to 14 there has been an increase of 217 per cent. I realised why the National Asthma Campaign highlights childhood asthma. It is shocking that more than 113,000 children in Scotland are diagnosed as asthmatic. Many of us tend to think that asthma is caused by pollution. However, I can tell members—Margaret Smith mentioned this—that there are very high asthma levels in the Isle of Skye, although there is certainly no pollution there. Much more research has to be done to find out the causes of asthma. Pollution may be a contributory factor, but it is certainly not the only one. We discovered recently that children in the UK who are aged 13 to 14 have the highest rate of asthma symptoms in the world. However, in Scotland only four out of 15 health boards designate asthma as a priority in their health improvement plans. I was pleased to look up "The Administration of Medicines in Schools." I thought that it was an excellent document but, as an asthma sufferer, I was surprised that only five lines are dedicated to asthma. There is also a note. Having been a lecturer for 20 years, I know that if someone had had asthma in one of my classes, I would not have found the five lines of great assistance. I realise that teachers cannot be experts in everything, but I do not think that there is quite enough information to help a teacher in a school when a child suffers from asthma. I was surprised recently when I was out with the Inverness police. They had an asthma inhaler in the station. Doctors do not come out to the police station at night, so there was an inhaler that could be used by anyone who was asthmatic. The police were not trained, but at least there was something there to assist someone with asthma. I congratulate the National Asthma Campaign on its excellent document, "Who Cares about Asthma in Scotland?" It is a first-class summary of the issues and highlights the great contribution that patient groups can make towards conditions in Scotland. In response to a written question that I lodged about how the Executive "plans to reduce the number of serious asthma cases presented at accident and emergency departments"— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 28 September 2001; p 176.]  the reply mentioned the SIGN guideline, the Scottish asthma management initiative, a project called "Asthma Attack—Targeting Emergency Asthma Contacts in Children" and grant funding to the National Asthma Campaign Scotland. Those are all highly worthy, but I am concerned that there  is very little in the way of a co-ordinated and joined-up approach. It took me almost 20 years to be diagnosed as having asthma, although I had described my symptoms. I can describe my experience from a patient's point of view. I went to the chest clinic and was told that everything was fine. I went to the ear, nose and threat department and was told that everything was fine. I went to the asthma clinic and was told that I perhaps had asthma. I now have a speech therapist and find that speech therapy is of tremendous benefit to an asthma sufferer. I am looking not only for a co-ordinated approach with strategies, consultations and reviews, but a joined-up approach from the patient's point of view. Speech therapy could play a much greater role in helping to control not only adult asthma, but children's asthma.

Does the First Minister agree that, at 66 per cent and 73 per cent respectively, the uptake of the MMR vaccine in the Western Isles and the Highlands is now at a critically low level? Will he consider offering the single vaccine to people who, despite all the advice from GPs and others, are not choosing any vaccine at all?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many national health service beds are currently blocked. (S1O-5066)

Is the minister aware that Lothian NHS Board alone has 527 blocked beds? How can that situation be alleviated, given that so many care homes have closed due to lack of funding? Will the minister ensure that, as we move towards the introduction of free personal care on 1 July, all the patients affected and their carers are made fully aware of, and are offered, direct payments to allow them the freedom and choice to purchase care from the independent and voluntary sectors as well as from councils?

The minister announced that budgets will be devolved to LHCCs and yet, in many parts of the Highlands and Islands, there are no LHCCs. Does the Executive plan to devolve budgets to local GPs?

Given what Johann Lamont said about the shift from the acute sector to the primary sector, is she concerned that in the past five years the number of consultant posts has increased by 19 per cent, while the number of GP posts has increased by 3 per cent?

Does the member understand devolution, particularly in relation to health policy? Any decisions on Conservative health policy in Scotland are made by Scottish Conservatives. I realise that that is quite difficult for the member to understand.

Will the member give way?

The debate is interesting. I cannot quite make up my mind whether Malcolm Chisholm wants to admit that he has gone back to GP fundholding, devolved budgets and choice through additional information. At the end of the day, that is what we are going back to. The minister would gain more respect if he said, "We have got it wrong for five years."

I am pleased that the minister agrees with some of what I said. The minister said that he is passionately committed to primary care. GPs in the Highlands are so passionate about his commitment to primary care that 10 per cent of them have walked out in recent years. None of them says that they need a golden hello payment or an extra few quid a year. Those have never been reasons for leaving. I value the primary care modernisation group report and the fact that the minister intends to listen to GPs, but if he thinks the matter is simply about golden hello payments, he has missed the mark. I welcome the minister's endorsement of best practice becoming common practice and of the excellent work that is done in Dumfries and Galloway's managed clinical network for heart disease. My colleague David Mundell lodged a motion on that topic. He visited GPs and others who are involved and brought the matter to my attention. Many Conservative and SNP members have signed the motion, but not one member of the Labour party has done so. When we find excellent practice, which is endorsed in the modernisation group report, the minister should be big enough to ask his party members to support it. One aspect that was missing from the minister's comments on one-stop shops in primary care was the voluntary sector, which has an enormous role. This week, I spoke to a representative of the  Church of Scotland. Its work on drug problems and alcoholism—from detoxification and rehabilitation through to rehousing and support accommodation—should be welcomed. I hope that the minister will find a place in the new structure for the excellent work of the voluntary sector. Before I begin the main part of my speech, I will deal with the joint future group. At yesterday's meeting of the Health and Community Care Committee, we were told that Edinburgh alone has 527 blocked beds, which has an obvious impact on the acute sector, patients and the primary sector. Although the minister talks about joint futures, joint working and partnership, we must consider the reality that, of Scotland's 3,000 blocked beds, 527 are in this city. I am pleased that we are debating primary care. As a member for the Highlands, I can certainly confirm that primary care is in crisis. The Executive's reforms of the past five years have created the crisis. Dr Murray of Lochcarron described the provision of health care in rural areas as being in a state of "near collapse". It is now impossible to register as an NHS patient with a dentist in Inverness and in most parts of the Highlands but, on the east coast of Caithness and Sutherland, it is becoming almost as difficult to access a local doctor. With 139 vacancies for dentists in Scotland and more than one third of GPs in their 50s, manpower planning is in serious crisis. Like the SNP, we would support more nurse-led care, but those nurses must be appropriately trained for the responsibilities that they undertake. According to the National Asthma Campaign, 20 per cent of nurses who currently run asthma clinics do not have the appropriate qualifications. At yesterday's RCN conference, we heard via videolink that many nurses have difficulties in accessing training funds. If we expect nurses to do more, we must give them the support and training. In the Highlands, many people with epilepsy have never seen a specialist and have never been given an accurate diagnosis. Many of them have been on the same medication for years, despite the new and more effective drugs that are now available. I agree that we should bring primary care into the health care team because it has an enormous role to play, but we need to ensure that budgets are available for training. We must also ensure that accurate diagnoses are carried out, in particular for neurological problems, before embarking on continuing care. We support the placing of chronic disease management of diabetes, asthma, epilepsy and mental health within primary care, but we do so only with the proviso that there must be proper support. According to the RCN, fewer than four in 10 nurses feel that their employer enables them to  keep pace with developments related to their job. Physicians and consultants have in many cases accessed the training fund, but I hope that equal access to training will be allowed to nurses. On the radio this morning, the health minister said that things that could be done in primary care should be done in primary care, but the minister should acknowledge the truth that, under GP fundholding, things were increasingly being done in primary care. I hope that the devolution of budgets to the LHCCs will enable and empower them to utilise the skills and experience of the primary care teams. The minister also mentioned that no new money would be made available for primary care this year and that he has set out the direction. By the time the minister decides to allocate extra funds to GPs in primary care, it might just be too late.

We need only look at the figures to see what is happening. The proof of the pudding will be when GPs and others stop walking away from the health minister. What will the minister do to encourage GPs who have walked away from the profession back into the fold, to deliver the health care for which they were trained? Last week, Dr Joiner resigned, citing a long list of reasons for dissatisfaction. Let me read from the letter that he sent to his patients: "I find the administration increasingly difficult to work with and the demands of the new financial bosses completely unacceptable. The reasons that I have decided to resign are common to several senior doctors in Scotland—especially in the Highlands: being single-handed, onerous out of hours responsibility and the administrative demands of our bosses." The problems are not all about pay and Dr Joiner is not alone. In the past six months, 10 per cent of GPs in remote and rural areas have resigned. There is a great deal of frustration in their cries for help. For example, Dr Macleod of Glencoe and Ballachulish paid £20,000 of his own money to employ an associate GP, but that was not accepted by Highland NHS Board because it did not fit into the favoured new PMS model, which does not encourage that kind of approach. I believe that we should listen to Highland doctors such as Dr Macleod, who know exactly what their patients need, what doctors need and how to work together to provide the best level of care. The problems in the Highlands are critical— [Interruption.]

Mike Rumbles could not behave if he tried, but we have got used to that. The Highlands did well out of the Arbuthnott formula, which provided additional funding to reduce inequalities in, and increase access to, health care. However, the opposite of that has happened. Many communities rightly fear the loss of their local doctor. I appreciate what the minister said about physiotherapists, ambulance teams, podiatrists and district nurses but, at the moment, Highland communities cannot see that any acceptable substitute is in place. People see that they are losing their contact with the NHS and that nothing else appropriate is being put in its place. It is not surprising that people will be canvassing the Health and Community Care Committee when it visits Inverness next week. It is not surprising that people are worried. Waiting lists are up by 10,000 since 1999. Waiting times are up. There is a record number of blocked beds. Those things are not the responsibility of GPs but, as GPs have the only open door in the NHS, they usually find that they are the focus of people's anger and frustration. Less than 7 per cent of health spend goes to GP services. Despite the fact that 90 per cent of patient contact with the NHS occurs at the GP surgery, over the past five years the number of consultant posts has increased by 19 per cent while the number of GP posts has increased by 3 per cent. The absence of primary care commissioning in Scotland needs to be addressed. Fundholding is needed to support local decision making and to ensure more empowerment, so that the NHS is more responsive to patients' needs. I realise that my time is almost up, but I am pleased that Labour has reversed some of its dogma. I am pleased that it has gone back to some basic Tory principles. The Executive has not quite got there yet, but I welcome the U-turn. How will the Executive reverse the damage that has been done in the past five years? Let me use my last few seconds to talk about primary care teams. A few weekends ago, I went out with the police in Inverness. During the evening, there was a problem at accident and emergency, when the staff could not cope with a patient. The police were called and the suicidal patient was locked in the cells. The police phoned the primary care mental health team but got no co-operation, despite there having been an attempted suicide a couple of days earlier. I was shocked that the police had to charge an attempted suicide victim with breach of the peace in order to keep the person in the cells. There was no hope of a  call-out from a GP to treat a prisoner in the police cells. Any new initiative must include not only the primary care team but the voluntary sector and the police, who often become the dumping ground for many of the NHS's problems. I move amendment S1M-3022.3, to leave out from "applauds" to end and insert: "notes that in order to improve primary care local health care co-operatives should be free to purchase care from the most appropriate provider, be it public, private or voluntary, and the incentives gained by the purchasing of such services should be used to underpin patient choice; further urges the Scottish Executive to continue to use private providers where they can supplement the capacity of the NHS and provide value for money, and asks the Scottish Executive to make available to patients information on alternative providers and on waiting lists and times to allow patients to exercise real choice."

That is not right.

The first thing that an Opposition party or an MSP in the Parliament does when they receive a motion is look at what the heart of the motion is about. The motion asks us to support the development of the work force and to endorse the strategy. Naturally, the first thing that I did was ask my researcher to find the strategy so that I could make an informed contribution to the debate. I support totally the social work force and social workers. I do not want any negative points that I make to be seen as detrimental to my commitment to them. I was desperate to speak today—like many other members—particularly from the health point of view, given that we have passed the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2001 and the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002. We are about to have a mental health act. One cannot sit on the Health and Community Care Committee without realising the importance of health. When I heard that there would be other speakers from the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and that the Minister for Education and Young People would speak, I wanted to examine the strategy more. I am angry that we received the note ten minutes in advance of the debate. Like other members, I cannot make informed input to the debate.

No, I am going to be brief. The one point that I wanted to make was that in  the Highlands many social work teams are below 50 per cent strength and are now offering bursaries. I would have liked to enter into dialogue with the Highland Council to ask whether the strategy is what it is looking for. I want to represent my constituents, but have been unable to do so today. I ask one question based on my minimal examination of the action plan and on point 9 of that document. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will answer my question, which is about the integrated human resources working group, the joint future agenda for community care and so on. We all know that free personal care for the elderly was to be delivered on 1 April, but the date has been changed to 1 July. The action plan says that in the next nine weeks—by 1 July—an integrated human resources working group report will be published. It goes on to say that, in the next nine months, the Executive will "Link plans on future action from these two initiatives and this action plan." The date for that work is January next year. My question for the deputy minister is simple: how will that work impact on the implementation of free personal care? Will social work departments be able to draw up the assessments, placements, home care packages and everything else that will be needed to implement free personal care? I am sorry to have taken a negative tone, which is in no way directed against the social work work force. I ask the minister to treat with more courtesy MSPs, including me, who wanted to make a courteous and informed contribution to the debate.

Given the fact that the working time directive is being implemented for junior doctors, will they still have access to the training and experience that is necessary for their future career development and for patient safety?

indicated agreement.

I am delighted to support Susan Deacon. I congratulate her on securing this debate and on her moving and highly informative speech. Before I visited Rachel House this week, I did not know what to expect. As I drove down the road, my expectations—if I had any—were that I was going to enter an intensive nursing hospital for very ill children, probably in a highly clinical and formal setting. However, as other members have said, that perception was far from the reality. As Bruce Crawford said, before one enters Rachel House, one notices that the gardens, the structures and the environment are in a wonderful, colourful and welcoming setting. Rachel House is happy, friendly and relaxing. As the leaflet says, Rachel House is "a home from home, offering a place where families can relax, recharge their batteries and have fun with their children. Expert care is on hand to help them to make the most of each day and live life to the full. Rachel House is not a sad place, it is a place for living ... of fun and laughter, enjoyment, love and support." I found the definition of a hospice as a "place of rest and refreshment for those on a journey" one that changed my views and my  understanding. I am delighted that Rachel House exists—there should be a place that families can choose to go to during the different stages of illnesses. Like other members, I would like all families in Scotland who have children with a life-limiting condition to have access to the rest and refreshment that is provided by CHAS at Rachel House. However, Rachel House is struggling to meet the demand for its services. As one of the CHAS publications says: "Demand at Rachel House is so high that family visits may soon have to be restricted. The only solution is to create additional services"— as there are only eight beds. Rachel House supports 130 families and more than 100 bereaved families. As Susan Deacon said, the increased demand for services has led to the establishment of a pilot project for a home support co-ordinator to work alongside CHAS nurses in order to help people at home. I understand that there could be as many as 2,000 children in Scotland who suffer from life-limiting conditions. As a representative of the Highlands and Islands, I particularly welcome and support such home services. It is interesting to note that Rachel House came about after several parents from Scotland took their children to Martin House in Wetherby. Martin House opened in 1987 and, five years later, Rachel House opened. We should take the lead from Bruce Crawford, who commented on the work that was done to find the site, the problems that were associated with it and the huge fundraising effort that was made—the five years that that initiative took was not too long. I was amazed by the number of volunteers at Rachel House—500 volunteers is an incredible number. One volunteer even comes from Orkney. I finish on a point raised by Susan Deacon. Rachel House gets £125,000 from the 15 health boards, and the same amount comes from all the local authorities. Although the children's hospice serves all of Scotland, some councils and health boards do not contribute to it. Therefore, given that the money is all public money, it would make sense to have a one-door funding mechanism, rather than CHAS having to spend time and administrative effort on funding. That would ensure that future funding would be consistent, for both the house in Balloch and Rachel House.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether cancer patients have sufficient opportunities to participate in clinical trials for new drugs and therapies. (S1O-4972)

I am delighted that my question prompted the minister's announcement of a new cancer research network and £1 million for clinical trials for cancer patients in Scotland. Given that Scotland is a world leader in the development of new cancer drugs and that patients who are involved in clinical trials have better outcomes, will the implementation plan provide continuing information technology and clinical staff support and a continued commitment to allow the NHS in Scotland to lead the world in patient involvement in cancer research trial work?

To ask the First Minister what reassurances the Scottish Executive can give that tap water poses no risk to the health of consumers. (S1F-1796)

Recent problems in Aberdeen highlighted the fact that health chiefs took five weeks to notify the public and then wrote to hospitals and general practitioners asking them to advise patients who reported to them with symptoms to boil water before drinking it. Given the commonly held belief that our tap water is clean and safe to drink, is the First Minister concerned by the response of the public bodies to the problems? How will he address the confidence of consumers, given that Athens, Marseilles and Rome have all recently been judged to have better all-round quality water than some areas that are supplied by North of Scotland Water?

Will the minister give way?

That is cruel and in bad taste.

I am pleased to speak in the tourism debate today. I could talk for four minutes about the poor state of the trunk and non-trunk roads in the Highlands, about the sedentary strategy of Highlands and Islands Airports Limited in providing affordable and available transport links, or about the fact that a private ferry operator—Pentland Ferries Ltd—can operate a better service to Orkney, at a fraction of the price, than the state-subsidised service. However, I am sure that others will raise those crucial transport issues. Today, I would like to use my slot to talk about food. Given the surge of interest in food and the Europe-wide boom in gastro-tourism, I am relieved that Scotland's food is at least mentioned in the action plan, which says: "Some of the finest food and drink in the world is produced in Scotland." Scotland has the healthiest food that anyone could eat and tourism provides a ready market for locally grown produce that is free from genetically modified organisms. A promotion of our food would benefit businesses of all sizes and would secure Scotland's reputation for excellence. Given that we have a culinary tradition to be proud of, we should be far from happy with scoring an average of 14 per cent in a survey of German, French, Italian and Spanish tourists on "good places to eat out" and an average of 33 per cent for "local products to eat and drink". I understand that there are proposals for a food and drink consumer magazine to help promote the best in Scottish produce. I ask the minister to meet the people who are involved in the publication of the magazine to raise awareness of and promote the best Scottish quality produce here and abroad.

I noticed that that comment appeared later in the document and I welcome it. I would also like to welcome the positive comments about Skye made by the First Minister and by Ken Macintosh. The debate would not be complete without mentioning the great achievement of Shirley and Eddie Spear's Three Chimneys restaurant, which has been voted the 28 th best  restaurant in the world. I have spoken to Shirley Spear in the past few days and can say that she puts a large part of her success down to the use of local produce. She is full of praise for the food initiative on Skye, where businesses work together to co-ordinate buying and selling from one another. Recently, the island food link van won a national award. Could that initiative not be used as a benchmark and rolled out to other islands and mainland Scotland to maximise local produce? Shirley Spear welcomes visitors, who seek her out from all over the world. She firmly believes that food is best served where it belongs. She serves fresh salad and vegetables from Glendale, cheeses from Achmore, mussels from Drumfearn, oysters from Carbost and wonderful seafood from surrounding lochs. The fact that there is no travelling time ensures peak freshness and making good use of local produce helps to promote and sustain businesses on Skye. The new box scheme, the food link van, the food festival and the Skye and Lochalsh Horticultural Development Association's bid to start a regular farmers market have all been successful. However, all those schemes need support in order to grow in strength. The food and drink co-ordinator's post at Skye and Lochalsh Enterprise has been invaluable. It has been funded with help from the LEADER programme, but I understand that no future funding is available. A similar initiative is taking place on Orkney, funded through the oil reserve fund. I must also mention Orkney salmon, lamb, oatcakes, cheese and fudge. I hope that I have done my bit to talk up Scotland and to promote some of the best examples of Scottish food. I ask the Executive to ensure that Scottish food is given its rightful place at the top of our marketing strategy.

To ask the Scottish Executive what proposals are being developed on fluoridation of the public water supply. (S1O-4923)

I hope that the Parliament will acknowledge that tomorrow is world day for water. Given the outcome of the court cases involving Northumbrian Water, whose refusal to add fluoride to the water supply was upheld in the absence of a full indemnity from the Westminster Government against all claims, will the minister confirm that fluoridation of the water supply in Scotland is a complete non-starter unless the Scottish Executive provides such indemnity to Scottish Water? Is the minister prepared to do that?

Hear, hear!

Can the minister confirm whether the Horizon system, which exists in all post offices, will be used, at least in the early days, to print out forms that people need for obtaining benefits and information?

I am pleased to support Robert Brown's motion and am delighted to have the opportunity to support the post office movement in Scotland. I am also pleased, if not absolutely amazed, to be able to agree with Susan Deacon—for the first time. In June 2000, the Cabinet Office's performance and innovation unit published a report that contained 24 proposals for modernising the post office network. One of those proposals was: "there is a need for rural post offices to modernise and for the services they provide to be broadened and improved. The Government should back this modernisation with financial support." The concern that "Your Guide" may not be rolled out in Scotland is very pertinent to the Highlands and Islands, especially as one post office in the region closes every month. In the Highlands, not only post offices but many banks, local shops, tourist information centres and petrol stations have closed or are closing. On top of that, there are serious problems with recruiting and retaining general practitioners and dentists. Given the Executive's commitment to social inclusion, joined-up government and joined-up working, it has an opportunity to provide joined-up information in the local community by helping to retain our post office network. Using libraries or tourist information centres to provide information would not work, as libraries are too far away and many tourist information centres are open for only half the year. The universal bank has been mentioned. I remind members that although it will be set up in 2003, it will not be completed until 2005. That could be too late for many post offices, given the fact that, as from 1 April 2003, all benefits payments and pensions must be paid into a bank account. It is no exaggeration to say that postmasters' income may be reduced by 30 to 40 per cent. Against that background, we do not have time for a further pilot scheme in Scotland. I want to welcome to the public gallery Cathy Walker from Inverness, Lynn Kneller from Conon Bridge and Edith Beveridge from the Black Isle. They feel so strongly about the issue that they have come down from Inverness today to listen to the debate. Rural post offices are not the only post offices under threat. In many towns and cities, the post office exists alongside a small group of shops that  serve local communities. In Crown Street in Inverness, the Kingsmills post office sits alongside an optometrist, a hairdresser, a greengrocer, a baker, a newsagent, an off-licence and a chemist. Many post office customers spend their money locally. The loss of income to small groups of shops could be considerable. "Your Guide" would increase access to information on health, police, benefits, tax, jobs and tourism. It would reduce travel costs and travel time, aid social inclusion and assist tourist information. I look forward to hearing the minister's commitment to "Your Guide" being rolled out in Scotland.

I am grateful to Kenneth Macintosh for raising the issue. Like many members in the past year, my attention has focused on foot-and-mouth disease. The debate is a worthy reminder of BSE and CJD. That it has taken so long for so few cases to present with variant CJD might suggest that it is not likely that there will be as many sufferers as was feared at the outbreak's height, when incredible figures were quoted. I hesitate to say that, because the disease apparently has a long incubation period and young people are particularly vulnerable to the disease. In preparing for the debate, I found that it was difficult to be categorical about anything. We have a right to be concerned, because enormous uncertainty still exists and, as a Parliament, we must be well prepared. New variant CJD was first defined in the UK in 1996 and it is widely assumed that eating BSE-infected food causes the disease. It is not clear whether the 100 or so cases that have been observed to date merely represent the tip of the iceberg or whether the number of people infected has peaked already and is likely to fall—I sincerely hope that the latter is the case. In 1990, the national CJD surveillance unit was set up at the University of Edinburgh to monitor CJD in the UK. It was there that the new form of CJD was discovered in 1995. There are specific concerns in Scotland because the unit recently highlighted a possible north-south divide in the incidence of variant CJD. It has been noted that the number of cases per million people is nearly twice as high in northern England and Scotland. A possible, but unproven, explanation for that divide is that the northern diet includes more of the food products that are assumed to be of higher risk, such as the mechanically recovered meat in sausages and burgers. I hope that the FSA will closely monitor practice in the production of those goods. There are also concerns about imported meat and the means by which that meat is recovered. I have asked several parliamentary questions about that issue and I am aware that in the past few months BSE has been found in meat imported from Germany and other European Union countries. I take this opportunity to raise an issue that Ian Jenkins often raises. We should ensure that councils have adequately staffed their environmental health departments with sufficient numbers of environmental health officers to scrutinise both meat production and imported meat. I would like to believe that all EU abattoirs and the meat that is produced in other countries are of the standard that we expect in Scotland. Although I have asked a number of questions on that subject, it seems to be difficult to get answers. Our  representatives in Europe should ensure that meat that is imported into the EU reaches that standard. I turn to a point made by Kenneth Macintosh about treatment of the underlying disease process and the need for more research. Any finding that may lead to effective treatment must be welcomed but, in the light of the experience of Kenneth Macintosh's constituent, we must do further work to establish whether drugs can provide effective treatment and to develop better assessment and diagnosis. That work must be carried out in the context of well-designed clinical trials. The 1999 report on care and treatment recommended that all patients with a clinical diagnosis should be allocated a key worker to co-ordinate care for both the patient and the family. Assessments should be constantly and more rigorously updated to ensure that the care package suits the needs of patients who have a dramatically deteriorating condition. I hope that the minister will respond to those points and that she will assure us that those steps are being taken in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

Does Tavish Scott recognise that the expertise and specialism in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Inverness and Aberdeen hospitals does not exist in Shetland? Does not he wish that patients in Shetland should have access to that expertise?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Another week, another health debate. Last week we debated the shrinking provision of community care and this week we debate the shrinking provision of the NHS. I challenge Nicola Sturgeon, because she concentrates far too much on the number of beds rather than on the number of procedures. Cataract surgery, for example, is now done in hours instead of five days. With advanced technology and shorter stays in hospital, we would expect lower waiting lists, but that is not happening. Anyone who pledged their troth to Labour in 1999, given the promise of support in sickness and in health, would now have serious grounds for divorce on the basis of promises that were made but not kept. If we could have an open, honest and transparent debate, in which issues were addressed in an accountable manner, people  would have the right to feel reassured about our national health service. Instead, despite all the failings over five years by Labour, and then by the Labour-Liberal coalition, we get an amendment from the health ministers that fails to acknowledge, let alone address, the problem. We would all congratulate NHS staff on their commitment and sheer hard work and their provision of quality care against all the odds. At least the ministers are honest enough not to congratulate themselves; surely that is progress. I hope that the ministers realise that the consultations, reviews, strategies and glossy brochures of the past are not translating themselves into improved levels of patient care. After three years of devolution and the ability to manage the health service in Scotland, instead of the progress that we expected, we are being left behind England in creating a modern, forward looking and patient-centred NHS that utilises all the health care resources in Scotland. The dogma against the independent and voluntary sectors is insulting to patients who want simply the best standards of treatment. We owe it to them to provide that service. It is worth reminding the Labour party at the outset that it has now been in Government for five years. After five years, it is striving to cut waiting times to a maximum of nine months. Nine months was the maximum waiting time under the Conservatives; that was branded as scandalous by Malcolm Chisholm. In Labour's 1997 and 1999 manifestos, we saw promises to raise spending and to spend the money on patients and not on bureaucracy. We had no idea that that would mean an increase in the staff who are in charge of that bureaucracy. Yesterday, I received a written answer from the minister, which confirmed that there has been an increase of seven administrative staff per 100 NHS beds during Labour's five years in office. In this age of advancing technology, we now have two administration staff per NHS bed. If similar investment were to be made in infection control, we could save lives, reduce suffering and free up hospital beds.

It has not reduced in line with the number of hospital beds. That is what the question was about.

It was not a daft question. It was a daft answer, because the minister confirmed that  there are now two admin staff per NHS bed, according to his own figures. The increase in administrative staff has come on the back of the abolition of the internal market, which was hailed by previous health ministers as the cause of so much bureaucracy; however, the abolition of the internal market has created even more bureaucracy. The figures not only confirm the reduced capacity and longer waiting lists and waiting times, but behind those figures are closed waiting lists and reclassification of figures. At a recent meeting of MSPs from all parties and Highland NHS Board, we were told that 300 names could instantly be wiped from the waiting list of 3,000 for Raigmore hospital through a reclassification process that has been recommended by the Executive. A cut of 10 per cent throughout Scotland would enable the Executive to claim a cut in waiting lists, but not one more patient would be treated. The waiting times co-ordination unit is undoubtedly a step in the right direction, but the Executive is—with its action on delayed discharge—admitting its failure to improve the health care system. Scotland's independent hospitals have claimed that they can help to cut NHS waiting lists by up to 10,000. With the situation deteriorating to such a level, will the minister now take a leaf out of Alan Milburn's book and fully utilise that capacity by signing a concordat for a permanent agreement in Scotland to put patients first? I move amendment S1M-2882.1, to insert at end: "by signing a 'concordat' with the independent and voluntary sector in similar terms to that already established in England, and further calls upon the Executive to initiate a debate in Scotland about how to improve the delivery of health care to standards similar to the best European countries, whilst ensuring that access to high quality care is guaranteed for all."

Will Nicola Sturgeon also compare the figures from that time with the rise in the number of patients and in-patients who were treated, the increase in the number of procedures that were carried out in the NHS and the reduction in waiting times that all happened under the Tories?

After 1 July, when free personal care is implemented, will the Executive continue to support different pricing strategies for the accommodation and hotel costs of, on one hand, those who are self-funding and, on the other, those who are assisted by the council?

Given what the member said on pooled and aligned budgets, does she share my concern that it is the money in those budgets and how it is spent that counts? Does she share my concern that £63 million earmarked for care of the elderly is diverted to other budgets?

Figures from the information and statistics division of the Common Services Agency confirm that, in August 1998, 1,500 beds were blocked. In October 2001, 3,138 beds were blocked. That is more than double the number of blocked beds in 1998.

I used the example of the Church of Scotland because it has 34 homes in Scotland. Does Des McNulty not feel that that is relevant? If the not-for-profit sector cannot survive, how does he expect the rest of the voluntary and independent sector, which have no such reserves, to survive?

Does the member agree that if the voluntary and independent sectors—including  the examples that I have mentioned of the Church of Scotland and the Salvation Army—were given the same funding as local authorities, they could pay their staff at council levels? That is the inequity.

It is about care for the elderly.

The Labour party has been in power for five years.

Will the minister give way?

I am pleased to debate the motion today, given the historic and unanimous decision of the Parliament to implement free personal care for the elderly. We need now to show that same unity of spirit and commitment in order to ensure that all those who are eligible for free personal care are given an assessment of needs and eligibility; that all elderly people are treated equally, which the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 will help to achieve; that care provision is funded equally and that the funds that are allocated for the care of the elderly are used for that purpose. I hope that the debate will help to address those issues. We are all familiar with the figures for bedblocking, or delayed discharge. The latest figure is that there are 3,138 delayed discharges. Since the start of the Parliament, the figure has almost doubled. More than 3,000 people are receiving inappropriate care in a hospital setting when they have been assessed as needing care in the community. Of course, some of the figures relate to the elderly, but bedblocking also applies to people who have mental illnesses and to the disabled. The average cost of a care home place is about £300 per week and that of an acute hospital bed is about £1,000 a week. Therefore, if only 1,400 patients were given the care packages that they need, that would free up beds to allow more people to have operations and treatments, reduce waiting lists and free up £1 million to be spent more appropriately on national health service care. We cannot even blame the Scottish Executive for not addressing the problem of bedblocking and councils' inability to fund care in the community. Since the start of the Parliament, £54 million has been allocated to that purpose. According to the Minister for Health and Community Care's press release this week, "Previous initiatives to tackle delayed discharge have simply not delivered".  According to the care development group, grant-aided expenditure for the home-based elderly and services for the elderly in care homes was £603 million, but budgeted expenditure throughout local authorities equalled £540 million. In other words, £63 million that was allocated for the elderly was diverted to other council budgets. We have often been told—including by Sir Stewart Sutherland at the Health and Community Care Committee—that money is diverted to children's services. Given the imminent implementation of free personal care for the elderly and the undoubted unmet need and eligibility for care, surely it is time to examine whether children's services are adequately funded. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities stated recently that 50 per cent more is spent on children's services than is earmarked for them. I am not making any judgments—I do not know enough about those services. However, if free personal care is to work, we must examine children's services and other social work services to determine whether they are adequately funded, so that the budget for care of the elderly is not raided year on year to supplement other services that receive inadequate funding. This week, another £20 million was—despite the failures of the past—given to local authorities to alleviate bedblocking. However, this time, the £20 million comes with the threat of the hit squad. I now realise why there are two Deputy Ministers for Health and Community Care—Mrs Nice Guy Mary and Big Shug from Paisley. They are heading up the bovver boys hit squad. I say to Hugh Henry that if the hit squad works, I will support him. Let us examine the current state of services and their ability to deliver free personal care. For example, 100 residential care homes closed last year. According to the Executive's community care statistics, the number of residents in residential homes has fallen by more than 1,000 since 1998; the number of beds in residential homes has fallen by 946 since 1997; the number of people receiving home care fell by more than 11,000 between 1998 and 2000; the number of people seen by health visitors has fallen by 49,800 since 1997; the number of clients seen by district nurses has fallen by 13,300 since 1999; and more than 2,500 fewer elderly people attended day centres between 1997 and 1998. I ask the ministers how we can promise to deliver free personal care at home when the service has been slashed in recent years. We then come to funding. Any mention of the independent sector is often dismissed as putting profits before care. Today, I will concentrate on the examples of the Salvation Army and the Church of Scotland. The Salvation Army was running eventide homes long before much of the provision that we  have today existed. On Monday evening, I visited the excellent facility at Davidson House in Edinburgh and was given the following figures, which relate to the situation even after the new settlement from 1 April. The cost to the Salvation Army of providing care is £334 per week per person and payment to it as a result of the settlement will be £304. The Salvation Army will therefore subsidise by £30 a week each person who depends on council contributions for care. The Salvation Army's subsidy comes from door-to-door collections, moneys that are raised by its bands and other fundraising activities. That money could be used to help missing persons and homeless people or to develop other services. If the not-for-profit sector cannot manage to finance care, how can we expect other voluntary and private sector organisations to do so?

The Conservatives put the whole sector in place and listened to it. The Labour party was originally against that. The Parliament is unanimous in wanting free personal care. Rather than to score political points, I initiated the debate because I feel strongly that if we address the issues, free personal care will be the success that people expect it to be on 1 July. If we do not address them, we will all have failed. As we prepare to implement free personal care, can we justify funding a place in a local authority home by £83 a week more than we fund a place with the Salvation Army or the Church of Scotland? Using the budget for care in the community, we could place far more people in the independent sector—council places cost £83 a week more per person. In a similar vein, I spoke this morning with a Church of Scotland representative, who confirmed that the church has losses of £3.4 million a year or, more accurately, that the church provides £3.4 million in subsidy to run its 34 residential homes. The representative said that even after the new settlement in the next financial year, the church's losses are likely only to be cut from £3.4 million to £2 million. That subsidy is and has been taken from the church's reserves, but they will eventually run out. I ask the minister whether we should ask why—in a modern, caring Scotland—we expect organisations such as the Church of Scotland and the Salvation Army to subsidise from their funds long-term care for the elderly, when council homes have no such worries. Self-funding clients or patients often pay more  for the same care. Is that justified when the regulations and the quality standards are the same? Is it equitable for patients to receive the same services in relation to accommodation, food, laundry and so on and yet pay different amounts? That needs urgently to be addressed. Is it fair, just or acceptable that a different pricing structure from that for council patients applies to self-funding patients? I will end with a quotation: "I support the greater diversity of provision and more freedoms for local services to improve care for patients and seek a new common purpose shared across health sectors with a relentless focus on better health outcomes and less inequality". I am sure that ministers and Labour members fully agree with that statement, because it is from a speech by Tony Blair. I move, That the Parliament notes the unequal funding support between local authority and independently run care homes; regrets the exceptionally high levels of delayed discharge within Scotland's hospitals; believes that the action plan to tackle delayed discharge will not solve the problem until health and social work budgets are unified, and urges the Scottish Executive to implement the recommendation of the Royal Commission chaired by Sir Stewart Sutherland to unify these budgets within a single organisation and put in place systems to ensure that funds allocated for community care are actually spent on such services.

Given that the Highlands is one of the lead sites for electronic clinical communications implementation—otherwise known as ECCI—is the minister concerned that only 30 per cent of GP practices are linked to the system for the electronic booking of appointments and transmission of patient test results? Is he concerned that immediate discharge letters are e-mailed to GP practices from only 18 wards in Raigmore hospital and two in Belford hospital? Does the minister agree that, for the NHS to work efficiently and effectively, greater emphasis needs to be placed on linking acute and primary care GP practices and social services  departments in councils, so that we can progress towards seamless patient care?

I, too, thank Dorothy-Grace Elder for securing the  debate. She is one of Scotland's seasoned campaigning journalists and, when she gets the bit between her teeth, she does not let go. That is the case with chronic pain. We all congratulate her on the consistency and persistency with which she has pursued the topic. I travelled down from Inverness today, having been in recess last week. When I arrived back at the Parliament, I discovered that, like other members, I had received loads of mail and e-mail. I am afraid that I cannot do justice to the number of people who have written to me and other members. However, I will go through the mail and respond to it in time. We often talk in the Parliament about joined-up talking and thinking. Surely pain management is an excellent example of a service that could span the NHS and the independent sector as well as complementary medicines and techniques in order to address all the conditions that John McAllion and Dorothy-Grace Elder mentioned. I was surprised to find that, although there is a Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network document called "Control of Pain in Patients with Cancer", there are no guidelines for the many other conditions that cause enormous pain. I hope that the minister will consider that at the close of the debate. Greater integration between the health care professions, particularly the huge untapped potential of osteopaths, physiotherapists and other professionals, could do much to help people with chronic pain to lead fairly normal lives. The alleviation of pain would not only help the individual and their family to have a better quality of life; it would help many to get back to work and to gain independence, self-esteem, dignity and confidence. Like others, I was shocked to find out that 10 per cent of the population of Scotland suffer from chronic pain. I have spoken in many members' business debates and I can think of none that has covered an issue that affects such an enormous number of people. I commend the Pain Association Scotland for the measures that it is taking and for its emphasis on medical and social welfare problems relating to chronic pain. I hope that the emergence and establishment of local health care co-operatives will be another opportunity for general practitioners to specialise in pain management. I was shocked and pleased to hear that the Scottish Executive health department currently funds six projects on chronic pain and that a further 229 projects are continuing or have recently been completed. I hope that, as a result of our call today, there will be joined-up thinking and  a bringing together of research and expertise to help us to arrive at conclusions and recommendations in order to address many of the points that Dorothy-Grace Elder's researcher, Gordon Anderson, made. I will give some of the statistics. Nearly two thirds of adults in the UK have had experience of back pain—that figure is enormous. Back pain is cited by 15 per cent of jobless people as a reason for not working. I refer to the points that John McAllion made: we need to bring people back into the world of work, away from loneliness and isolation. In the UK, back pain accounts for 119 million days of certified incapacity annually. There is no doubt that physiotherapists have an enormous role to play. I hope that the minister will examine the vacancy rate of 7.8 per cent in physiotherapy, a profession that can be of great help to people in pain. Finally, I thank Dorothy-Grace Elder once again for raising awareness of the issue. I look forward to a positive response from the minister.

For obvious reasons—my voice—I will be very brief. Although I am pleased to support Elaine Thomson's motion, I must disagree with her suggestion that Aberdeen is the gateway to the Cairngorms—I think that many people in Strathspey and Badenoch would not agree with her either. The Cairngorms are one of several mountain ranges in Scotland that fit the criteria for world heritage status. Others that come to mind are the Cuillins, the Torridon range and the Nevis range. Such a site must be an example of a state of  evolution on earth; be representative of biological evolution; contain natural habitats of endangered animals; be a scene of exceptional beauty; or have a spectacular view of large concentrations of animals. Indeed, Loch Ness also fits those criteria. Since the world heritage convention was signed in 1972, hundreds of sites, including some of the most famous places on earth, have been accorded world heritage status. Those sites are of such universal value that protecting them should be the concern of every man and woman. It is beyond doubt that the Cairngorms mountain range is one such place. Like others, I regularly walk in the Cairngorms, although, as more of a flat walker than a mountain walker I do not achieve the heights of my colleague Murray Tosh. It has been said that attaining world heritage status means that an area is fully protected and cannot be knocked down, dug up or painted over. Although I support the granting of world heritage status, I do so on the basis that the areas that are covered should be recognised rather than on the basis that there is any threat of their being knocked down, dug up or painted over. Managing a world heritage property is an ever-changing task that calls not only for special knowledge of the site but awareness of what is going on around it and in society at large. If world heritage status means that future planning would be more realistic than was the case for the funicular railway, which had the longest-running planning application in Scottish legal history, it would be worth while and I would fully support it.

On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I support the bill. I thank all those who contributed to and supported the passage of the bill, including the witnesses and our loyal and hard working clerks. I agree with the minister that work remains to be done. After spending two years and eight months as a member of the Health and Community Care Committee—I am one of the first members of the committee—I had not appreciated that that work would include the manuscript amendments that arrived at the last minute. However, we are at the beginning, not the end, of the process. The bill is undoubtedly the most contentious to pass through the Parliament. Many considerations and principles underlie it, including financial considerations, which tended to get the most press. The bill should also be viewed from the perspective of equality of access to health care. If an elderly person is dying from cancer, a stroke or heart disease, all their health care costs are met, but old, frail people with Alzheimer's disease or Parkinson's disease are given limited support. The bill will ensure that elderly people will not be discriminated against on the grounds of their illness. For me, visiting places such as the Western Isles was an incredible experience. Four members of the existing committee—Margaret Jamieson, Margaret Smith, Dorothy-Grace Elder and I—went on those visits. I suspect that the people that we met were shocked by the similarity of members' lines of questioning and that they felt some admiration and respect for us, as we were big enough to put health, and health of the elderly in particular, before politics. The one or two points that I will make relate to our continuing work. Age Concern Scotland raised the issue of notional capital, although the committee probably did not spend as much time on that issue as it should have done. There is no doubt that that issue causes enormous distress, confusion and argument, as well as lengthy legal battles. Given the fact that the bill strives for equity, surely we need to set out guidance for families on that issue. I make no specific proposal, but I draw members' attention to the fact that inheritance tax is not due on assets that are disposed of seven years prior to death. However, councils—at their discretion—can take into account a family home that was disposed of 20 years before care was accessed by claiming that the home was disposed of in order to deprive that person of capital. I am not saying that the period of 20 years is right or wrong, or that the period should be seven years. I am asking simply for clarity and, in particular, consistency in councils across Scotland.  I will quote from the Age Concern document: "We do not wish to support the practice of giving away property with the sole intention of avoiding care fees, but we want to see an end to the draconian practice of including as notional capital the value of assets given away over a decade ago." I am not saying that the period should be seven, 10 or 20 years. I am asking simply for clarity and consistency across health boards in Scotland. Much of the free personal care will be delivered in the elderly person's own home. The recent Accounts Commission report talked about "national policy focusing on care at home rather than institutional settings", but the facts and the figures prove that the opposite is true. I raised that point in the Health and Community Care Committee and I make no apologies for raising it again. There will be tremendous demand for care at home on 1 July. I will use the figures from the Accounts Commission's report. Between 1997 and 2000, the number of people that health visitors saw fell by 49,800. Between 1998 and 2000, the number of people who receive home care fell by 9,000. Between 1999 and 2000, the number of people that district nurses saw fell by 13,300. The numbers of people who attend day centres and who live in residential homes were also down. I hope that the provision of care to assist people in their own homes will be in place on 1 July, given the decline in those figures in recent years. Although I am disappointed that we will still not have a single body for budget holding and planning and commissioning community care services, as was recommended by the Health and Community Care Committee, I accept that aligned and pooled budgets are undoubtedly a move in the right direction. I note that where joint working does not deliver the outcomes that are expected—in other words, in cases of failure, in which the expected outcomes are not delivered—ministers can intervene to adopt key principles, such as single management and single budget. I am still not clear how the effectiveness of joint working will be measured. There needs to be some clarity about that. Quite honestly, 3,000 blocked beds represent proof that joint working is not as effective as it should be. There should be clarity about the outcomes that are expected from joint working—the outcomes on which joint working will be judged—and at what point the Executive will intervene. There is also a concern about unmet need, which has emerged often in the Health and Community Care Committee. I spoke with my colleagues John Farquhar Munro and Rhoda Grant at a meeting with Highland Council and  Highland NHS Board this week. Very little seems to be known about the unmet need for care in the community. Although we are clear about waiting times, waiting lists and all the procedures that are undertaken in the NHS, we are not clear about the unmet assessed need in the community. It is not always acknowledged that the care plans that people are given should reflect the provision of care—not a wish list.

I am on my final point. Perhaps you mean that I should take another 20 minutes, Presiding Officer. I welcome the introduction of direct payments, which will bring freedom, choice and, I hope, competition in care services. The provision of direct payments will mean that the carer and the cared-for person will be in charge of their package of care. It will mean that they are not simply passive recipients of what someone else thinks is best. I welcome that exciting development, which will fundamentally change care services in Scotland. As other members will have found, many people believe that, after 1 July, those in residential care homes will not have to pay anything. It is incumbent on us to be totally clear about what free personal care means. People think that it means that they will not need to pay for accommodation, food and laundry charges—what we term hotel costs. We must be clear that, although personal and nursing care will be free, people will still need to pay substantial sums for their hotel costs. I am delighted to support the bill on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives.

I support and commend the work of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers. I would like to think that everyone in Scotland has the opportunity to be registered or acknowledged as a carer. Does the minister agree that the guidance to the Carers (Recognition and Services) Act 1995 was supposed to provide NHS engagement with carers? Is she aware that research by Audit Scotland in 2001 showed that only 15 per cent of carers of older people had been asked if they needed support? Is the minister concerned that although there is a lot of good practice and guidance, it is not being adhered to or implemented?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Does the member share my concern that carers need to be identified before they can be informed? The Executive proposes a move from a carer identification strategy to a carer information strategy, but we need to know who carers are before we can give them information.

Will the minister give way?

I am grateful to the minister for apologising for the lateness of the Executive amendments. I hope that she appreciates that the seeking of clarification is based upon the lateness of the amendments. I support the ability to give GPs more information to give to carers. I also support Janis Hughes's point about the valuable work of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers, which found 6,000 hidden carers. I do not think that that work even covered all of Scotland; it was limited to certain areas. That proves that the Parliament is right to be concerned. By finding 6,000 hidden carers, the trust has proved that there are many carers who do not know who to contact, and who are not getting the support, advice and assistance that they need. I commend the work that the minister is doing with the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland and the Scottish Consumer Council to produce the new mark 2 patients charter. However, I seek clarification. We started this afternoon with Shona Robison's amendment 18, which sought to place a duty on the NHS to provide information to carers. Janis Hughes has asked for a strategy to identify carers in health board areas. I do not want health boards to duplicate a register that is held by local government; I can appreciate that argument. Janis Hughes's other point concerned "ensuring that advice and information about those rights is available free of charge to any ... carers and to carers living elsewhere ... in the Health Board's area." I am all right with that, apart from my reservation about duplication with local government. Will the minister confirm that the Executive's proposals, as set out in amendments 19A to 19G, will apply to all carers whose cared-for person has been in recent contact with the NHS? Will the proposals apply to everyone who has passed through the doors of the NHS who does not have contact with local government? Will the minister confirm that everyone will receive that level of advice, support and information? Amendment 19A refers to "carers who appear to the Board to be persons who may have rights under section 12AA of the 1968 Act". I am unfamiliar with that act. Will the minister confirm that the amendment covers everyone who passes through the NHS, or say whether it is exclusive?

Amendment 18 would provide the NHS body with a duty to provide information to the carer. Amendment 19—which I originally supported—would require a health board to "provide a copy of its carer identification strategy to any person who requests it." However, many people may be unaware that such a strategy exists. They may be too traumatised or too emotional to ask for it. Perhaps only the most assertive and best informed will get the information that they need while others may be left out. Is not the minister concerned about that?

I thank the minister for giving way. Carers Scotland has advised that far more carers are in contact with the NHS than with social services. Quite often, carers do not get in touch with social services until things have reached a fairly desperate stage. Does the minister accept that?

When I first saw Shona Robison's amendment 18, I was minded not to support it—not because I do not agree with the principles outlined in the amendment, but because I thought that amendment 19, in the name of Janis Hughes, was more comprehensive. However, I have just discovered the minister's amendments to Janis Hughes' amendment—I am sorry if that sounds complicated. Will the minister clarify whether, under his amendments, consideration will be given to the  evidence that Carers Scotland has produced of NHS bodies' overlooking and ignoring carers? Will he assure us that account will be taken of the guidance to the Carers (Recognition and Services) Act 1995, which has yet to be amended? The carers organisations tell us that far more carers are in contact with the NHS than with social services. It would be tragic if carers working with local authorities were given support, advice and information that other carers did not get. I apologise for speaking about amendments 19 and 19A, but those amendments will influence how we vote on amendment 18. Amendment 19A states that the Scottish Ministers may require any health board to prepare and submit to them a carer information strategy for: (a) informing carers who appear to the Board to be persons who may have rights under section 12AA of the 1968 Act or section 24 of the 1995 Act that they may have such rights; and (b) ensuring that information about such rights is available free of charge to carers." I ask the minister to identify which persons with rights under section 12AA of the 1968 act are to be supported. Are we talking about only a section of people, or are we saying that the carers of all those who leave NHS care will receive the same advice?

To ask the First Minister when negotiations between the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the independent care homes will be finalised. (S1F-1623)

Given the Executive's recent announcement of £20 million to address bedblocking and the fact that the dispute has been running since last October—despite the agreement reached then between the Scottish Executive, COSLA and Scottish Care—will the First Minister tell me, first, why COSLA is not honouring that agreement and, secondly, whether he thinks that it is acceptable for councils to allocate £400 per person for those staying in their own homes but only £245 for people in independent homes?

Members may think that the bill is fairly straightforward, but we should not forget those who are pursuing complaints in the system. As Sylvia Jackson spoke, I could not help thinking about a lady who came to my surgery. Her mother, who was in a local authority home, had dementia and was taken into a psychiatric hospital where she was to be assessed and where it was to be decided where she would go. The lady went to the council, which said that the matter had nothing to do with it, as the mother was in a primary care trust. The lady went to New Craigs hospital, where her mother was being assessed. The hospital said that the matter had nothing to do with it, but  concerned the social workers. The lady tried to get a social worker, but was told that the matter had nothing to do with them. She went to her doctor, who said that it was not their responsibility. She went to see her councillor, who said that it was nothing to do with them, but was a hospital matter. Members are saying that the bill is okay, but we should not forget the trauma that people go through in finding their way through the system. I support the proposal to have one ombudsman and a one-stop shop. However, at stage 2, I ask the minister to take into account the complaints procedures for the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care and the Scottish Social Services Council. There may be no overlap and things may be crystal clear, but this morning I found out that the Executive is still deliberating on consultation responses—we still do not know the details of the complaints procedures for the Scottish Social Services Council or the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. I ask the minister to be open to amendments at stage 2 and to clarify that matter. I will make two small points before I come to my main one. The first relates to Scottish Health Advisory Service reports. They are first class, but I have often seen reports that say that recommendations were made three years ago but nothing has been done. I ask the minister to ensure in the bill that the public sector ombudsman's recommendations are monitored and acted on. The second point is that I was shocked that Michael Buckley said almost proudly that the time taken to process complaints had been reduced from 45 to 42 weeks. Any move in that direction is welcome, but I know the trauma that many people go through in pursuing complaints. I hope that thoroughness can be maintained, but that the time taken to process complaints can be reduced. My main point was raised by Trish Godman. It concerns the joint-working aspect of care in the community. If a person who receives care complains about their treatment, is not satisfied with the local resolution and goes to the public sector ombudsman, who is to say whether the complaint is a health complaint or a local government complaint? The difficulty arises from the fact that the ombudsman can consider only those complaints that are based on clinical judgments that relate to health service personnel and, in respect of social workers, can examine only the process followed and maladministration. The best submission that the Health and Community Care Committee received was from the Mental Welfare Commission, which said: "This Bill contains many provisions which will achieve the objectives of the Executive that the public sector complaints system will become simpler and more effective".  We all agree with that. However, the commission also said that the bill "will also mean that the decisions and actions of professionals who do not operate clinical judgement, but who do use other forms of professional judgement, will not be open to the same scrutiny as those of their colleagues within the health service. This does not seem to be in the public interest." There will soon be even greater emphasis on joint working and joint decision making: for example, there will be multidisciplinary teams and care plans will be jointly decided. Moreover, both the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 and the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill stress joint working. We can see how difficult it will be to assess who has made a decision when that decision has been made jointly. It is surely unfair if a health service employee must be more accountable for a decision than a local government employee is. For example, a person could complain about being refused a home care service, about not being referred to a day centre, about respite care to help the carer or because, as a carer, they disagree that their mother should be taken into care. Are the judgments that would be involved in those situations clinical or administrative? Do those judgments take into account all factors, including social and clinical factors and the health of the rest of the family? That point was raised in the Health and Community Care Committee.

Yes, so did I. My evidence comes from the Mental Welfare Commission and others who felt that, when the commission examined a complaint, it examined it as a whole. The commission made the same point as the member—there is now a blurring because of joint decision making. If two people make a decision, it cannot be right that one is held to account for a clinical judgment but the other is not. In addition, if a person complains that an elderly person's discharge is being delayed because a local authority does not provide appropriate care, to whom do they complain and who is responsible? I feel that that needs clarification. The ombudsman can investigate the action of independent providers, but only when the services are provided under arrangements that were commissioned by a health service body or a family health service. In other words, the ombudsman  can investigate voluntary and independent care services that are commissioned by the NHS, but cannot investigate services that are self-financing. That means that two people in the same day care centre could have different complaints procedures, because one of them is deemed to be receiving a service that is self-financing and the other is receiving a service that was commissioned by a family general practitioner or the NHS. That undoubtedly needs clarification. There must be clarity about the professional judgments of social workers and the clinical judgments of NHS staff in relation to mental health in the community. The target time should be reduced and, at stage 2, the complaints procedures should be clarified, especially in relation to the two new organisations.

I seek clarification from the minister. I am confused about what will happen if someone complains about a social worker. Will they complain to the Scottish Social Services Council or to the Scottish public sector ombudsman? When I asked the Scottish Parliament information centre and the Executive about the complaints procedures for the Scottish Social Services Council and the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, I was told that they are still out to consultation. I find it difficult to see the parameters of those new organisations and how they will fit with the role of the public sector ombudsman.

What targets have been set to reduce hospital-acquired infections and free up the 1,000 beds that are occupied every day in the NHS in Scotland by patients with hospital-acquired infections?

Will the member give way?

Will Des McNulty take an intervention?

I apologise to members for my croaky voice. The report that we are debating today is an example of Scottish Parliament committees at their best. We have worked to ensure that a thorough investigation was done, resulting in a report with cross-party support. At times, the Health and Community Care Committee acted as judge and jury, examining evidence and reaching conclusions. Today we need to address the grievance felt by sufferers who have been infected  with hep C through NHS treatment and to consider the profound effect that that has had on their lives. It is important to state that the events that we are debating today happened in the 1980s. We cannot judge those events in the light of today's medical knowledge and experience, only on the basis of what was known at the time. We must also bear in mind that all health interventions carry some degree of risk. Conservatives would not support any proposal that inhibited clinical judgment regarding treatment. In the world of medicine, treatments are being found for hitherto fatal diseases and problems. We need to support medical research and science in the advancement of knowledge to enhance patient care and human life. The risks of receiving a blood product must be balanced against the risks of not receiving it. We can be sure that at some point in the future other diseases will emerge. The judgments that the Parliament makes then will be based not only on precedent, but on the information available today, which informs today's judgments. I fully support the conclusion of the Health and Community Care Committee that this problem is not the result of medical negligence or error. The treatment that was provided in the 1980s was appropriate at the time. When treatment for blood and blood-based products was found, the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service introduced the new system effectively and efficiently. The ALT test so often mentioned was not a test for non-A, non-B virus and was highly unreliable. People who did not have the disease showed up as having it, whereas those who had the disease showed up as safe. Instead of seeking to apportion blame, we need now to move to help and support people with hepatitis C. I hope that the proposed expert group will concentrate on providing those patients with practical and financial support. The case is unique in that the problem did not arise from a statutory offence, an act of negligence or other discernible fault, and there is no legal recourse that will allow any form of compensation. The Consumer Protection Act 1987 provides assistance of between £10,000 and £45,000, but that covers only those who were infected after 1988. Today's debate concentrates on those who were infected prior to that date. We would not be discussing the issue today if the CPA had been brought in some years earlier. It is unclear how many hep C sufferers fall into that category. The Haemophilia Society gives an overall figure of more than 300 hep C sufferers in its patient group. Obviously, there are more in the patient group that is supported by Thomas McKissock's petition, who were infected through  routine NHS surgery, yet the figure for those who are registered with the Scottish Centre for Infection and Environmental Health—SCIEH—is only 206. That figure was confirmed to me in a written answer last year. We need to know how many people have contracted hep C through bad blood and how many of those people are eligible for assistance under the CPA. I ask the minister whether only those who are registered with SCIEH will be eligible for assistance under the CPA and following the expert group's proposals. The Conservatives would not support a measure that offers financial aid in no-fault situations, but I believe that we are facing a unique situation that warrants making a special case. At the time that the Macfarlane Trust was set up to help those with HIV and AIDS, neither the extent of hep C contracted through blood transfusion nor the extent of the illness itself was fully known. Both the Macfarlane Trust and the CPA benefit one group and not another, but the principles of fairness and equity should not be negotiable. I ask the deputy minister to clarify, when he sums up the debate, whether the situation would withstand a challenge under the European convention on human rights, on the basis of article 14, which accords individuals the enjoyment of rights free from discrimination on any ground. I agree with the lady from Dundee who wrote to me to say: "my father has to cope with deteriorating health made worse by the added strain of financial worries—at 47 he deserves to live the rest of his life with dignity". I also agree with Iain Bisset from Blairgowrie, who said that if he could prove that he was infected after March 1988, he would be entitled to assistance, yet those who were infected before 1988 are given nothing. That sense of injustice can only add to the strain and worry of those who have the condition. Like other members of the Health and Community Care Committee, I was disappointed with the Executive's response of 11 December, which dismissed the committee's recommendations that financial and other assistance should be awarded, on the basis of need, to hep C sufferers who were infected through NHS treatment. Having said that, I believe that there has been considerable movement by the Minister for Health and Community Care, as outlined in his letter of 7 January to the convener of the Health and Community Care Committee. I acknowledge the Department of Health's consideration of "the merits and disadvantages of different types of no-fault compensation". I also acknowledge the consideration of English findings in a Scottish context. I fully support the  inclusion of patient representatives in the expert group and the retrospective application of the group's findings, which was mentioned by Margaret Smith. I fully support the adoption of a UK-wide position on hep C and similar issues, and I also support talks with patients and patient groups prior to meetings being held with financial institutions. I further support the inclusion of the Health and Community Care Committee in discussions on the membership and remit of the expert group. However, I have concerns about the further delay, given the problems faced by so many hep C sufferers. Given the fact that the remit and membership of the expert group will be discussed with the committee, and given the firm recommendations made by the committee in its report, does that mean that the minister and the Executive fully agree to act on the report's recommendations? Will they act with greater urgency to implement those recommendations? I have made my speech short because of my voice. I thank members for bearing with me.

What action will the minister take when dental screening for school children falls below the statutory obligations that have been outlined by the NHS in Scotland, as is happening in the Highlands? Does she intend to review and upgrade the fee structure for NHS dentists? Finally, I ask Jamie Stone to let the thousands of people who live in the Highlands know how Madonna accessed an NHS dentist, given that they cannot find one.

I am pleased to say that I am not here today to debate the Barnett formula, taxation or fiscal autonomy. My contribution to this debate is based on my experience as a member of the Health and Community Care Committee. For all the worthiness of the Finance Committee, it is very important that members of subject committees are listened to. Like the minister and Des McNulty, I believe that we must move towards having measurable outcomes. "Investing in You: The Annual Report of the Scottish Executive" outlined the Executive's spending plans up to 2002. In the foreword to that document, Donald Dewar stated: "We are committed to a more open inclusive budgeting process which actively seeks to inform and involve those outside the immediate political process of budget setting." Donald Dewar's commitment is an excellent starting point for today's debate and I make my comments against that background. The health section of the budget document states that health boards will "continue to develop and improve services in line with declared priorities" and "meet increases in demand". There is an increased demand for services for people with diabetes. How is the demand for that service measured, and how do we know whether it is being met?  One of the aims of the health plan is "to develop and deliver modern, person-centred, primary care and community care services". All of us want that. Another aim of the plan is "to improve, protect and monitor the health of the people of Scotland". We would all sign up to that. Often—deliberately or otherwise—the Executive's aims or objectives are very vague and their achievement is impossible to measure. We know that more money is being spent, but it is incredibly difficult to track that money. We need to know whether the additional money benefits patients. However, the openness, transparency and subsequent accountability that was promised—or aspired to—has not been realised to the extent that we are able to know that. We are told that in 2002-03 new money will be available to the NHS. As has already been said, most of that money will go to the unified trusts—into the melting pot. When people in Scotland hear about increases in spending, naturally their expectations rise. They cannot understand why health care benefits are not visible. Instead of constantly announcing moneys, we should be more open and honest with people. For example, we should tell them that 70 per cent of national health service spending is allocated to salaries. A substantial sum goes to cover price inflation, as year on year the drugs budget rises at a rate well above the rate of inflation. Many trusts also face considerable financial deficits. All members of the Health and Community Care Committee are seeking measurable outcomes, particularly outcomes that are in line with clinical priorities. However, this is our third year of questioning the Executive and its officials, and we are no further forward. We cannot audit-trail the spending of the community care pound. When the committee asked the former Minister for Health and Community Care about that, her response was that councillors are democratically elected and accountable. If the Health and Community Care Committee cannot get information about community care spending, how can the average Joe Punter decide whether his councillor is spending wisely and effectively and endorsing best practice? The Local Government Committee has expressed similar concerns. I welcome the minister's commitment to outcomes for care in the community and the planned road shows, but those must be understandable not just to us but to everyone out there so that people can be engaged in the budget process. Mr Aldridge, the top financial official at the health department, stated that he was not the only person responsible for monitoring health care and that  "As far as other issues, such as clinical governance and management issues, are concerned, other colleagues in the Executive are responsible."—[ Official Report , Health and Community Care Committee , 25 April 2001; c 1746.] That is further evidence of a blurring of the lines of responsibility, which leaves issues vague and unmeasurable. The top three clinical priorities are cancer, heart disease and mental health. While pursuing mental health outcomes, I found that recent community care statistics confirm that local authorities reduced spending on adult mental health services by £8 million in 2000, in comparison with spending in 1997. The minister might say that those patients are receiving care elsewhere, but we do not know that that is the case, as we do not have the information.

I will skip the next part of my speech, Presiding Officer.

I will try to sum up. If we look at spending on nurse training, for example, we note that one health board allocates £5 per nurse per year, while another allocates £100 per nurse per year. When I was looking for measurable outcomes, I found that even Florence Nightingale classified her patients as "relieved", "not relieved" or "dead". Despite great advances in time, knowledge and technology, we do not have a measurement that is as sophisticated as that used by Florence Nightingale. I realise that I am running over my time, Presiding Officer.

Most members of the Parliament are seriously concerned about drugs and alcohol. We cannot measure spending on detoxification and rehabilitation facilities for people with drug and alcohol problems through a minister, as local drug action teams make that expenditure. Will that spending be closely monitored and accounted for by the minister and the Executive?

The member seems confused. He seems to think that we are here to lay out our manifestos for the next election. Des McNulty's motion says: "That the Parliament notes the 13th Report, 2001 of the Finance Committee on Stage 2 of the 2002-03 Budget Process". Rather than fighting over whether we need an independent Scotland or making points about whichever party's manifesto, the member should direct his energies to that report.

Has the member read the report?

I commend the minister on what he has done in the past two weeks. Unfortunately, we have reached the depths of a crisis and it would take an awful lot more than two weeks to fix it. It is very unfortunate that the previous Minister for Health and Community Care, Susan Deacon, did not address the problems when they came to her. Malcolm Chisholm tells us to listen to what the experts say, but breast cancer patients whose cancer is in remission are being told that their clinical appointments are being delayed by six months. I listened to Anna Gregor saying last night that she is reconfiguring the services and that all the clinics are not necessary. I think that the minister should start listening to women who have had breast cancer. He should ask them how much assurance, reduction in anxiety and peace of mind they get when they go along to see an oncologist who tells them that their cancer is still in remission. We would all have far more trust and confidence in the reconfiguring of cancer services if we felt that it was driven by clinical priorities. We are all mature and professional enough to accept that. However, when four oncologists have walked out, when morale is at rock bottom and when resources are desperate, we can hardly be blamed for being sceptical about a sudden reconfiguration of cancer services in the midst of an enormous crisis. As cancer is one of the top three clinical priorities, we are entitled to expect the best in cancer care. If that is an example of a clinical priority, where does it leave people in Scotland who suffer from asthma, diabetes and epilepsy? God help those whose conditions are not clinical priorities. If the cancer care that is available is the best that ministers can do, there is not much hope for the rest. To lose one consultant at the Beatson is unfortunate; to lose two is careless. To have four consultants resign is an outrage and an indictment of the Executive's appalling inability to run the NHS in Scotland. The most recent resignation—that of Dr Adrian Harnett, who has no job to go to—has robbed the Beatson of one of the UK's leading authorities on breast cancer. His resignation will also impact on the Scottish ophthalmic oncology service and on patients throughout Scotland. That resignation could and should have been avoided if support had been available from management and sufficient resources made available. As Dr Kemp, the consultant ophthalmic surgeon, wrote in The Herald , those developments could have been avoided if consultants' concerns had been listened to over the past two years. I commend what the minister has done in two weeks, but I cannot commend what has been ignored for two years.  It is unacceptable that services should be allowed to deteriorate at all. What is disgraceful is to be aware of such problems and to allow them to continue to fester. The Beatson, the biggest cancer centre in Scotland, is in a state of crisis. With Dr Harnett's departure, the staffing level will become half of that in Edinburgh. That is certainly no way to run cancer services in the west of Scotland. Indicative of the performance of our much-vaunted Executive is the response earlier this year to a letter from a doctor at the Beatson warning of near disasters due to staff shortages. As has been said, Susan Deacon did not even deem that worthy of her attention. It is alleged that the reply was given by a junior civil servant without Ms Deacon apparently even being aware of it. The Beatson was clearly not a priority for the Executive. That fact is glaringly obvious and now comes back to haunt ministers. The current crisis is undoubtedly a headache for the minister. For too long, doctors have been bypassed and ignored by managers and the Executive. Staff morale is at a low ebb. In terms of embarrassment for the Scottish NHS, surely nothing can compare with the words of Professor Karol Sikora, who led the World Health Organisation's cancer control programme, when he described the Beatson as like "going into Bombay". He said that we had a "black hole in Glasgow" and were running the operation like something from the 1950s. It cannot be acceptable for that to continue. The decline of the Beatson cannot be blamed wholly on mismanagement at the North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust. The buck stops with the Minister for Health and Community Care, particularly when concerns have been raised over a period of years. Although the Beatson is facing so many problems, we heard yesterday that the minister will now embrace the underutilisation and spare capacity in the private sector. Will he tell cancer patients in Scotland how their care will be affected in the new configuration of services? Will he utilise the 540 beds, the 24 operating theatres and the 67 intensive care beds, as well as the expertise in cancer care, for diagnosis, treatment, surgery and aftercare, all of which are readily available at the HCI? We are looking for a commitment from the minister that health care in Scotland is decided not by dogma but by patient needs. I was pleased to read in The Herald today that Jack McConnell would not "be bound by dogma". He just needs to get his troops to believe that. When the First Minister puts patients first, before political dogma, the Conservatives will wholly and fully support that approach.

The minister talks about a recruitment crisis and people having faith and confidence in the service. How would he respond to an article today in The Herald that says: "A team of specialist surgeons is considering a breakaway move from the NHS to set up ... in a private hospital"?  If there is such trust in the way in which the minister is running those services, why are the top specialists leaving?

The review document "Our National Health—Delivering Change" is to be published this week. Given that GPs have been ignored in the national health plan, will the minister be including GPs as key stakeholders in the delivery of that change?

rose—

rose—

Do not point.

I never thought that I would see the Minister for Health and Community Care blush, but I have seen it today. Over the forthcoming months and years, quite a few more comments from his past will probably cause him to blush. When I read the motion as I was considering an amendment, I got as far as the word "progress", which the dictionary defines as "a movement forward towards a place or objective: a satisfactory development: or advance towards perfection". Labour has been in power for four and a half years. The truth is that things are not progressing but regressing. Even with the party's specialism in spin-doctoring, by any standard or by any stretch of the imagination, what is happening in the NHS in Scotland cannot be called progress. No pilgrim ever progressed by that definition and patients in Scotland are certainly not feeling any benefit from what Labour calls progress in health care. Throughout the UK, it is becoming obvious that the truth is quite different from the spin. I quote: "I am fed up looking constituents in the face and telling them that things are going to get better. After four and a half years, things are not getting better." That quote is from the Labour member of Parliament who defected this week.

There would not be much point in going to Mr Rumbles's party up here. Our amendment acknowledges the contribution of NHS staff. The staff need support and commitment from the Executive, but those are not forthcoming. With the morale of general practitioners at rock bottom, with the mass resignation of GPs in Scotland still on the minister's table for March next year and with the top cancer specialists at the Beatson clinic having to do their own typing because no medical secretaries are available, it is hardly surprising that GPs and oncologists walk out even when they have no jobs to go to. Who would have thought that, in peacetime, in a Scotland that spends 20  per cent more on health than is spent elsewhere in the UK, the protocol of battlefield medicine would be the basis of decision making in our largest cancer care centre? Since the establishment of the Scottish Parliament two and a half years ago, waiting lists are up by 11,000, deferred waiting lists are up by 6,000, 2,500 fewer emergency patients are seen, more than 5,000 fewer operations are carried out, more than 78,000 fewer out-patients are seen and waiting times are at the highest level ever recorded—57 days. I reiterate a point that I made to Nicola Sturgeon: more than one waiting list has closed in Scotland on reaching the embarrassing 12-month figure. The communications clinic at Raigmore hospital has had to close its waiting list for the best part of this year, with the result that children with forms of autism spectrum disorder are not being diagnosed and are consequently not being given the care and treatment that they need. The number of beds blocked was around 1,700 when the Parliament was established. The latest figure is 2,954, despite many initiatives and a few million pounds here and there.

We intend to make greater use of the beds available. At the Health and Community Care Committee this morning, I proposed an amendment for a single budget for community care, which would ensure that the 3,000 people in hospital who are waiting for care in the community were given that care and that 3,000 beds were freed up for surgery and so on. We have policies, unlike Mike Rumbles's party. The number of people receiving care at home who were seen by a health visitor fell by 49,000 between 1997 and 2000. More than 13,000 fewer people are now visited by a district nurse. In two years, the number of people receiving home care fell by 11,000. There are fewer local authority staff to deliver care in the community. I say to the minister that there are many words to sum up the state of the NHS in Scotland, but "progress" is not one of them. If anything, after four and a half years, a more fitting word would be "regress". I will move on to the private sector—and despite what Margaret Jamieson may say, I am not privatising the health service. She is on the Labour back benches but I am talking to the Labour front benchers, whose policy is quite different.

Not just now. In HCI, more than 540 beds have 10 per cent occupancy. Despite that, Mr Chisholm stated last week that the private sector did not have sufficient capacity to help patients in Scotland. There are 24 operating theatres, 67 intensive care beds and spare capacity for patients from Liverpool, so why is there no spare capacity for patients in Scotland? The minister is ideologically opposed to using the private facilities, yet he is being forced by patient demand to allow the use of such facilities. When we talk about there being no resources or inadequate resources in HCI, the minister should bear in mind the first rule of Keynesian economics: demand creates supply. The demand for private health care would ensure that resources were in place. That is called market forces.

The member obviously did not do economics at school or university. Where there is demand, supply will come. It is hardly likely that HCI will employ consultants until it gets the contract—that would not be good business. It is simply untenable to leave Scottish patients to languish on waiting lists for operations while patients from Liverpool are guaranteed private treatment at HCI in Glasgow after six months on the NHS waiting list. The minister said that he will embrace and utilise the spare capacity in Scotland's private sector. On what basis will that capacity be used and how will it benefit patient care? Will all the resources be put into a central organisation so that they can be utilised? How long will patients wait for a heart bypass before being given the option of the operation at HCI? How long will patients have to wait for a hip replacement or a knee replacement before the minister gives them the option of treatment at HCI or any other private facility? My advice to those who need heart bypass surgery and want to get the quickest care and treatment in Scotland is to move to Liverpool. We need more than a vague commitment to the private sector.

Quite honestly, I think that that is 66 too many; it is 66 more than would wait in Liverpool. We need to see the concordat. Patients should know what they can expect. Even Des McNulty is embarrassed by a situation that allows patients from Liverpool and a member of their family to drive through Govan, enjoy private health care and stay in the Beardmore Hotel while patients in Govan must wait up to 12 months before any consideration is given to alternatives to the NHS. People in Scotland simply want the best treatment, which should be free at the point of delivery and should be of the highest standards. Surely the driving force must be to put patients first, even if that means treating them as NHS patients in the private sector. The state monopoly model has long been discredited.

Quite honestly, I would be absolutely shocked if there were 400 empty beds in the NHS, given that 11 per cent of beds are taken up because of hospital-acquired infections and around 7 per cent are taken up because of bedblocking. Waiting lists and waiting times are going up and the Scottish National Party's spokesperson has talked about the reduction in the number of beds. I would be more than shocked if there were more than 400 empty beds in the NHS. The state monopoly model has long been discredited in the UK and worldwide. The Parliament must address that. I am happy to welcome Malcolm Chisholm to his new right-wing ideology, which I could almost feel today. Since the Parliament was established, the internal market has been abolished to rapturous applause from many back-bench members, but it is now time to bring back the market in health care, because the state monopoly is not working. Monopolies have never provided efficiency or best value and they have never been the most effective use of resources. The abolition of GP fundholding, with nothing to replace it, has resulted in a recruitment crisis, a morale crisis and the threat of a mass resignation of GPs from the NHS, as Dr Richard Simpson acknowledged. We will support the SNP amendment to strengthen the primary care system. The minister  talks about partnership with staff. The much-vaunted health plan contains a section on working together—section 9—which outlines the key stakeholders. Given that 90 per cent of patient contact is with GPs, why are GPs not mentioned in the plan as stakeholders? That is hardly progress for patient care. I move amendment S1M-2538.3, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the lack of progress made by the Scottish Executive in delivering on its promises for improved health care, in particular the reduction of waiting times, and further notes the rising crisis in staff morale and retention in the health service together with the delays in obtaining consultant assessment and the continuing inability of the Scottish Executive to effect meaningful devolution of funding and decision making to local level."

I remind the member and the minister that the waiting list for the communications clinic at Raigmore hospital for children with autism spectrum disorder has been closed for the best part of this year. That admission was made to a cross-party group of MSPs at meetings with Highland Health Board. The example that John Swinney cited is not the only one; there are many.

Given that the spare capacity in HCI alone is around 500 beds, will the minister sign a concordat with the private sector to ensure that  patients have a guaranteed waiting time, like patients in Liverpool have, so that they will be entitled to care after a certain number of months on the waiting list?

Is it the case that the proposals to unify health boards and trusts is resulting in decisions being made further from the patients? Has that contributed to the problems at the Beatson? Is the minister concerned to hear today that some cancer patients in Glasgow have had their appointments delayed by six months?

Is the minister concerned about the number of patients with mental illness who are assessed as needing care in the community but who have their discharge delayed from psychiatric hospitals because councils cannot fund their care? The figure for Inverness alone was 40 patients. Will he ensure that councils make mental health a clinical priority?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate the new minister. That he has gone from being a member of the Health and Community Care Committee and back-bench rebel to Minister for Health and Community Care is surely an endorsement of the democracy in the Parliament. I also welcome Mary Mulligan and Hugh Henry. I hope that Hugh's attendance at health debates will be more frequent than his attendance at the Health and Community Care Committee. I also congratulate Richard Simpson, for whom I have a tremendous respect. That he has been given a remit on drugs and prisons is first class. As Nicola has already said, we extend our best wishes to Susan Deacon. I hope that Susan will join us on the Health and Community Care Committee because she would be a great asset—it would be fun. I welcome the tone of the minister's speech. He accepted many of the points that the Health and Community Care Committee made. In the spirit of unity that Nicola Sturgeon mentioned we will support the motion in the name of Susan Deacon, not the SNP amendment. The points in the amendment have already been clearly made by the cross-party Health and Community Care Committee. The minister has already accepted one of those points and I know that the other is on-going. It is not necessary for the SNP to hijack the strongly stated recommendations of the cross-party committee. We agree with what the new First Minister said last week that it is better to do less better. I am pleased to hear that he is reviewing health services. We can certainly confirm that considerable anger lies at the root of the change that is needed. In June 1999, along with the other 10 members of the Health and Community Care Committee, I listed the main health priorities, so it is with much pleasure that I now stand to support the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill at stage 1. Given the fact that care in the community was highlighted as the major issue for committee members two and a half years ago, it is crucial that we get the bill right now. We need to address all the problems that have been highlighted in the oral and written evidence that the committee received and in the visits that it undertook, as well as in all the individual cases that are brought to us as MSPs. We fully accept the principle that we need to end the discrimination whereby payment must be made for care for the frail and elderly yet NHS treatment is free for other conditions. It is only right that people pay the costs of accommodation  including food and laundry because those costs would be incurred at home. Our support for free personal care was based on the recommendations of the Sutherland report and the calculations that were made by the then Minister for Finance and Local Government, the care development group and the Department for Work and Pensions. None of those indicated the underestimation that we heard about at the end of last week. Our party did not sign a blank cheque when we backed the policy. Like other parties in the Parliament, we identified the accounting procedures and the calculations that were made at the time by well-respected bodies. The definition of personal care has been endlessly discussed. I welcome the minister's announcement that the definition will be included in the bill. However, although the definition of personal care as endorsed by the care development group is now clear, the terms "social care" and "nursing care" are not quite so clear. In fact, when he was Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, the minister replied to my query by stating to the committee: "there is a continuum between personal care and nursing care. There is an argument for collapsing the two into each other, because in going for free nursing care we are following a sort of international definition of nursing."—[ Official Report, Health and Community Care Committee, 7 November 2001; c 2177.]

My quote came from the Official Report . Page 67 of the Sutherland report states that personal care "falls within the internationally recognised definition of nursing, but may be delivered by many people who are not nurses, in particular by care assistants employed by social services departments or agencies." Therefore, if personal care is nursing care and Westminster has decided to pay for nursing care with no argument over attendance allowances, we have to ask whether older people in Scotland are getting a raw deal or a different deal from older people in England. I ask the minister to address and clarify that point when he is summing up. My next point highlights the most recent figure of 2,954 people who remain in hospital beds despite being assessed as requiring care in the community, at home, in a residential home or in supported accommodation. In February 1999, three months before the start of Parliament, the  bed-blocking or delayed discharge figure was 1,724. Despite various initiatives and commitments, as well as a few million pounds here and there, the latest figure of almost 3,000 people highlights that major issue. This week, I was at a meeting at NHS Highland with my colleagues Rhoda Grant and John Farquhar Munro. We were told that children were writing to the hospital to ask why their grandparents were being kept in hospital when they were being told that they should be cared for at home. We welcome the emphasis on outcomes rather than budgets. However, point 66 of the policy memorandum refers to cases of failure in joint working and states: "where the expected service outcomes are not being delivered ... Ministers will be able to use this power to require that local authorities and NHS bodies adopt certain key principles, such as a single management structure, with a single budget". Why should we wait for failure when we already have well-documented failure. The case for a single budget is well made—it was recommended in the Health and Community Care Committee report. That issue must be addressed now. More worrying statistics were published recently in "Scottish Community Care Statistics 2000" and in the Accounts Commission's review of home care services for older people, which was published last Friday. Between 1997 and 2000, the number of people seen by health visitors fell by 49,800. Between 1998 and 2000, the number of people who received home care fell by more than 9,000. Between 1999 and 2000, the number of people seen by a district nurse fell by 13,300. The number of people attending day centres and the number of people in residential homes were also down. In a written response to those figures, the minister stated: "recent changes in practice include increased activity in clinic-based settings". In fact, the Accounts Commission's report states that "with national policy focusing on care at home rather than institutional settings", the facts and the figures prove that the opposite is true. The national review revealed a different picture to Government policy. We know the problems and we have the time, so we should address them and get the matter right.

I welcome the minister's point about increases in funding, but as I think all members of the Health and Community Care Committee have said, we are looking for increases in outcomes. The figures are horrific, by anyone's account. They fly in the face of Government policy, which emphasises care at home. That point cannot be missed. In the Highlands, where 170 people are left in hospital when they should be in the community, we note that the Highland Council's proportion of net community care expenditure on home care for all ages is the lowest in Scotland at 8 per cent. We should also consider that. In comparison, Falkirk Council's proportion is 31 per cent. We need to consider the allocation of those budgets and why some councils allocate so much less than others. The Highland Council tells us constantly that delayed discharge is all the health board's fault. On Monday, we were told that the fault lay with the council. That is not joint working, and patients are suffering. That could be overcome by accepting the Health and Community Care Committee's recommendation that a single body should be the budget holder, to achieve accountability and transparency and ensure a single point of entry for services. The Conservatives would like that budget to be managed by the NHS, as the NHS carries the cost of councils' inability to accept that they must provide appropriate care and support to many people. The result is rising waiting lists in hospital and inappropriate care. We fully endorse and welcome the recommendation of direct payments, which will empower and enable carers and families to purchase the care that they need, when they need it, and to choose the provider of that care. It is unfortunate that the number of people taking up direct payments in Scotland is just over 207. Of those people, 93 per cent are from the 18 to 64 age group. Half Scotland's local authorities do not participate in the scheme. I understand that eligibility depends on a person's being designated disabled, but nonetheless, a positive approach to direct payments must be taken, to maximise the success that the minister spoke about. It is unacceptable for councils to monopolise referrals to their own homes at a weekly charge of £361 when, in the private, voluntary and independent sectors, the average cost is about  £278. Direct payments would allow people to exercise choice in care and the quality of that care. The Scottish Conservatives endorse, welcome and acknowledge the principles in the bill.

Does the member recognise that all 19 Conservatives voted in favour of free personal care? Will she endorse that fact?

Is the Executive still on course for achieving the targets, aims and objectives that were set out in "Eating for Health: a Diet Action Plan for Scotland", which was written by my colleague Lord James Douglas Hamilton when he was Scottish health minister in 1996?

Is it acceptable for Moray Council to hold back more than £113,000, which was allocated by the Executive for the care and treatment of drug users, while those who seek help are told to come back in four to eight weeks?

I associate myself with Johann Lamont's comments about having expertise on the disease: I find it difficult to pronounce, let alone understand. However, as is the case with many subjects that have been chosen for members' business debates, I have gained an awareness and an understanding of the condition. I hope that the debate allows that to be achieved on a wider scale. To say that the condition affects one in 500 does not sound much, but when we state that it affects 12,000 people in Scotland, the figure seems more realistic. There seems to be a consensus in support of the Cardiomyopathy Association's campaign to secure screening by electrocardiogram and echo-ultrasound for all first-degree relatives. I received a letter from a lady in Portknockie, in Morayshire. Her son died of the condition in December 1998. Following the loss of her son, all members of the immediate family were screened, and none had any signs of the condition. Naturally, that lady shares the concern that has been mentioned about familial screening for first-degree relatives. She said in her letter that, had a familial screening programme been available, and had the family been aware of it, she might still have her son today. Having heard that personal point of view, we can understand why people wish to raise awareness of the condition. Given that the disease is familial, exposing each child of an affected parent to a 50:50 chance of inheriting the condition, the need for first-degree relatives to be offered case testing would seem to be a right, rather than an obligation. The British Medical Association has stated: "Many patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy do not have symptoms and may be relatives of patients known to have the disease. Unfortunately, the first manifestation of  the disease may be sudden death, frequently occurring in children and young adults, often during or after physical exertion". The case of Shona Hill, which is clearly outlined in the information that we received from the Cardiomyopathy Association, indicates the risks and the benefits of screening for the condition. I was shocked to discover how it can affect the members of one family. Shona Hill is a member of the Cardiomyopathy Association and a voluntary co-ordinator. She was diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in her early 30s, while pregnant with her second child, and has been fitted with a pacemaker. As the gene responsible for the condition has been identified in her family, her children have been screened and shown not to carry it, but Shona's father, brother, sister and nephew all suffer from the condition. Tragically, as is too often the case, before the family gene was identified, Shona lost four first-degree relatives at a young age because of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. I am pleased to speak in today's debate, because I think that the condition is worthy of our consideration. In seeking to outline the problem and to raise awareness of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, it is important to remember that the condition will not limit the quality or duration of life for the majority of individuals who are affected, provided that it is picked up and treated at an early stage. A few minutes ago I picked up the paper that the Scottish Parliament information centre has produced on the subject. I note the question that Christine Grahame asked about the number of deaths over the past five years from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The answer was that there were 11 deaths in 1995, 11 deaths in 1996, five deaths in 1997, six deaths in 1998 and six deaths in 1999. The information we have received from SPICe indicates that, if male and female deaths from the condition are added together, the figures are 22 deaths in 1995, not 11; 28 deaths in 1996, not 11; 27 deaths in 1997, not five; 17 in 1998, not six; and 36 in 1999, not six. I do not know whether I am interpreting the information wrongly, but the figures for deaths from the condition seem to be much more dramatic than the figures we were given in the written answer to Christine Grahame's question.

As our business today started with a mention of the patron saint of mothers, on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I congratulate the Minister for Health and Community Care on the announcement of her new arrival. [Applause.]

Did you not know, Presiding Officer? I am not implying anything saintly about the minister, but I am delighted about the news of her new arrival. We are delighted to participate in the mental health debate. As Nicola Sturgeon said, there is likely to be a tremendous degree of consensus on the issue. However, some concerns have been voiced and, in that respect, I appreciate what the minister said about the on-going reviews. I hope that the clarifications and assurances on various issues that I seek will be taken in the tenor in which they are sought, as they are meant to be constructive points in the debate. We welcome the opportunity to work towards ending the stigma and the prejudice that surround mental health. The Scottish Conservatives are broadly supportive of the proposals. Mental health legislation is due for an overhaul and we endorse fully the Millan committee in the excellent job that it carried out in evaluating current practice and proposing reforms. The British Medical Association said recently that at least 30 per cent of general practitioner consultations have a psychological component. I hope that the new system of providing care and treatment for those with mental illness will involve GPs. We further welcome the inclusion of a statement of principles in the new mental health bill. Today, I will concentrate on three of those principles, which I do not list in order of priority and which were mentioned earlier. The bill will be hugely complex, but the three principles about which I feel most concern are reciprocity, the respect for diversity and the use of the least restrictive alternative. My colleagues will examine other issues, including the proposed mental health tribunal. In turning to the principle of reciprocity, I will quote from the Executive statement: "Where society imposes an obligation on an individual to comply with a programme of treatment and care, it should impose a parallel obligation on the health and social authorities to provide safe and appropriate services, including ongoing care following discharge from compulsion." As the system is not currently in operation I have difficulty envisaging how it will work. Will the  obligation of health and social authorities to provide safe and appropriate services be monitored by the NHS or the new regulation of care commission? How will they be held to account for the delivery of those services? It is also interesting to note that that obligation will apply to patients who receive compulsory treatment without compulsory hospitalisation. Whether a person is cared for at home or in the community, they are undoubtedly entitled to the best standards of care. Our challenge is to regulate, monitor and gain the feedback to ensure that those service users are achieving and attaining the best standards of care. I welcome the minister's points in the statement that the role of compulsion is to be more fully considered. How will the obligation on the individual at home to comply with a programme of treatment and care be monitored? Will relatives be asked to give an account? Will the individual being treated have to prove compliance? If so, how? I ask those questions because I feel that the issue is likely to be highly subjective. I welcome the moves to strengthen the role of the mental health officers. To say that their role will be strengthened is an understatement, given the reduction in the use of emergency detention and the proposal to introduce long-term compulsory interventions in a community setting. Will community psychiatric nurses be turned into community custodians, rather than having a therapeutic relationship with the patient and their family? The grounds for compulsion are where "the necessary care and treatment cannot be provided by agreement with the patient; the person's decision-making ability is impaired to a nature or degree which would justify compulsory measures; ... there is a significant risk of harm to the health or safety or welfare of the patient or a significant risk of harm to other persons if such treatment is not administered." We begin to get a picture of the enormous responsibility of compulsory care in a community setting. My next point on reciprocity, which has been more or less covered by Nicola Sturgeon, is about dropping the right to advocacy, as was recommended by the Millan committee, and replacing it with "a duty on the NHS and local authorities to ensure that a range of advocacy services are provided." In its submission, SAMH, said: "The right to advocacy is a clear principle and a clear right." I hope that, under the principle of reciprocity, service users will be entitled by right to advocacy services to ensure that they receive the appropriate choice and care for their needs. I also believe that advocacy is essential to protect  against neglect and abuse. The second principle that I want to discuss is respect for diversity. There seems to be an underlying assumption that a wide range of options for care are available. The aim is that service users should receive care that "accords respect for their individual qualities, abilities and diverse backgrounds and properly takes into account age, gender, sexual orientation, ethnic group and social, cultural and religious background." These are undoubtedly worthy principles and aspirations, but there is no doubt that, to achieve them—and in order for people to have choice and appropriate treatment—significant resources will need to be reprioritised into the mental health budgets. Any intervention or treatment is only as good as the best possible assessment of need. I am concerned about many of the answers to written parliamentary questions on waiting times and on vacancy rates for clinical psychologists, psychiatrists and the shortage of forensic psychologists. The final principle that I want to mention is the least restrictive alternative. Again, the policy statement says that service users should be provided with the "necessary care, treatment and support ... in the least invasive manner and in the least restrictive manner and environment compatible with the delivery of safe effective care, taking account where appropriate of the safety of others." A full range and choice of diverse services must be available to exercise and achieve that principle. SAMH raised concerns about community-based compulsion, saying that the evidence to support that approach has not been provided, despite research into the use of similar orders elsewhere in the world. In fact, SAMH goes further, stating: "Until there is a firmer evidence base, the move towards community compulsion should be resisted". Although I feel sympathetic to community compulsion, I would like some of those issues to be addressed. I would like to be assured that the system has been applied elsewhere and that it is the best system for people with mental illness in Scotland. Research from other countries seems to show that compulsion in the community, combined with enhanced service, produces better outcomes. Even the enhanced services by themselves produce good outcomes. However, we return to the need for a range of services to allow choice, diversity and appropriate care designed for individual needs. The basic principles of reciprocity, respect for diversity and the least restrictive alternative can be meaningful in practice only if there is a full range  of services, including crisis services, based in the community. The reconfiguration of that wide range of services would also prevent many people from becoming so ill that it becomes necessary for them to be detained in hospital. That is why the Scottish Conservatives will today acknowledge and endorse the SNP amendment. It is hoped that the range of services would be provided by the public, private and voluntary sectors to enable choice. I have already spoken about resources. It is important to point out that recent community care statistics have compared the cost of the average weekly charge per resident in residential care homes for people with mental health problems. The statistics state that the average weekly cost for a private sector place is £254, the average cost of a voluntary sector place is £357, and the average weekly charge for a local authority place is £616. With local authority weekly charges at more than double the cost of the private sector, the cost of treating two people in a local authority home would cover the treatment of five people in private or voluntary sector places. If we are considering a wider and more diverse range of services with limited resources, it is important that we also consider providers. Delayed discharge has been mentioned in connection with compulsory community orders. Members should note that, in Inverness alone, 38 patients who have been in New Craigs hospital for some time are awaiting discharge into the community. I very much welcome the increase in services in the community.

I thought that I had another hour to write this speech so I am afraid it is a bit disjointed. I apologise. I have written to the minister several times recently about the topic of the debate and I thank Margaret Ewing for bringing it to our attention. I am pleased to endorse the minister in the support that the Executive has given to the case by Highland Council for the imposition of measures to ensure access to Gatwick from Inverness. I understand that Sarah Boyack wrote to the Westminster Government on 9 October—I am sure that we all fully support that. Although it is a major aspect of Margaret Ewing's motion, the public service obligation is  only part of the equation. I am seriously concerned that, in these days of great expansion in global travel, the management, attitude, vision and ability to market that one finds at many other airports is sadly lacking at Inverness airport. Such is the disgust of many of the island authorities served by Inverness airport that Shetland Islands Council, which has bought a 26 per cent share in a shipping line, has put forward a case to run and manage Sumburgh airport in Shetland. I received a fax today from Shetland Islands Council that highlights many of the serious concerns about the management of Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd. The fax says: "We in Shetland are convinced that to create overall best value for the region and the communities that HIAL airports should be managed and directed much more by the individual needs and opportunities of the communities they are located within." The communities of Inverness and the Western Isles are mentioned. The fax goes on to say: "We think the whole question of government ownership and the HIAL management structure accountable to the executive constrains individual entrepreneurial and business acumen and it is against this background that we in Shetland are promoting to the executive the local ownership and business management of Sumburgh airport." I ask the minister to consider not simply the public service obligation but the whole management of HIAL. Does the minister feel that HIAL is doing its best to increase and market passengers and freight in the Highlands and Islands? Given that Inverness airport receives a subsidy of £16.2 million—considerably more than many other airports in Scotland—the minister should ask HIAL whether he is getting value for money. It is the luxury of the Opposition parties to keep asking for more subsidy. Until HIAL can show taxpayers in Scotland that it is providing value for money, best practice and good management, it does not deserve a larger subsidy. It is still more expensive to cross the Pentland firth than the Atlantic. It is £276 for a day return from Inverness to Kirkwall and—as I discovered last week when I was looking at flights on the internet—a return to Los Angeles is £240. When I was in Orkney last week, a businessman told me that a day return from Kirkwall to Stornoway is £600. Margaret Ewing's motion is crucial. I fully support the approach of the minister and Highland Council, and the public service obligation for the Inverness-Gatwick link, but I would like the minister to consider the whole structure of HIAL.

Yes, indeed, but my point is that it is a matter for the airlines in negotiation with the management.

Given that the length of stay for many patients is substantially extended by hospital-acquired infections—such patients take up more than 10 per cent of NHS beds in Scotland—will the minister ensure that measures are taken to reduce such infections and, consequently, length of stays in hospital?

I am grateful to Cathie Craigie for the opportunity to discuss this subject. In the first two and a half years of the Parliament, much of the Health and Community Care Committee's deliberations have centred on the needs of the elderly. It has been a particular privilege to be part of that exciting process. I note that, according to an Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia press release issued on 20 September, Susan Deacon said that the health service is giving more help and support to this area and that a range of measures, from extra money to extra care and short breaks, is already in place. We constantly hear about the levels of funding that have been allocated to social work and the national health service and the expansion of services, but access to them diminishes almost daily. The Scottish community care statistics for 2000 show that the number of elderly people seen by a health visitor in the 12 months from 1999 to 2000 fell by 34,400. In the same year, the number of elderly clients seen by a nurse fell by 13,300. In the three years from 1997 to 2000, the net expenditure on all community care fell by £45 million and from 1998 to 2000, the decrease in home care clients was more than 9,000. I would like to think that the extra money mentioned in the press release—I do not doubt the commitment—is being spent wisely. We can measure that only by the number of people who benefit. Almost 35,000 people who have Alzheimer's live at home—the statistics are quite fearsome—as they need more community-based services. In the Highlands—the region that has benefited most from Arbuthnott funding—the respite care that is  offered to people with dementia at Migdale hospital in Bonar Bridge is being reduced from six to four weeks a year. That is the example that I know of. The situation may be the same in all community hospitals. I do not know what is happening in the rest of Scotland. The reason that Alzheimer Scotland was given for that reduction is bedblocking. After two and a half years of the Scottish Parliament, 169 beds in the Inverness area are still blocked. Unless we sort that out, the elderly will suffer and we will not be able to offer them the resources they need. The Woodlands Centre in Inverness is a day centre for people with Alzheimer's. I have visited it several times. It is much valued by sufferers, their carers and their families. The real cost per hour for that non-profit-making centre, which allows almost one-to-one care, is £8.51, yet the social work department will pay no more than £7.41. Moreover, we are told that, like other social work payments, it is under review. That review is still continuing after 12 months. Two weeks ago, two sisters whose mother had Alzheimer's phoned me. She was taken into a Church of Scotland home. They were told that the social work department had no money and that their mother would be delivered to their doorstep in a taxi on Friday. They said, "We will be out. We are not looking after her any more." They did not feel good about that, but it was the only way in which they could force the social work department to address funding. I accept the points that have been made about postcode prescribing, and I hope that something will be done through the HTBS. I would further welcome the vaccine that is being developed to help prevent the onset of Alzheimer's. Although it is in only the early stages of assessment, it is an exciting prospect.

Having survived a recent experience driving up the A9, I ask the minister whether she will consider creating opportunities for overtaking on the 45-mile stretch of the A9 between Dalwhinnie and the Slochd summit. I have written to her several times on that issue. There is no opportunity for overtaking on that stretch.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I feel quite angry at Mike Russell's speech. Given that he suggests that Irene McGugan is isolated in bringing honesty to the committee, is he implying that the others are not honest? He should withdraw that comment—[ Interruption. ]

Although in some areas there is great investment, in many areas the facilities are withering on the vine. I ask that throughout the debate we do not limit consideration of sport to schools, but focus on community education as well.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Thank you for your good wishes, Sir David. I appreciate the good wishes that have been sent by members from all sides of chamber. To ask the Scottish Executive how many people are currently on NHS patient waiting lists. (S1O-3878)

That figure is about 13,000 higher than it was when the Parliament began. I understand that some of the NHS underspend came from resources that were allocated to alleviate bedblocking. With patients unable to leave hospital and other patients unable to get into  hospital for surgery, how will the minister ensure that councils give patients the care that they need and allow hospitals to do the job that they want to do?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many people in Scotland are currently registered on methadone programmes for drug users. (S1O-3790)

Given that it was confirmed in a written answer that methadone is more addictive than heroin, will the minister offer methadone users alternatives such as residential detox, rehabilitation and support measures that focus more directly on patient care?

Both the Sutherland commission and the Health and Community Care Committee recommended a single budget for care in the community. Why has that recommendation not been accepted?

Will the minister give way?

I should point out that I did not connect tuberculosis patients with privatisation. I was speaking in the context of the European Court of Justice ruling.

Will Stewart Stevenson give way?

Had the member packed it himself?

It is unfortunate that Shona Robison did not deal with improving patient care, but concentrated on the outdated assumption that only state monopolies work. SNP members would be better spending their time in Dundee today, because their contribution to the debate has been zero. I say to Margaret Smith, my colleague on the Health and Community Care Committee, that she can continue to quote Ann Widdecombe, Liam Fox and whoever, but she does not realise that in the Conservative party, Scottish health policy is devolved to members of the Scottish Parliament. Perhaps policy is not devolved in Margaret Smith's party or the Labour party. If she wishes to quote members of the health team in the Scottish Conservative party, we will take responsibility for those comments.

No. We all agree that health care has moved to new  ground. I will start by briefly considering the European Court of Justice ruling that patients can challenge their health authorities to obtain treatment abroad if that cannot be provided domestically in an acceptable time scale. In Germany, any wait for treatment of more than four weeks is considered too long, and in France, any wait of more than two months is unacceptable, yet in the UK, six months is the norm. Many patients in Scotland would be delighted to see a consultant within six months, let alone to wait six months for treatment. The idea of patients going abroad is not new. I would like to claim that it was a Tory idea, but in 1951, the Labour Scottish Office minister Peggy Herbison organised a scheme for patients with pulmonary tuberculosis to be treated in Switzerland. Seventy patients from Edinburgh—more appropriately known as Auld Reekie at the time—were flown out to Switzerland and joined later by patients from Glasgow. In 1951, Labour recognised that what mattered was what worked. I would like to correct what Margaret Smith said about the Department of Health's concordat, by Alan Milburn, with the private and voluntary health care sector, which sets out a partnership approach that enables NHS patients in England to be treated free in the private and voluntary health care sector. The concordat says: "The key test" for this relationship "is that it must represent good value for money for the tax payer and assure high standards of care for the patient." In Scotland, are we saying that we do not endorse those key tests? Is politics in the Scottish Parliament overwhelmed by ideology?

I thank Dorothy-Grace Elder for her contribution. The national health service also found the best care for patients by sending them abroad. Can we be absolutely clear about the new definition of waiting time? The British Medical Association suggested that the definition of waiting time should be the time from referral by the general practitioner until treatment. Will the minister confirm whether the new definition of  waiting time is the time taken from being put on a list following the patient's appointment with the consultant or the time taken to wait to see a consultant? If we are to have an honest debate about waiting times and waiting lists, we need to be clear about the definition. Some waiting lists are closed, including the list for the communications clinic at Raigmore hospital in Inverness. That clinic is where the diagnosis of autism and other disorders—

What matters is what works. The SNP misleads members when it talks about hospital-acquired infections. Can Shona Robison prove that hospitals that are run by private contractors have lower, or higher, hospital-acquired infections than those in the public sector? We all need to hear that information.

My mother was in a hospital in Dundee that is run by an in-house contractor. That hospital was far from clean. I will wind up with a final point—

I want to mention the case of   Alec Grant, a patient who has spent three years being assessed and diagnosed inappropriately. He saw a doctor again yesterday, but he has to wait until December to get on a waiting list—

He will have to wait a year. If the Executive does not reduce waiting times, clean up hospitals, unblock beds and give patients appropriate care, the money will follow the patient to Germany, France and other countries.

Will the member give way?

Research confirms that, generally speaking, the most affluent men have a shorter lifespan than the least affluent women. Would Tommy Sheridan comment on that?

I am very pleased that the debate is being held in men's health week, and thank the business managers for rescheduling it for today. I hope that those who are not in the chamber and those who are watching the debate via the webcast will have their say in the internet chatroom, as this is undoubtedly an enormously complex issue. There is no doubt that the women's movement has accomplished much in recent years. Women have succeeded in the battle for scarce resources, partly due to sheer power, and partly thanks to biology. Women visit their doctors regularly to talk about periods, family planning, pregnancy, birth and the menopause, alongside other medical problems. It has been said that "the whole system from birth to the grave does not allow men to be vulnerable or weak". We need to overcome that laddish culture, where it is seen to be "vulnerable or weak" to talk about physical and mental problems, and we need to encourage more open dialogue between men and their health professionals. This debate is unlikely to solve such complex issues, but I hope that it will help to raise awareness during men's health week. I would like to commend Kenny Gibson on the excellent work that he has done in highlighting male suicides. I also commend Maureen Macmillan's work on  prostate cancer. Both issues are hugely important to men's health. I hope members will bear with me while I mention some statistics. The life expectancy for men is 74, but for women it is 79. Even in 2021, men will be able to expect to live, on average, five years fewer than women. An important statistic that I noted is that even the most affluent man has a shorter life expectancy than the least affluent woman. More men die from cancer, cardiovascular disease and HIV than women. In education, the percentage of boys who achieve three highers or more is 8 percentage points lower than the percentage of girls. A 1998 national health service survey found that 20 per cent more young women than young men visited their doctor. Men tend to access their doctor when a crisis point has been reached. Often, men spend more time worrying about a problem than gaining medical advice for it. Men tend to ignore symptoms of illness or delay seeking medical attention—the largest percentage prefer to treat themselves. One in four men tolerate symptoms, hoping that they will go away. When men do go to the doctor, the average consultation time is much shorter than it is for women. Visiting the dentist takes a similar pattern: 14 per cent more women than men regularly attend the dentist. The most horrifying statistic relates to suicide. Men are three times more likely to commit suicide than women. Last year in the Highlands, out of 39 suicides, 36 were by men. I commend the work of the 1997 Scottish needs assessment programme—SNAP—report on suicidal behaviour among young adults. I hope that the minister will refer to acceptance of the report and undertaking its recommendations. A British Medical Journal report points out that men use more lethal and violent suicide methods than do women. That is thought to contribute to the higher rate of suicide among men. Prisons are more than 90 per cent male. Homeless hostels are predominantly male. The only places that I have visited—as a member of the Health and Community Care Committee—where women outnumber men are care homes for the elderly, where it is often a case of spot the male. I visited two care homes in Shetland during the recess. One was a home for 36 people that had only one male resident and the other had no male residents at all. In the best traditions of the Executive, I undertook my own consultation exercise and visited Inverness prison, where prisoners were offered a health check. At first there was much apprehension, but after the first group visited the nurse and reported back to the other prisoners, there was greater demand for the service. Some  of the prisoners' responses were interesting. One said, "Men think they can deal with problems themselves." Another said, "If I am thinking of doing myself in I'll go to the doctor." Even then the same prisoner told us that he would be put in an observation cell, which would only make him feel worse. He compared that treatment to the treatment given to female prisoners at Cornton Vale. I do not mean to take anything away from the female prisoners at Cornton Vale, but we should perhaps consider giving the same compassionate treatment to men as we do to women. A recent conference on men's health in the Highlands highlighted the many barriers to health care, such as tough guy images, a lack of political will to target men's health, inadequate services and general practitioners being too busy. Many men spoke of their fear, embarrassment and low self-esteem, their reluctance to admit fallibility, the difficulty in admitting that there is a problem, the fear of having a serious disease and the fear of discussing personal issues with strangers. How can we alleviate or eliminate those problems? There are no easy answers. I hope that we can improve education in men's health and I hope that we can make doctors' waiting rooms and surgeries more male-friendly. Should we, for example, consider walk-in MOTs for men, especially in relation to chlamydia? I read that men tend to take more care of their cars than their own health. We must encourage men to seek medical advice when they are healthy. Sixteen per cent more women than men attend doctors for preventive care. We must overcome the macho culture towards illness and we need to understand and address the embarrassment and stigma that are associated with seeking advice and help. We need more understanding of and education about health issues, symptoms and problems. It is obvious from reading about men's health issues that the health care system has to target men, encourage them to attend doctors, and provide a more male-friendly environment. Perhaps we should consider taking health care to men, for example to job centres, workplaces, sports clubs, pubs, football clubs and even men's toilets. Undoubtedly, there is a need for a multi-agency approach, especially in relation to integrating mental health services. In conclusion, too many men die early, too many die when it could have been prevented, and too many die at their own hand. There has to be a culture change, so that there is an improvement in preventive care, and so that there are moves to ensure that the health care system is best fitted to cope. Do we expect too much of men, or do men expect too much of themselves?

Given the limited time available to Opposition MSPs to examine the Executive's legislative programme, I will refer to the two pieces of health legislation. The Conservatives welcome the mental health bill and give it broad support. There is no doubt that the rights of people who use the mental health services need to be strengthened. I am also concerned about an issue that is not in the bill and is almost impossible to write into a bill. I commend Adam Ingram for raising the topic. For too long, mental health has been the Cinderella of the health service. We welcome moves to embrace mental health issues, to reduce the stigma relating to mental illness and to support the families of those with mental illness. None of that could happen unless professionals are equipped not only with the legal tools for the job—as the First Minister said—but with the respect and dignity that all patients deserve when undergoing all forms of care and treatment in the NHS. I use that as an example because of the bad experience in Inverness last week. MSPs from all parties can send out a clear signal that people with mental illness deserve the same care and treatment as other patients within  the NHS. I hope that the mental health bill will provide an opportunity for members to work together in a less adversarial and more consensual manner. Mental health is one area of the NHS that needs our attention and compassion. On the community care and health bill, the First Minister said that he is on track to deliver a commitment to and is preparing for the implementation of free personal care and free nursing care. When I spoke to the health department today, the care development group, which was to decide on the definition of personal care, had still not reported. I understand, however, that we are likely to get a report next week. The Conservatives fully support the principle that people with dementia, or who have had a stroke or are frail and elderly, should have their care in old age paid for, as do people with cancer and heart disease. For that reason, the Conservatives fully embrace and support the proposed bill. On free personal care and free nursing care, I refer members to the report "With Respect to Old Age: Long Term Care—Rights and Responsibilities" by the Royal Commission on Long Term Care for the Elderly, chaired by Professor Sir Stewart Sutherland. I remind the chamber that every debate we have had on that issue has been based on the definition of personal care that is set out in the commission's report. If that definition is about to change, the whole debate will change. As Stewart Sutherland said last year, the haggling will be over the definition. I will not read out to members all six of the principles that are included in the definition, but I will quote from page 67 of the commission's report. It states that personal care "falls within the internationally recognised definition of nursing, but may be delivered by many people who are not nurses, in particular by care assistants employed by social services departments or agencies." That is at the heart of free personal care. I, along with many people throughout Scotland, would be desperately sad were we to abandon the commission's definition of personal care, which has been the basis of discussion of the issue both in the Health and Community Care Committee and in the Parliament as a whole. I ask the Executive when it comes forward next week with a new definition of personal care to embrace that set out in the Sutherland report. That is what it must do if it wants to have the full support of Conservative and, I hope, other members of this Parliament.

I, too, would like to thank Annabel Goldie for initiating this debate. Like her, I can barely pronounce the condition, let alone understand it—and even less spell it. It is a great advantage that the Parliament is able to raise awareness of such conditions. I was quite concerned when I examined the potential impact of the condition on fertility. That is part of a much larger issue, which I hope the Parliament will address in future.

The passion with which Elaine Smith speaks on this subject has been mentioned. I advise her that women from Wick and Skye in the Highland Health Board area must spend a lot of time travelling, at great expense, to Aberdeen for treatment. Perhaps we could agree to hold a debate on that issue. Annabel Goldie's motion led me to an extremely helpful website: ScotEndo, which was set up by Susan and Sandra. I also learned that there is an endometriosis awareness day on 4 July. The ScotEndo website is a wonderful source of information on the causes and treatment of endometriosis. The website shares information and provides guidance and tremendous support to women. I was unaware of the condition until I prepared for the debate. Some figures show that 2 million women in the United Kingdom suffer from endometriosis. Whichever figures are correct, it is likely that around 200,000 women in Scotland are affected. I share the concern about the average time taken to diagnose the condition. As Kenny  Gibson said, one cannot consider treatment until diagnosis has been made, yet in Scotland it can take seven years from the onset of symptoms to diagnosis, compared with six months in England. That is quite unacceptable. I hope that the minister will give an update on Susan Deacon's written answer of 11 December 2000. Given that there are four projects in Scotland—one is supported by the health department's chief scientist office—I hope that some of that research has been concluded and that we are moving towards Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guidelines and the kind of protocol that Annabel Goldie asked for, which will enable better diagnosis. I will conclude with a quotation from the website: "Endometriosis is not an infection. Endometriosis is not contagious. Endometriosis is not cancer." The debate has been highly informative and I look forward to hearing the minister's response.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am delighted to contribute to the debate. The new opportunities fund was launched on 29 January 1999. It required a change in legislation to allow the use of lottery funding for health and education. As colleagues have said, the Conservatives always welcome additional funding for the NHS and education. However, I would like to express the concerns of a Labour MP, who contributed to the original debate on the National Lottery etc Bill in the House of Commons in 1993. That member said: "The reservation that I and many of my hon. Friends have is that the revenue will not supplement Government  expenditure, but will supplant it. It will be used as a source of revenue to pay for things that could and should come from general taxation. That is the real fear."—[ Official Report, House of Commons, 28 April 1993; Vol 223, c 1122.] I listened to my colleague David Mundell's speech about cycle paths that are financed for the short term, but which lack revenue for care and maintenance in the long term. Lottery funding can be used for the prevention, detection, diagnosis and treatment of cancer, coronary heart disease and strokes, and to improve the provision of associated support and information services. It can be used to improve the provision of palliative care, of the support and information services that are associated with such care, and of counselling services. It is one thing to build a cycle path and not maintain it, but to raise expectations and fund services, such as the health services that I listed, without offering secure long-term funding is cruel and misleading. As Linda Fabiani mentioned, spending on lottery tickets is volatile, which is evident in this week's announcement of lower funds for good causes. Many people in Scotland are concerned that Government spending on core services in the national health service is being replaced by lottery spending. For example, public health spending is a major priority in Scotland, yet the core network of healthy living centres is funded by the lottery. Cancer is one of the three top clinical priorities, yet programmes for cancer prevention, treatment and palliative care are funded by the lottery. As an ex-lecturer, I am aware that information and communication technology training for teachers, school librarians and public library staff is funded by the lottery. Like other members, I welcomed Peter Peacock's initiatives on out-of-school-hours activities, but I did not hear him say that they would be funded by the lottery. I would like there to be more honesty, and I would like an assurance that the services will exist in the longer term. The problem of service sustainability was raised by Tessa Baring, a member of the National Lottery Charities Board, who—according to Derek Wyatt MP—argued in Lottery Monitor  "that many people in the voluntary sector feel dismayed by the creation of the new opportunities fund, which they consider to be breaching the principles of arm's length and additionality ... The Department for Culture, Media and Sport published a consultation paper in November 1998 outlining three initiatives. One initiative concerned cancer care."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , Westminster Hall, 11 April 2000; Vol 348, c 2WH.] The then Minister for Tourism, Film and Broadcasting responded: "As with all lottery funding, the new opportunities fund supports only initiatives additional to those funded from  taxation."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , Westminster Hall, 11 April 2000; Vol 348, c 8WH.] My question is, how additional is the funding? Is it pound for pound, or are we seeing creeping and increasing lottery funding, which will do what the Labour member whom I quoted suggested in 1993, and supplant rather than supplement Government funding? When it announces new money and new initiatives, will the Executive be honest and state what is to be funded in the long term from general taxation and what is funded by the lottery?

Will the work and findings of the Scottish Advisory Committee on Alcohol Misuse be included in the current Health Technology Board for Scotland appraisal of alcohol intervention?

I share Donald Gorrie's view that the problem is identifying young carers, of whom around 6,000 have been identified in Scotland. The "Strategy for Carers in Scotland", which was published in November 1999, contains excellent commitments to young carers. When the minister  sums up the debate, I ask him to give us an update on the proposal to introduce "legislation to enable carers under 16 to have for the first time a direct assessment of their needs" and the further commitment that local authorities are "to pay particular attention to young carers' services." A further proposal from the carers' strategy, which Donald Gorrie mentioned, was that the Executive was to "work up proposals for research on what support is available to young carers in Scotland and what guidance is needed for professionals in health, education and social care. The strategy also mentioned schools. While the strategy's commitments and proposals are first class, we would have expected some progress on them after 18 months. Eighty-six per cent of young carers are of compulsory school age and one in five of those children misses school regularly because of their responsibilities. Lateness for school, tiredness and missing school can lead to underachievement. We should not consider only the problems of school-age children, as their problems are likely to stay with them throughout their lives. As others have said, young carers can become isolated from their peers and may experience emotional problems such as stress, depression and the feeling that they have no control over their life or environment. I have served on the Health and Community Care Committee for two years, during which we have examined care in the community for the mentally ill, the disabled and the elderly. We have complained a lot about councils failing to meet needs but, having done some reading for the debate, I was suddenly made aware of the fact that while some needs can be identified, we should be concerned about the needs that cannot be measured. I became aware that a level of responsibility that would be difficult for an adult to undertake mars the childhood of young carers. The problems of someone with a physical difficulty are evident—it is easier to assess their needs and for support groups, doctors, nurses and social workers to meet those needs. When I was reading up on the issues that surround this subject, I learned that the most serious problems are those of children who care for parents with drug and alcohol problems. Not only are those problems immeasurable, they are exacerbated by the household debts that can arise when a parent's addiction becomes the household's main financial priority. I do not understand drug and alcohol problems and I do not know how I would cope in such a situation, but we expect children to cope with adults who can  change from being loving parents to being violent and aggressive in a short period of time. It is little wonder that the lives of young carers can be muddled, confused and unstable, which can result in children becoming ill-equipped for relationships in adulthood. Many children are drawn into the world of illegal drugs before they have any understanding of what that world is all about. All they have is a willingness to tend to their parents' needs to get the love and security they seek, while their parents offer little or no guidance or support in the early years. When the minister sums up the debate, I ask him to consider the problems of drug and alcohol abuse, rather than the needs that can—or cannot—be measured, or the availability of access to the internet or NHS helplines. When someone presents at a GP surgery with alcohol or methadone addiction problems, we should also take into account the children in their household.

Will the minister also encourage the development  of improved telecommunications in NHS Direct call centres in the Highlands and Islands? Will he support Highlands and Islands Enterprise's bid to have those call centres located around Caithness, Sutherland and Inverness? Will he further ensure that there will be no displacement of nurses to man those call centres?

To ask the First Minister whether an inquiry will be carried out into the use of children's bones without parental consent for research into nuclear radiation in the 1960s. (S1F-1161)

I appreciate the First Minister's answer. Does the First Minister share my concern that 2,100 femurs and bone samples were taken without parental consent? Does he support the inclusion of that information in Professor McLean's inquiry? Obviously, he does. Is he concerned that Professor McLean was unaware of the issue? Will he guarantee that the practice will not happen again? Will he confirm whether any other human studies have been carried out under the Atomic Energy Act 1954?

The minister said that we should be interested in people rather than statistics; in two years as a member of the Parliament, I have never met an MSP who is not interested in people. No party has a monopoly on caring. We were interested in the statistics, which were given in September 2000, of £350 million to be made available for the free installation of central heating, which would benefit 70,000 pensioners and 71,000 tenants. We were also interested to hear that elderly people would save £550 annually on heating bills. The scheme would have been an excellent example of joined-up government, which would have improved the health of the elderly, reduced winter deaths and reduced pressures on the health service. It is well known that poor heating and damp houses exacerbate arthritic conditions and chronic health problems, both of which are far more prevalent in the elderly. Against that background, the Scottish Conservatives broadly welcomed the Executive's central heating initiative. The initial hope raised by the initiative was that all houses with inadequate heating would qualify. However, as Fiona Hyslop mentioned, Highland Council has written to the Scottish Executive to describe the scheme as a cruel deception, because the criteria were set far too low. Of Highland Council's total housing stock of 17,000, only four houses qualify under the scheme's eligibility criteria. We are not being negative. We are not carping. We are not being critical. We simply want the expectations that have been raised to be met. That is a fair and honest assessment. In Highland Council, 1,700 homes are due to have deficient heating systems replaced or upgraded, but still only four would qualify under this initiative. I understand that the Scottish Executive is requesting information from councils in Scotland on homes with deficient and inadequate central heating systems. This may be reading between the lines, but when the minister says that she is extending eligibility for heating and accelerating the programme, I hope that she will reconsider the tight-fisted, grudging and half-hearted announcement of last year.

I am in my last seconds. I welcome the minister's promise to extend eligibility and accelerate the programme, but I must ask why a categorical announcement was made that 140,000 households would benefit when, in Highland, out of 17,000 households, only four would benefit.

One of the most telling phrases that Karen Whitefield used was "heading in the right direction". I agree that we are heading in the right direction but, as other members have said, we still have a long way to go. Many of the points that I wanted to make have already been made, but I draw the minister's attention to the issue of technology. It seems odd that, in this day and age, Raigmore hospital in  Inverness should be involved in a scheme called the electronic communication initiative—ECI. That is a pilot study in which the hospital notifies general practitioners about the needs of their patients when discharged from hospital. I find it incredible that, in 2001, with access to the world wide web, we are still running pilot studies on acute hospitals talking to GPs. Nevertheless, I welcome that pilot study and I hope that it will be rolled out across Scotland quickly, because many GPs in the Highlands have informed me that they and their staff spend a long time on the telephone trying to find out why a patient was discharged, what their needs are and what drugs and help they are supposed to have. Meanwhile, the carer is sitting in the surgery, wondering what they are supposed to do. We are heading in the right direction but we recognise that we have a long way to go. Margaret Ewing mentioned social security benefits. Recently, a carer's daughter was taken into hospital; the carer told me that not only had her daughter lost her independent living fund—I am not too familiar with such benefits—but that, when she was discharged, she was unable to get that benefit back because she was not purchasing enough care. In addition, she was not allowed to attend her day care centre because of her medication. That was a learning curve for me. I discovered that the energies that should have been spent on caring were spent on bureaucracy and administration. Such situations also arise for elderly people. If an elderly patient is in hospital for a certain period of time but then goes home, they lose benefits and have to go through that bureaucratic system again. They also go to the end of the queue for home care assessments and benefits, which were all in place before they went into hospital. Malcolm Chisholm, the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, is chair of the care development group and, on the theme of heading in the right direction, I look forward not just to the group's definition of personal care but to the minister's commitment to the recommendation of both Sir Stewart Sutherland and the Health and Community Care Committee that there should be a single budget, a single point of entry and a single management system for people who leave hospital and who are cared for. Most members talked about carers, but I would also like to speak about respite care. The idea seems to be that when respite care is set up, everything is all right. However, many carers worry about whether the respite care is appropriate or up to standard. Respite care must be appropriate. The debate brought to my mind a recent case from Kingussie that Fergus Ewing will know well. A  carer's husband is in hospital and, therefore, in care. However, the carer spends most of her day visiting him. She has a 40-mile journey each way, with a further bus journey. That journey leaves the carer more concerned and traumatised. The carers strategy, which the Executive produced in November 1999, promised that an national health service helpline would be set up in spring 2000 to provide information and access to social services and support for carers. I ask the minister to confirm that that helpline has been set up. I hope that it has; perhaps I have missed it. I commend Karen Whitefield for her commitment to carers and for helping to raise awareness of caring and carers' needs. I hope that we can continue to head in the right direction.

Like my colleagues, I would like to thank the clerks to the Health and Community Care Committee, along with the other members of the committee. There is no doubt that this bill will raise standards of care. It will ensure consistent standards of care and will help to bring dignity and respect to people dependent on care. The progress of the bill at stage 2 was an example of committee working at its best. It was enhanced by the minister's willingness to acknowledge concerns that were raised by the committee and by individual members of the committee, irrespective of their party loyalties, and his willingness to take on board the evidence and submissions from the many organisations that gave evidence to the committee. The Scottish Conservative party welcomes the  bill, which will provide a national system for the regulation of care, early education services and the social services work force. We also welcome the minister's and the Executive's acceptance of the many amendments, suggestions and points of clarification that have strengthened the bill. We endorse the fact that the provision of care by local authorities will be registered and inspected to the same level as provision in the private and voluntary sector, and we welcome the independence of the Scottish commission for the regulation of care. Like my colleagues in other parties, I have concerns over the level of funding and its potential impact on care services: not only a potential reduction in care services, but the harm that it may do to the diversity and subsequent choice of care services. I remain concerned that there is not a system for the scrutiny of contracts and referrals from local government, but I look forward to ensuring that that will be addressed in the forthcoming bills that were mentioned by the minister this morning. I understand that that issue may be examined by the care development group that is considering the long-term care of the elderly, but that group will not address the concerns that have been raised by the Scottish Association for Mental Health and Capability Scotland. We can only accept in good faith that the minister will ensure that future regulations will address the issues of openness, fairness, transparency and accountability in relation to local government. If the budget deliberations of the Health and Community Care Committee and the director of finance of the Scottish health department cannot unravel the spending of councils on care in the community, I wonder how ordinary voters will be able to hold councils to account for their commitment to spending on the elderly, those with mental illness and the disabled, as was mentioned by John McAllion this morning. Given the fact that many of the contentious issues regarding fees and the provision of care will be addressed in the regulations, I ask the minister for an assurance that the Health and Community Care Committee will be given the opportunity to scrutinise future proposals. The Scottish Conservatives welcome and support the motion to pass the bill.

I will speak to amendment 59 to highlight the fact that fostering and adoption were discussed during stage 2. Will the minister consider bringing the 2,200 fostering households within the scope of the bill for the purposes of registration? Childminders are registered, although they care for children for far shorter periods than foster carers. Members received a note from the National Foster Care Association, which asks for foster carers to be considered. I do not know whether this is the appropriate point for such consideration to be given, but foster carers should be taken into account when statutory instruments are made under the bill.

I have two points to make. First, given the fact that the Executive has allocated millions of pounds to resolve the problem of delayed discharges, is the minister not disappointed that today, after several months, around 3,000 people who should be funded by local authorities and cared for in the community are still in hospitals? Secondly, will the minister assure me that the care development group will consider not only care of the elderly? Am I right to assume that there will be openness, fairness and transparency in local government contracts not only for care of the elderly but for care of the mentally ill and the disabled?

I welcome the statement of the general principles, and I particularly welcome the principles relating to the safety and welfare of all persons, the diversity of the provision of care services and the element of choice, which Christine Grahame talked about. Those are important principles. Given that much of the work of the bill will be done by regulations that will be considered at a later date, I hope that those regulations will take account of the general principles and will not contradict them.

Does Donald Gorrie agree that it is very difficult for care providers such as the Church of Scotland—which Richard Simpson mentioned this morning—to maintain the same wage levels and staff conditions as council homes, given that they receive half the funding per care bed that council homes receive?

I also commend Richard Simpson on his speech, and especially on his passion and commitment to care services. He moved the amendment to introduce section 24A at stage 2 with the majority support of the committee. Section 24A addresses major concerns about the provision of care throughout Scotland. Richard Simpson's amendment, which introduced section 24A, was supported by the Scottish Association for Mental Health, Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia, Capability Scotland, the Richmond Fellowship, Penumbra and many other care providers in Scotland. In the points that I will make, I refer to the document that Community Care Providers Scotland produced for the stage 3 debate.

Community Care Providers Scotland has certainly not notified me or my  colleagues that it has accepted the amendment. Perhaps I am a couple of days behind. Richard Simpson has outlined a basic principle: it is important that the Parliament addresses it. Voluntary organisations are concerned because the link between standard setting and funding will be severed. They will have the impossible task of having to meet new, high standards set by the commission while dealing with zero inflation budgets, and sometimes funding cuts, imposed by local authorities. Despite the minister's comments this morning about increased funding for local government, it has come to the attention of the Health and Community Care Committee time and again that the increases in funding are not always passed on to the care providers. In our budget deliberations, we could not get information on the provision of community care within local councils. Sir Stewart Sutherland said that local authorities do not always spend the money on care of the elderly. They may spend it on other aspects of social work, but the Parliament has no guarantee or mechanism to ensure that, if we give local government more money to care for the elderly, the mentally ill, the disabled and those with learning disabilities, the money will address the care needs. As Richard Simpson said, voluntary organisations do not have profit margins that they can use to absorb the extra costs that new standards will involve, and when they are left with a funding gap, staff pay and conditions are generally the first casualty. The main point is that, according to section 24A, in cases where the provider fails to meet standards purely as a result of inadequate funding by local authorities, the commission will have the ability to examine and comment on the contract or funding arrangement. There is no doubt that quality and cost are inextricably linked. There is a need to make funding provisions and local authority contracts and referrals more open and transparent. Without section 24A, staff wages and staffing levels will be cut and many services will have to close down. Such an outcome would seriously undermine the bill's main purpose, which is to raise standards and promote excellence. More than 100 care homes closed last year and, despite Executive funding to address the issue, there are still around 3,000 delayed discharges to deal with. That situation obviously has an impact on the acute and primary care sectors. People are not receiving the appropriate level of care in the community because they are being held at far greater expense in NHS hospitals. This morning's news that Grampian care home owners will refuse to take any referrals highlights the point that care often costs twice as much in a council home as in the private and voluntary sectors. The retention of  section 24A will allow the scrutiny and transparency of council care home contracts. The council is indeed a monopoly purchaser and the level of openness and transparency to date has not been sufficient. I accept the minister's comments about the care development group, which is considering the long-term care of the elderly. However, section 24A(1)(a)(ii) says that the commission can "examine and comment on" any contract when asked by any "provider or any other interested party who has reasonable grounds for believing that there is an unequal distribution in the allocation of public funds to providers to meet similar care needs". Will the minister assure us today that the care development group—and any future bills—will examine the contracts and ensure openness, transparency and fairness? Will the group also address the issue of care of the mentally ill and disabled?

The basic principle of amendment 77 is similar to that of amendment 75. Amendment 75 was about registration; we are now discussing fees. During stage 2, the minister's reply to the question that that principle raises was that, when a care home provides another level of care, a reduced fee for one service would be appropriate. This morning, we received further reassurances on that. I welcome the reduction or the waiving of fees when a service can reasonably expect to attract only an unusually small number of clients because of its geographical location. As an MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I welcome that, particularly for remote and rural areas such as Sutherland. The minister says that the commission's decisions should not take account of the financial circumstances of any provider. I understand that we will debate that matter more fully when we debate the amendment to delete section 24A. However, surely we must take account of the fact that quality cannot be divorced from funding, costs and council referrals. With little or no increase in funding and reduced referrals, care providers cannot achieve or maintain the required standards. If a service is given only a small number of referrals because of problems of  delayed discharge, for example, will a reduced fee be appropriate? Unless the integrated provision of care is recognised, councils could put voluntary and private care providers out of business through their powers of funding and referral. Some people fear that care services will be reduced to a standardised form to suit the commission rather than the care needs of individuals. I will be consistent and refer again to the Leonard Cheshire homes' provision of care. If that organisation had to pay five fees, that would quickly lead to a reduction in, and a more standard form of, care. For example, after 2004, registration and inspection of a 40-bed care home will cost £7,000. From 2002, registration and inspection of a day care centre will cost between £1,400 and £1,800. For a home care service, the amount will be between £1,200 and £1,800. That is not to mention respite care and supported accommodation. Amendment 77 looks towards a more appropriate single fee that is based on the multiple services that are provided. The amendment would address the provision of more than two services.

The minister has responded to my concerns at both stage 1 and stage 2. Amendment 75 is about the regulation of different branches of care services. The minister has gone some way towards addressing my concerns by stating that to be separately registered a care service must be separately managed, with one person in day-to-day charge of the service and directly responsible for its quality. He has also stated that in most cases it will be clear what  constitutes an individual care service—for example every child minder, every care home and every independent clinic. The minister has further stated that when two homes are managed as one unit and staff move between them interchangeably, the commission may well agree that one registration would be appropriate. He has also said that if a local authority home care service is run as one service—with the management and decision-making powers at the centre and effective arrangements in place to ensure that management decisions get through consistently to those providing the service on the ground—again, one registration may be appropriate. For example, there could be one registration for the whole of Highland Council, covering a huge geographic area for home care services. The critical point is not who provides the service, but who manages it. Another example would be of a care home offering a day care service. The minister has stated that the commission could charge a total fee made up of the separate registration fees, but that it would have the power to waive, or reduce, the fee under section 20(3)(b). That section needs to be clearer. I can envisage lots of care providers challenging the commission to get a reduction in the fee. However, the minister has gone some way towards addressing the situation when there is more than one care provider. To be consistent, I will stick to the example of the Leonard Cheshire homes and the various other providers that I have mentioned at stage 1 and stage 2. Many providers provide residential accommodation, supported accommodation, respite care, day care and home care. That extensive choice of service, which is designed to suit various individual needs, may be managed by one person and the staff may be interchangeable. For example, some staff will do some hours of home care but the rest of their working week will be in day care or residential care. The same staff could see to the care needs of people in respite care beds. Given that that integrated service could have one manager and interchangeable staff, amendment 75 requests that where such a service "is operated and managed in an integrated manner ... a single application" can be accepted for multiple registration and inspection. People in the voluntary sector keep complaining about bureaucracy. Amendment 75 would reduce bureaucracy. It would reduce the amount of time that is spent filling in forms and it would reduce duplication. In the situations that I have been talking about, instead of 10 inspections a year, only two inspections a year would be required. A failure to endorse amendment 75 could lead to  a reduction of choice in the care services offered by the voluntary sector and other providers. Acceptance of the amendment could encourage a more diverse range of services, such as day care and home care. Eventually, individuals could increase their use of the services that were provided and would be able to move to different grades and levels of service while staying with the same provider I move amendment 75.

I am reassured by much of what the minister has said. Like many things to do with this bill, the provision is not in the bill; the devil is in the detail in memorandums and regulations. Will MSPs have the opportunity—perhaps in the Health and Community Care Committee—to examine the type of registration to which the minister referred once the Executive has produced more details?

With those assurances, I seek to withdraw amendment 75.  Amendment 75, by agreement, withdrawn.  [Amendments 18 and 19 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.]

I welcome the definitions and the minister's response to the points raised at stage 2. I wish to raise a point that I raised at stages 1 and 2. Although I accept the definition of support services in the bill, my point is one of clarification in relation to support services in hostels for homeless people, many of whom have drug and alcohol problems. Given the poor standards in many of those hostels, I would not wish vulnerable people to be denied support, assistance, advice and  counselling because the service providers could not afford to upgrade and register their premises. Those premises seem to fall outwith the categories of residential accommodation and supported accommodation, although the support given would be covered by housing support services. I understand that we are talking about a specific service, but I seek clarification that hostels for homeless people will continue to exist as such, with appropriate support services provided. I ask the minister for an example of what might be specified as "excepted accommodation", which he raised during a debate on section 21 at stage 2, in a paper entitled annexe A6. Both that paper and amendment 9 refer to "excepted accommodation in regulations". Could the minister advise us what such accommodation would be?

Given that last year eight trusts had financial deficits and that this year 13 trusts have projected year-end deficits, will the minister encourage trusts to delegate more power to health professionals such as optometrists, whose skills and training could be more fully utilised in monitoring eye care for people with diabetes? That would free up consultants to do more surgery and provide more care in hospitals.

I welcome this debate, which has been opened by a big mac and will be closed by a big mac. I usually address Susan Deacon or Malcolm Chisholm in debates. I say to Duncan McNeil that, although the Greenock Telegraph may reign supreme in Greenock, the Scottish weekly newspaper of the year is, deservedly, the Highland News . This is the second time in four years that that accolade and recognition of excellence has been conferred on the Highland News , which was chosen as the best weekly newspaper in Scotland because of its campaigning stance. One of its victories was on membership for women of the Inverness British Legion, which was described as "a notable victory". The Highland News measures, expresses and influences opinion on a range of subjects, such as fluoridation of the water supply, genetically modified crops, road deaths and Raigmore hospital accident and emergency services. Last week's issue contained a personal story from a  woman who had been raped some years ago and felt that she had to tell her story. The honesty and openness of that report was appreciated by many people who find their emotions difficult to speak about. The judges also commented on what they described as the paper's "street-fighter mentality", which persuaded it to carry the full text of a lengthy speech by the new chairman of Highlands and Islands Enterprise. The centre-page spread broke all the rules of tabloid design and outdid the broadsheets. Mike Russell mentioned Irene Oldfather's column, but I say to him that it is the ordinary things in life that are reported in local newspapers. I have lost pets as a child and as an adult and remember the grief that that brings to a family. I ask Mike Russell how he would last for a week without his glasses.

Now that Mr Russell has made his marketing pitch, I am sure that the local newspaper will weigh up whether he or Irene Oldfather is best placed to write about such matters. Further success for the Highland News came when its journalist, Catherine MacGillivray, was highly commended in the weekly news journalist of the year category of the BT Scotland media awards. Nick Hunter, the editor of Highland News , which incorporates Highland News , North Star and the Lochaber News , stated: "Apart from a great team of journalists who produce the Highland News, a lot of the credit must go to the readers. They phone with their stories, they phone with their worries, they phone when they want a wrong put right and they blow the whistle on injustice, knowing that we will investigate." So, Donald Wilson and Helen MacRae—

It did not get in touch with me to inform me of the fact, but I thank Margaret Ewing for telling me. Local newspapers in the Highlands, as many members have said, are the lifeblood of information about what is on, gossip, problems, history, arts and culture, local achievements and so on—the list is endless. I have concentrated on the Highland News because of its national success—I hope that it goes on to success in the UK finals—but journalists in other local Highland newspapers should also be recognised. For  instance, no one disputes what is written in the Inverness Courier , because it has the long-established confidence of people in Scotland. As members have said, local newspapers are not frightened to express their opinions of prospective parliamentary candidates, MPs and MSPs. The comments of the newspapers on the performance of politicians are probably worth a fair few votes. Local newspapers hold us to account and are a crucial part of the democratic process. All credit to them.

It is interesting that last week in the chamber we were espousing "breast is best". It was interesting to hear Brian Adam putting forward the great benefits of natural childbirth. My first point is on Arbuthnott funding. We have a problem, because Grampian did not do well out of that funding. I say that because the Highlands did exceptionally well. I believe that Grampian had one of the lowest settlements from Arbuthnott, which wanted increased access for all. I have serious concerns about many of the community hospitals and facilities in Grampian, because the area has undoubtedly had a poor settlement this year. Nora Radcliffe mentioned the over-medicalisation of maternity services. My children—they are not children now—are 26 and 27 years old. When they were born, we were being told in this country, "You cannot possibly have a home birth. You have to go to the acute hospital. You would put your child's life at risk otherwise." It is interesting that, at the same time, mothers in the Netherlands were being told the opposite and were being encouraged to have home births. Nora Radcliffe said that in the Netherlands, 40 per cent of women were having babies at home. I was told today that more than 60 per cent of children are born at home in the Netherlands. I lodged a written question to the Minister for Health and Community Care some time ago to ask whether NHS staff will be allocated to assist with home births, because that is the preferred option of parents. Like Nora Radcliffe, I think that we are considering parents' choice. That point has come through in the debate. Many parents would like to have that choice, provided that the appropriate services and skills are available. The Royal College of Midwives also mentioned a serious lack of consultation in the area that Nora Radcliffe referred to. It is not the first time that members of the Health and Community Care Committee have heard that. Such comments were made during our investigation into the Stobhill situation. Whenever local services are changed, reconfigured or restructured, there seem to be serious problems of lack of consultation. I understand that account was not taken of the wider catchment area or that questions were not  asked to ensure that risk assessment took place so that people were reassured about that. The distance between Insch and district hospital and Aberdeen maternity hospital is 28 miles and the distance between Huntly and Elgin is 27 miles. If Nora Radcliffe's colleague Jamie Stone were present, he might compare those distances with the 150 miles' travel that many parents will face in Caithness and Sutherland in the Highlands, given that the consultant-led service there might be reduced. Compared with that, 27 miles is almost next door. Central Aberdeenshire local health care co-operative said: "Both communities have expressed an opinion that would suggest that Insch residents would not use the Huntly facility nor would the Huntly residents use the Insch facility." That seems to be the Gordon equivalent of the Falkirk bairns not wishing to be born in Stirling. The issue is emotive. It does not matter where a patient has a hip operation or has their appendix taken out, but where children are born matters to families—it is important. I hope that whatever great clinical health guidelines are produced take account of that basic point. Women must have the information that will allow them to make informed decisions by balancing risks. I am not sure whether that information is available. I will not read out statistics, but there is something odd about the total number of bookings for Huntly and Insch. Comparison of the total bookings with the total deliveries illustrates stark figures. Why are only a quarter of children who are booked to be born in Huntly and Insch delivered in those places? Is that the parents' choice, or is the medical profession giving other advice?

I thank Elaine Smith for giving us the opportunity to contribute to this debate. At the lunch time meeting, when all the prams, babies and mothers came in, Elaine stood up and said that there would be four speakers. I thought, "You haven't got a chance," but the room was silent. When I saw the mothers in the gallery again tonight, I was struck by the evidence of how contented children are when they are breastfeeding. When she was talking about the health benefits of breastfeeding, one thing that Elaine Smith did not mention was childhood obesity. There are  serious problems with childhood obesity at the moment, and breastfeeding can be a great benefit in that regard. The other benefit is that breastfeeding helps a woman to regain her figure after pregnancy. If for no other reason, that is an additional benefit. Breastfeeding could also save the NHS millions of pounds every year, because it leads to reduced general practitioner consultations and fewer hospital admissions for chest infections and gastroenteritis. I welcome the targets set in the health plan, but the point that Karen Gillon and Elaine Smith made about choice is one that must be made. No mother should feel guilty because breastfeeding somehow does not work out. When advice is given to women by breastfeeding advocates, they should take into account a woman's feelings and experiences. No one has yet mentioned fathers. Many women feel that fathers are excluded from that closeness and bonding with the new child. When we are talking about mothers and babies, we should also take into account the father's need to bond. I was told at the lunch time meeting that the NHS is not a very sympathetic employer when women want to return to work while breastfeeding. In looking at private and other employers, it would also be quite a good idea to put our own house in order. There is an anomaly, in that millions of pounds is spent promoting breastfeeding, while at the same time the Government distributes milk tokens to poor families for the purpose of buying formula milk. The recipients of those milk tokens are usually those women whose infants most need the health benefits of breastfeeding. That is a perverse incentive that must undoubtedly be examined. There is evidence to show that fathers do not always have knowledge about infant feeding, and gaining the support of fathers in promoting breastfeeding among women in more deprived areas is absolutely crucial. When we consider what we can do, we must view the issue of infant feeding as a public health priority—I am pleased to acknowledge the health plan's contribution on that—as it has implications for future generations of Scottish children and adults. The work of the Public Health Institute of Scotland and the advertisements this week are commendable. Research has shown that of women who choose to breastfeed, almost 80 per cent give up breastfeeding before they are ready to do so, because of the lack of support. I am delighted to endorse the motion and also specifically the peer support groups, which Elaine  Smith mentioned. I met many mothers at lunch time whose babies are eight or 10 years old, but they are still working in the peer support group. I thank Elaine Smith for introducing the debate. I hope that it helps to change the attitudes of mothers and the general public.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to assist myalgic encephalomyelitis sufferers. (S1O-3454)

Does the minister accept that many of the problems of ME are due to the lack of diagnosable symptoms, which can affect care, support and treatment and assistance from benefits? What can be done to address those issues?

Tavish Scott's motion raises rural and island issues in relation to GPs. However, as a member for the Highlands and a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, I want to point out that the motion simply highlights the surface of a more deeply rooted problem, which is undoubtedly exacerbated by remote and rural issues. Tavish Scott mentioned the need for a package of measures. Top of the list should be the  inclusion of GPs in consultation, listening and working together throughout the health plan. Reading "Our National Health" is a case of spot the references to GPs. Section 9, entitled "Working together", does not even mention GPs in the list of key stakeholders. We must engage and work with our GPs. Tavish Scott mentioned the remoteness of the Highlands and the difficulties of access caused by single-track roads. I point out to Tavish Scott that that is not something new; those areas have always been remote and the problems have been there for centuries. However, the problem that we face today is new and has recently come to the attention of many members within the Highlands. NHS 24 is one of the answers, although it cannot be the whole answer. Nevertheless, I look forward to the implementation of NHS 24, which will be helpful in remote and rural areas. Recent articles in The Herald highlighted the fact that GPs are walking away from practices in Dundee, Glasgow and other cities in Scotland. The problems of recruitment and retention are not simply related to remoteness and rurality. Tavish Scott mentioned the remote and rural resource centre at Raigmore hospital. I understand that that centre is considering 200 small projects instead of concentrating on the serious projects that Tavish has raised today and on the serious pressures affecting health care and access in remote and rural areas. The real issues are more GPs, more practice nurses, more professions allied to medicine, a more accessible service and the problems with out-of-hours services. One GP commented that the activity of the centre is spread so thin as to be invisible. Tavish Scott mentioned that GPs in Shetland are retiring prematurely. That is the case throughout Scotland. In Fort William, three GPs recently retired early. That represents 25 per cent of the practitioners. At a recent meeting with GPs in Thurso, I was told that an excellent and much-respected young GP had decided that unemployment was preferable to her job as a GP. We cannot look only at GP services. In the maternity services in Caithness, the threat of downgrading puts additional stress on GPs. I have often mentioned the Arbuthnott funding. It is there to address poverty, rurality, deprivation and access to services, but not one penny has gone to GPs in Caithness, Sutherland and other parts of the Highlands. Enough has been said about Helmsdale tonight, but it is incredible that, after the doctor walked out of Dalmally, the doctor from Helmsdale found that Dalmally was preferable to the stresses and strains of working in Helmsdale. The BMA has recently remarked on the  problems of recruitment and retention. It said that 82 per cent of GPs reported that stress had increased; that 65 per cent had reported more bureaucracy; and that 76 per cent had reported that there was no sense of involvement in NHS changes. It is little wonder that all GPs in Scotland are being balloted at the end of this month, to highlight their plight and their strength of feeling over the resignation of their NHS contract by next year. Much has been said about local health care co-operatives and the previous practice of fundholding. Whatever the rights and wrongs of fundholding, we did not put anything in its place to engage with the best practice of doctors. GPs are being asked to do more and more, to provide more and more services to patients, but with less and less support. It is shocking that around 30 per cent of visits to GPs have a mental health component and that about 95 per cent of mental health care now takes place in the primary care setting. At the top of the list of measures that Tavish Scott mentioned, I would like to see partnership, consultation and working together. The despicable things that have happened between the primary health care trust and the people of Helmsdale are absolutely ridiculous. At Scottish Executive level, we should be showing that the health department engages with our GPs, to show them how consultation and working together should be done.

The report also recommends the promotion of enlightened entrepreneurship in the social services. Is that a new Scottish Executive initiative? Who will train the social workers in enlightened entrepreneurship and how will it benefit those receiving the service?

Cheese.

As the Highlands have benefited from an increase in Arbuthnott funding to address rurality, deprivation and accessibility to health services, does Jamie Stone agree that more money should be put into GP practices in Helmsdale, Lybster and Dunbeath and into the maternity services in Wick, instead of being used to pay off the financial deficit of Raigmore hospital?

In the business bulletin, amendment S1M-1896.3, in my name, contains a printing error. It should say "priority status", not "primary status". I was pleased to hear the minister talk about translating policy into practice, because a plethora of reviews and consultations have taken place. I am pleased that implementation will take place. The motion says that child health is a priority for the Scottish Executive, whose proposals are well outlined in the national health plan, which Conservatives support. It is worrying to hear from people such as Professor Phil Hanlon of the Public Health Institute Scotland, who confirmed to the Health and Community Care Committee this week that many health initiatives result in the healthy becoming healthier, but have little impact on poorer families. He said that health initiatives often widen inequalities. The challenge for members is to ensure that health initiatives have an impact on everyone. It is also worrying that the national health plan says: "The early years of development, particularly from conception to age three, influence learning, behaviour and health throughout life ... The life circumstances of the expectant mother and young child influence the chances of developing cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, obesity, cancer and mental health problems in later life."  I am shocked that so much damage can be done at such an early age. I will talk about two cases in my constituency; the most tragic cases that have affected families that I have heard of since I became a member of the Parliament. My point is about joined-up thinking. The cases involve women who were married to soldiers—one in the Black Watch and one in the Royal Highland Fusiliers. When their marriages ended, the women were thrown out of their houses. They endured a humiliating procedure of eviction through the courts. Then, they faced living in homeless hostels and bed and breakfasts. One woman—who has three children and who is waiting for a home—has been offered bed-and-breakfast accommodation in a house that she must vacate between 10 am and 5 pm every day. I mention that case to emphasise the importance of cross-departmental working and of communication with the Ministry of Defence in London. Probably the best place to start is with the maternity services review. I want to highlight fears about the downgrading of the consultant-led service at Caithness general hospital in Wick. I see Jamie Stone nodding in agreement. Although no firm proposal has been made, there is real concern in the community about the three-hour journey to Inverness on a road that is notoriously difficult in adverse weather conditions. As the Health and Community Care Minister will testify, even the air journey takes a similar time and is often not possible due to consistent fog problems at Wick airport.

I thank Jamie Stone for raising that point. I have heard serious concerns during my visits to his constituency. Health provision and services should be appropriate to the needs and rurality of an area. The unique circumstances in the north and north-west of Scotland render the area highly inaccessible. Some people have to travel more than 150 miles to Raigmore hospital in Inverness. Local general practitioners worry that they might be called to provide a service for which they feel they are not fully qualified. Not only are there serious clinical implications, there are serious safety implications, as Jamie Stone said, which worry pregnant mothers and their families. The loss of the maternity service in Wick is surrounded by further worries that that might be the thin end of the wedge and that it will lead to  losses of more children's services at the hospital. If we are to address children's health, the maternity services review should take account of the fact that the mother needs advice before, during and after the birth of the child. Children who have autistic difficulties need to be diagnosed early but, at what is a crucial time in a child's development, they may have to wait up to one year for an appointment for diagnosis. That must be addressed if such children are to be given an equal chance. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report into special educational needs, which is undoubtedly a significant piece of work, clearly says that assessment needs to be done at the earliest possible stage. The need to match the record of needs with education and support is absolutely crucial. Community schools, which have professional, multidisciplinary working, seem to address many of the problems that have been highlighted today. They bring professionals together and include children in decision making. Nonetheless, there are concerns and there is still much more to do. I am seriously concerned about the increase in chlamydia, the incidence of which almost doubled in the three years between 1997 and 2000. It is a symptomless condition that can lead to infertility. It is also worrying that the number of children who are registered with a dental service fell by 41,365 between 1997 and 1999. I understand that work is being done by the health-promoting schools unit and by the physical activities taskforce. We support the commitment that was given on children's health in the NHS plan, but we need to see the plan in action, not simply aspirations. I move amendment S1M-1896.3, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "calls upon the Scottish Executive to set out clear targets and timetabled objectives to ensure that child health is given priority status across its departments."

Are there health concerns for babies from the use of disposable nappies? I refer in particular to the product tributyl tin, known as TBT. I also ask the minister to respond to the claim, made by environmental groups, that it takes more than 200 years for a disposable nappy to decompose.

I thank Robert Brown for securing the debate, because the issue needs to be brought to the fore. It has been recognised and various MSPs have done work on it; I count myself as one of many. I asked parliamentary questions last year about the progress that was made by the joint review of section 24 of the "General Whitley Council Handbook", covering milage and travel allowances for all NHS staff. I received a reply on 27 November. I asked what further progress had been made and the reply came in a written answer on 20 April: "The Joint Review is still ongoing."—[ Official Report, Written Answers , 20 April 2001, vol 11, p 507] When I phoned the health department today, I asked when the joint review was going to conclude and make recommendations. Of course, I am not allowed to talk to officials and the person on the end of the line said that she could not say anything. I am pleased that, out of frustration at trying to do something, Robert Brown has secured today's debate. According to the Royal College of Nursing, the General Whitley Council has been considering travel within the NHS since 1988. A debate in this Parliament may be what it takes to get the General Whitley Council to do something; 13 years is rather a long time. As Nicola Sturgeon said, this should not be dealt with within the Parliament simply because there is a bureaucratic problem somewhere else. John McLaren, of the CPHVA states: "We have had a very sympathetic hearing" from MSPs, "but we would like to see warm words translated into concrete action." I say to John McLaren that I would like to see the General Whitley Council doing its job and the minister holding it to account for this unacceptable delay.  There is greater emphasis on care at home. Lee Whitehill, of the MSF, said in an e-mail that employees in trusts throughout Scotland are subject to widely varying terms and conditions. Dundee, Edinburgh and now Glasgow have parking permit schemes worked out with local authorities, but other trusts do not. Surely employees who are on the same grade and who do the same job within the NHS are entitled to the same terms and conditions. As other members have said, why would somebody choose to work in a part of Scotland where it costs them an extra £700 to £1,000 to do their job? Should not we ask that all milage rates in the public sector should be re-examined to ensure greater fairness and equity throughout the system? Several members have mentioned the agency card. If someone applies for an agency card—I know only about the Highlands, but I assume that the scheme is the same throughout Scotland— they can get one, as long as they have a business account and administration for it. It should not be an administrative problem for the NHS to endorse an agency card for community nurses. Ministers—I mean of the clergy—in the Highlands can get an agency card to buy petrol and diesel at the UK average price. I see no problem in community nurses having such a card. If one can get a petrol card to heal the sinners, surely one can get a petrol card to heal the sick.

Much is said about delayed discharges of the elderly, and we welcome what the Executive is doing, but does the minister acknowledge the problems in psychiatric hospitals? Patients must wait for four weeks to be put on a list for delayed discharge. Does the minister agree that more than 30 patients waiting in New Craigs hospital in Inverness is too many?

To ask the Scottish Executive what additional action is now being taken to assist the tourism industry. (S1O-3296)

The Crofters Union has still not signed up to "The Comeback Code", because of the issue of open grazing. Forest Enterprise still has "Keep Out" notices up, and throughout the Highlands people have downloaded "Keep Out" posters from the Highland Council website and pasted them on public rights of way. As a member of the Crofters Union, will the minister talk with that union, Forest Enterprise and Highland Council to ensure that we send a clear, unequivocal message to ministers? Furthermore, will he confirm who is responsible for keeping people off public rights of way?

Will Shona Robison give way?

When Shona Robison talks about compensation, is she talking about the 317 people in Scotland who are haemophiliacs and who contracted hepatitis C through contaminated blood, or is she including all those who were infected during routine NHS surgery and the thousands of people in Scotland who contracted  hepatitis C by other means?

The Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party welcomes the extensive Health and Community Care Committee inquiry into this issue and the Executive's commitment, in its amendment, to examine constructively the implications of the English ruling. We wish to help and support all those affected by hepatitis C. An inquiry into hepatitis C contracted from  contaminated blood has been an issue for many years. The ball started rolling in the Parliament when Brian Adam lodged motion S1M-323, which stated: "That the Parliament calls for an independent inquiry into hepatitis C and other infections of people with haemophilia contracted from contaminated blood products in Scotland." This is a cross-party issue: the first five signatories were Hugh Henry, Margaret Jamieson, Ian Jenkins, John Swinney and me. Support has since extended to include more than 70 members. I hope that, despite the fact that the debate is in SNP time, the issue will not become party political. We are examining it thoroughly and in a professional manner. The Minister for Health and Community Care carried out a fact-finding exercise. One would have thought that the facts would have been taken from the Haemophilia Society representatives who had contracted hepatitis C from contaminated blood. On 14 September 1999, the Minister for Health and Community Care promised to hold a meeting with the Haemophilia Society. To date she has refused to meet its representatives, either before her report was published or to discuss its findings. There is no doubt that that approach has led to anger and frustration, has contributed to the need for the current debate and has resulted in the Health and Community Care Committee's approach and inquiry. It took around six letters from the Health and Community Care Committee to the minister, asking for a response on hepatitis C, before the committee got a reply. The Health and Community Care Committee is currently taking evidence from the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service and the Haemophilia Society. We took evidence before Easter and we have arranged to question the minister on 23 May. The Haemophilia Society is preparing further submissions to the committee and suggests that we take further evidence. The issue is therefore live and kicking. We are in the middle of an extensive inquiry. I hope that we will not be jumped into any conclusions today, given that we have not heard the full extent of the submissions from the Haemophilia Society and from others. Because the ministerial inquiry was conducted, according to the Haemophilia Society, "behind closed doors", we have a responsibility to ensure that people have a say and can speak about their exposure to contaminated blood products. A member of the Haemophilia Society has said that the society is pleased with the conduct, manner and extent of the Health and Community Care Committee's inquiry, and stated categorically that the Haemophilia Society did not request that the SNP raise the matter in advance of the committee's conclusions. I ask all my colleagues  on the Health and Community Care Committee to be aware that today's debate was not arranged at the instigation of the Haemophilia Society. The English judgment was based on the Consumer Protection Act 1987. We should realise that most of the people whom we have seen during our inquiry contracted hepatitis C before that act came into force. We should also be mindful of the fact that it was the judiciary, rather than the Parliament, that awarded compensation in England. Nonetheless, given that the Department of Health is not to appeal the decision, there is no doubt that the Scottish Executive should, as Mr Chisholm's amendment says, "examine constructively the implications of this ruling." The Health and Community Care Committee is not only examining the petition from the Haemophilia Society; we are also responding to the petition from Thomas McKissock, which relates to infection with hepatitis C through routine surgery, although Susan Deacon did not extend her inquiry to cover that group of sufferers. I agree that we are talking about a principle rather than a figure. There are 317 people in Scotland who have been infected with hepatitis C through treatment for haemophilia. Nicola Sturgeon says that she is keeping the issue wide open, and the issue is open. The Macfarlane Trust, set up by John Major in 1990 to give financial help to people in the haemophiliac community, was established to help those who incur extra living costs arising from HIV or AIDS contracted as a result of having received contaminated blood. In 1990, we did not know as much about hepatitis C as we know today, and it is perfectly understandable that we should now re-examine the issue. I understand that the Health and Community Care Committee can recommend the setting up of a fund along the lines of the Macfarlane Trust. We cannot make that decision today—in the middle of an inquiry—but I am sure of a fair and reasonable outcome at the end of the process and I have no doubt that the committee will take account of the English court ruling.

We all want to support responsible measures to keep foot-and-mouth disease out of the Highlands and Islands and understand the difficulties of and want to provide support for tourism. I want to outline some of my concerns. There is still no access to the Black and Red Cuillins on Skye. There are keep-out notices on every gate. I also understand that Forest Enterprise has a stricter code of access than other landlords. I was told today that the Scottish Crofters Union has still not signed up to "The Comeback Code" because of open grazing in the Highlands and other concerns. As Fergus Ewing said, the flagship walk in Scotland—the west highland way—is mainly open, apart from the Tyndrum to Kinlochleven section. I ask the minister to do all in his power to ensure that the Scottish Executive rural affairs department guidelines are consistently interpreted and applied in order to send out clear signals to tourists. The Minister for Environment and Rural Development announced this morning the convening of local access forums by local authorities. Will the same principle of consistency in the interpretation of the guidelines apply to those forums?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there are any proposals to amend the referral system for care in the community placements. (S1O-3234)

I am pleased to hear that progress is being followed up. I would like to see progress. Does the minister share my concern that the current council referral system prioritises council homes, which are more expensive than those in the private and voluntary sectors? Councils rarely offer choice to patients and families, which results in fewer people receiving care and exacerbates bedblocking problems for the mentally ill and the elderly.

When I was listening to the minister earlier, I was struck by the fact that he mentioned one golden rule that should underpin all our values and principles. That provided food for thought, particularly when Ian Jenkins asked how one policy or one act of Parliament could cover the unique needs of all children. I looked through the research paper published by the Scottish Parliament information centre on 22 February 2001 on looked-after and adopted children and was struck by the values that it lists on page 29. I hope that members will not mind if I read out four of them, because together they provide one golden rule. The paper lists the following as draft adoption standards: "Right of child to grow up as part of loving family" "Child's welfare, safety, needs and views should be paramount at each stage of the adoption process" "Adoption should meet child's needs and not adults" "Children's ethic origin, cultural background, religion and language will be respected and considered when decisions are made." I am sorry that the minister has left because I would like to thank him. It is important that we look at values.

I meant the minister of religion, not the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs. [Interruption.] Frank McAveety said that the minister was divine; I did not. The values and principles that are in the SPICe document and that underpin the bill are equally important. I welcome everything that the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs said.

After Jack McConnell's speech today, I hope that he will not have to resign in the foreseeable future. I was touched by his openness and honesty in identifying the problems and by his commitment to addressing them. Children need more than care. They also have a fundamental need to be valued and to feel valued. As other members have said, we must not, by focusing on adoption, lose sight of the support and services that are available to other looked-after children, particularly in the light of some of the problems that can arise later in life. As the SPICe research note says—Ian Jenkins may have quoted this, but coming last has its problems: other members use up one's speech—foster children are 12 times more likely to leave school with no qualifications and, as Richard Simpson said, four times more likely to suffer from mental health problems. They experience such problems not just when they are in the adoptive family or in care, but throughout their lives. The problems are serious. Adoption is a lifelong opportunity for a family. It is the chance for a fresh start and, in some cases, the severing of existing family ties. Although I appreciate the need to reduce the length of time that it takes to place children with adoptive parents, it is important to balance the need for a speedy process with the necessity of making correct lifetime decisions. I am pleased that the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill will include the inspection of adoption and fostering agencies. Amendments on that were lodged only at stage 2. In the interests of joined-up government and getting the whole thing right, I hope that we will have plenty of opportunity at stage 3 to get that particular component of adoption and fostering correct. I welcome the recommendation that there should be discussion of whether adoption is an option for children who are in care for more than a year and that any decision should be recorded. The adoption panel, with agencies, should review at six-monthly intervals the progress of all children for whom adoption is planned. As Scott Barrie said, the draft standards say that a plan for permanence for each child should be made within six months. There may be reasons why fostering, and not adoption, is best. We have all been horrified by the Kilshaws and advertising on the internet, but what strikes me is that we must control our legal processes. Anyone who seeks to bring children into this country for adoption should have an approved home study  assessment by an agency that is recognised in this country. We can do little to ease the plight of children overseas, but at least those brought to this country should be assured of the protection of our authorities and of the rights to the same checks and assessments as our own people. Like many others, I ask for a commitment to some form of advocacy, befriending and support for children and parents, not only before placement but in the settling-in period and thereafter, which is when many of the problems arise. I am pleased to support the motion.

Like Marilyn Livingstone, I was a lecturer in further and higher education. How much would it cost a student to do a one-year top-up course to upgrade from an HND to a BA, for example in business studies? Would that student pay the £2,000?

I am delighted to speak in this debate about berries. Although members' business is normally consensual, I have to put on record that I am very sad to see the benches so empty. [MEMBERS: "Labour benches."] Yes, it is the Labour benches that are empty.   Given the enormous benefits to the health of Scotland and to our rural economy, it is a poor show indeed to have them empty. I had to fight with Alex Johnstone for my place in this debate. As members can see, I won. Like Irene McGugan, I was brought up in Angus. As a child growing up near Montrose, our summer holidays were all spent at the berries: first the strawberries and then the raspberries at Charleton. Little did I think, on becoming an MSP, that I would still be talking about them. The health benefits of eating berries are well documented in the North Karelia project in Finland. The evidence from that project has been brought before the Health and Community Care Committee on many occasions, as the committee seeks to address Scotland's serious public health record. As Irene McGugan said, coronary heart disease in Finland has been reduced by 50 per cent. As coronary heart disease is one of Scotland's top three clinical priorities, we undoubtedly have an enormous amount to learn from Finland. In what is a most difficult time for farmers, surely we can have joined-up government to help the nation's health and the nation's farmers. With that in mind, I submitted a written question that asked for an increase in financial incentives to farmers to invest in the production and marketing of Scottish berries. I see that there is a berry on its way to me just now. I do not mean Brian Adam—he is the one who is bringing them. The answer stated that there were no plans to increase the funding for marketing, but that there was some hope regarding production. It stated that Scottish Soft Fruit Growers Ltd's application for recognition as a producer organisation should  lead to a European Union grant of 50 per cent. I hope that the minister will update us on that application and outline and confirm the aid package. If the application has made progress, that will indeed be excellent news in these troubled times. I am being upstaged by a man with a plate of berries. Diversification to soft fruit, alongside a strong marketing campaign, would go some way to addressing the rural crisis, especially as Scotland's tonnage has dropped from 18,000 in the 1970s to around 4,000 now. In other words, we are producing around a quarter of the output that we produced in the 1970s. The first year of the Scottish berry project asks for only £150,000. That is a minimal figure compared to the problems that we have in health and the potential benefits to the rural economy. It is also a minimal figure in the overall Scottish budget. As Irene McGugan said, the WHO has recommended 400g of berries per day. We also have a crucial need for positive marketing. I would like to make a suggestion. The recent Health Education Board for Scotland advertisement for smoking cessation, which has become a hit record, reminded me, when I was researching for this speech, of Billy Connolly's song about his wellies. I am pleased to say that I will not attempt to sing it. [MEMBERS: "Aw."] I suggest to the Parliament that Mr Connolly, better dressed than he was last Saturday, could perhaps relate his song to berries. If it wisnae for the berries, where would we be? We'd be in the hospital or infirmary. Nae mair heart attacks or even surgery If we only keep eating the berries. Berries they are wonderful, berries they are grand, They are the magic cure to the health of Scotland. Now we know we have the chance to gain the health we cherish, If only we keep eating the berries. I hope that I have done my bit to raise awareness of the berry project.

My arithmetic is not so bad that I think that 129 MSPs will increase the membership of credit unions from 1 per cent of the population to 5 per cent. Does Robert Brown agree that we are in a unique position to raise awareness about, publicise, help to market, support and motivate the credit unions, as outlined in the action plan?

I am delighted to be able to declare an interest in the debate. I am a member of the Inverness Credit Union, which I joined on its launch last year. I am also delighted to have the opportunity to speak in the debate, because I am enthusiastic in my support of credit unions. When I read in the local paper last year that a credit union was to be set up in Inverness, I wrote to it to offer any support necessary. I am pleased to say that I was able to help when Christine Gower and her team seemed to be faced with addressing endless bureaucratic problems in order to gain registration with the Registry of Friendly Societies. If anyone thinks that it is an easy process, Christine would confirm that it is complex. It should be so, to ensure that it rigorously tests the ambitions and ideas that people put forward. The criteria included business planning, marketing, policies, procedures, financial forecasts, grant funding, approving the common bond and the business plan. It is, rightly, a complex matter to set up a credit union. In the move to the FSA, I hope that it will continue the rigorous checking and monitoring of applications, to ensure that they are fully thought through and have an established business plan. As a member of the Inverness Credit Union, I commend Christine Gower and her team on reaching 120 members and more than £5,000 in deposits in five months. It was Christine's persistence, encouragement and motivation of the volunteers that ensured that the credit union successfully met the criteria necessary for launch and continues to grow. Presiding Officer, I hope that you will join me in welcoming Christine Gower to the Parliament and commend her on her journey from Inverness to the Parliament in a wheelchair. [Applause.]  I welcome the key targets on page 5 of the action plan. I hope that all MSPs will join a credit union to help increase the proportion of the population who are members of a credit union from 1 per cent to 5 per cent. We are in a unique position from which to raise public awareness and understanding of credit unions. As several members have said, including Donald Gorrie and Alex Neil, there is tremendous scope to establish credit unions in remote and rural areas where banks and post offices are closing down. Not only does the principle encourage individuals to save and help themselves; it enables them to help others, it helps communities and it helps communities to help each other. A concern is that some existing credit unions  would be likely to fail the FSA requirements. That is documented on page 8 of the action plan. I am sure that the financial commitment that has been given today will give them the support that they need to address any problems. On page 19 of the action plan, a comment is made that there is strong feeling that the way funding has been distributed in the past could be more effective. By highlighting that, the action plan gives us an opportunity to ensure that funding is directed to maximise the potential of credit unions. I ask the minister whether the Executive would consider using rural post offices and community councils. Those are a unique part of our rural network and it provides wonderful local access and contact. The plan mentions 100 per cent rates relief on premises. Will that also include water rates, as they can be a significant commitment in these times? I hope that this boost to the credit unions will put paid to the perception that they are a poor man's bank. Indeed, committing to save in a credit union is an excellent way for those who can afford it to increase the size of the fund and to help others. I hope that, given Cathy Jamieson's encouragement today, every MSP will become a member of a credit union and do everything possible to encourage and support the movement.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will monitor in what ways the application of the Arbuthnott formula to health boards and trusts is being used to increase access to NHS in Scotland services. (S1O-3115)

Thank you. Given that the Arbuthnott funding was to address inequalities in access to health care, is the minister concerned that health trusts, such as Highland Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, are having to use that additional funding to reduce their financial deficit, leaving them no opportunity to address the problems that were set out by Arbuthnott in the document "Fair Shares for All"?

How will the minister ensure that local authorities pass those additional resources over to the voluntary and private sectors to enable them to pay the fees?

Will the member give way?

Although we have lodged amendment S1M-1523.1, the Scottish Conservatives welcome the broad principles of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill. We particularly welcome the principles of the bill as they were developed around and built on the proposals in the report of the working group on residential care home registration procedures, which was published in 1996 by the Conservative Government. Those proposals were pursued further in March 1999, in the white paper "Aiming for Excellence". The amendment expresses reservations about the level of charges and consequent supply of services and fits into the new procedures that were outlined by the Presiding Officer on 9 February. We lodged the amendment simply because so many organisations expressed their concerns in submissions and evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee. In addressing my amendment, I will raise the concerns of many organisations about the huge increases in registration and inspection fees and the likely impact of those increases on services and the provision of care. I hope that those concerns will be considered in the constructive way in which I will raise them. Two figures highlight the point. The first is the increase from £2,600 to £7,000 in fees for a residential care home, despite the fact, as members know, that many residential care homes are struggling to stay in existence as matters stand. The second is that day care centres, most of which are funded by voluntary and charitable organisations, will eventually pay fees of between £1,400 and £1,800. Those organisations have expressed genuine concerns that I hope the minister will address. I bring to the attention of members who are not members of the Health and Community Care Committee some of the concerns that organisations raised with the committee. In its written submission, Age Concern said: "Age Concern believes that the imposition of Fees for registering as a care provider may have a detrimental effect on the provision of services for older people, particularly if those fees were significantly high." I hear what the minister said about local  authorities increasing funding for services and I read what the financial memorandum said about COSLA, but many voluntary organisations have been on standstill budgets for some years while others have not received increases in funding that are in line with inflation. While I welcome the fact that the minister is addressing those concerns, I hope that there will be no diminution of services. Age Concern's submission continues: "In addition, we believe that any charge should relate to the size and turnover of the registered body. A flat rate fee would discriminate against smaller operations". There are many such operations in remote and rural areas. Capability Scotland said: "The unintended consequences of the additional costs could be either fewer services for people who need them or greater charitable donations from members of the public." Who should carry the financial burden of caring for the most vulnerable people in our society? Capability Scotland might find itself caught by an inability to meet the standards—which we all support—if the local authority and the health authority that purchase its service do not provide the funding that is required to raise the quality of that service. Capability Scotland also spoke about the ratio of staff to children with complex learning disabilities, which can be between 1:3 and 1:4 and requires greater funding than other services. The necessity of such a ratio may not be agreed on, so it may not be funded. The outcome of that could be that voluntary sector providers such as Capability Scotland will fill funding shortfalls through their own fundraising efforts. However, ultimately, a service provider's failure to meet the required standards could result in suspension or removal of registration. The figures that Capability Scotland has suggested are: an additional £50,000 a year for payment of fees for registration and inspection after 2004; £12,000 a year for Scottish Criminal Record Office checks; £150,000 over three years for workplace assessors for Scottish vocational qualifications at levels 2 and 3; and additional training costs.

I think that Mr Smith has said enough for today and I would rather keep my contribution positive.

Alzheimer Scotland does not pay registration fees— [Interruption.]

I will give way to Mrs Smith.

I am aware that, between the submission of evidence and today, there has been quite a bit of movement. That is why I say that the points that have been made are constructive. I am sure that there will be more movement at stage 2. Alzheimer Scotland does not pay registration fees for currently registrable services such as day care or for unregistered services such as home support, so it would attempt to add any fees that are imposed to the price local authorities are charged. If local authorities refused to increase their payments, the costs would have to be absorbed by the organisation, which would have to reduce either the number of its staff or their remuneration or conditions of service. I do not think that anyone here would want that. In Inverness, we have a centre called the Woodlands Centre for Alzheimer's patients. It is attached to a day care centre for the elderly. There seems to be confusion where two centres are side by side. Will there will be one registration fee, or will there be an additional fee because the council commissions services for Alzheimer's sufferers? I would like some clarification on that. The Community Care Providers Scotland registration fee is likely to increase by as much as 300 per cent. In evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee, Annie Gunner said: "we are ... concerned that the bill will give us more of the same ... except that the big difference is that we will pay a heck of a lot more."—[O fficial Report, Health and Community Care Committee, 7 February 2001; c 1524.] That has to be a concern, especially for very vulnerable people. The Scottish Association for Mental Health has estimated that it will need an extra £32,500. It has given evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee on the cuts in its community care service and the funding problems it faces. Community Care Providers Scotland told the committee that although the fees per bed space were £65, the increase in fees this year for registration has been 44 per cent. The fees per bed space went up from £45 to £65. That massive increase has set a precedent for future increases, which is quite horrific. Another witness from CCPS said that the increase "was intended to soften the blow and to bring registered care homes in line with nursing homes ... we now face another 45 per cent increase over the next three years"—  [O fficial Report, Health and Community Care Committee, 7 February 2001; c 1531.] Those kinds of figures are frightening to many voluntary organisations. Fees will not be a problem for local authority services as the authorities will retain £3.2 million of their current budgets for registration and inspection to retain some staff and to pay fees for regulation of the services that they provide themselves. The problem is to provide a level playing field for the private sector, the public sector and the voluntary sector. A witness from the Carers National Association told the committee that costs would rise and that somebody would have to meet them. He added that if the money did not come from increased charges, the association would have to raise it elsewhere or limit the service. I can tell the minister that these are genuine concerns. I hope that they will be addressed at the next stage of the bill. The written submission of Children 1 st to the committee said that the organisation would "be unable to absorb the costs of regulation or to secure the necessary funding to continue." It is understandable that providers should absorb some of the cost, but most voluntary organisations have minimal management structures and must budget on a shoestring. It is difficult for them to absorb additional costs without paring down their staff or the service they provide. Paragraph 162 of the financial memorandum refers to exceptions "where full cost recovery through fees runs counter to other policy objectives." Paragraph 168 states: "Expansion of childcare is a key Scottish Executive objective and is linked to employment objectives. The Scottish Executive will therefore provide a continued subsidy ... to be held to a maximum of £250 for day care providers and £50 for childminders." I fully appreciate the commitment to children, but the same commitment does not apply to the mentally ill, the disabled or the elderly, although they are included in our social inclusion package and are the most likely to be affected by reductions in service. The Leonard Cheshire homes raised another point with me, which undoubtedly needs clarification. Leonard Cheshire in Inverness has residential accommodation, a day centre, home care and flats with up to five people. It is unclear whether its home care, day care and residential care services and the flats will be registered and inspected separately. There is also a need to define respite care,  although I heard what the minister said about care in a person's home. The definition covers residential homes, but when respite care is provided in a child's own home, which is often the case for disabled children, is it a support service or a home care service? That needs to be clarified further. There must be further clarification of the definitions in section 2(5) of an independent clinic and an independent medical agency. The definition of personal care in section 2(20), debate in the chamber about which is well documented, is quite clear in the bill, but it is of concern that the care development group is currently reconsidering the definition of personal care, as that has the potential to be quite confusing. The minister mentioned the focus on quality of care and quality of life, which we, undoubtedly like the rest of the chamber, support. However, there is concern that the outcomes relating to care are difficult to find in the bill. In section 24, the only references to caring for the person are in subsection (2)(e), which states that regulations may "make provision for securing the welfare of persons provided with a care service" and in subsection (6)(a), which refers to "(i) the promotion; and (ii) the protection, of the health of the persons in question". I fully support what the minister said in her opening speech, but we ask that there be more positive emphasis not only on buildings, management structures, staff ratios, qualifications, training and registration, but on the quality of care and how it can be measured either by carers or others. More emphasis must be put on caring for the person. Section 28(8)(f) refers to "treatment using such— (i) techniques; or (ii) technology, as may be specified in the regulations." Again we are specifying treatments or technologies that should be covered by the regulations, but the concern is that we do not know which they are. I seek further clarification of that. This week, I was asked whether the "diet clinics" mentioned in paragraph 208 of the explanatory notes will include Weight Watchers and Scottish Slimmers, whose sessions are attended by thousands of people throughout Scotland every week. I do not think so, but the matter was raised with me and clarification must be given.  Finally, a distinction must be made between care homes and sheltered housing. It is not entirely clear what "supported accommodation" is. Is it hostels for the homeless? There has been much documented evidence on that recently. If support is given for drug and alcohol services—regarding which bad practice has recently been documented on television and in newspapers—it is important to make clear exactly what supported accommodation is. We have hostels for the homeless that may or may not provide some level of care. That is an important point about a vulnerable group. All the points that I have raised today I received in evidence. If Labour members do not agree with them, they are not disagreeing with me: they are disagreeing with those who gave evidence. My final point is from Children 1 st , which raised concerns about the risk to children from sex offenders who systematically target children and young people and spend time building up trust in order to abuse them in care settings. I understand from the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care that the consultation process is under way. I must ask whether we should consider the consultation process and the protection of vulnerable children in the context of this bill. Is this bill the natural place to do that, or is it wiser to legislate on that at a later date? I move amendment S1M-1523.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, expresses its reservations about the level of charges and consequential supply of services."

As a reformed rebel from the back benches, does the minister now agree with his colleague John McAllion that commissioning should be reintroduced for GPs?

An important point of clarification is needed. I understood that the minister had been quoted as saying that much of the £18.5 million over three years would be recouped, because GPs on existing contracts would opt for the new salaried contracts. Will there be 50 additional GPs or will there be changes in the contract?

Does Robert Brown share the concern of the BMA, which stated in its recent document that about 30 per cent of GP consultations have a mental health component? That highlights the point that both he and Adam Ingram have made.

rose—

I commend the member for raising the problem of chiropodists, but does he have the same concerns about opticians?

Before addressing my amendment, I would like to make a point about Nicola Sturgeon's speech. Referring to a political party as "that lot over there" is disrespectful, and does a disservice to her party and the chamber. It is time that the party that is against everything and for nothing grew up and entered the world of adult politics. Today's motion applauds the vital contribution that community-based health professionals make to the health and health care of the people of Scotland, and we fully support that. The second part of the motion affirms the commitment in the health plan to change and develop services. We cannot support vague promises and affirmations from plans, glossy brochures, strategies, focus groups, reviews and consultations until they are  translated into action, and genuine efforts are made to enable, empower, support, co-operate with and assist GPs and other professionals so that they can do the job that they are committed to doing. There is much in the health plan and in what the minister has said this morning that Conservatives totally support. I was visited by Hugh Campbell, from Tain, of the Association of Optometrists. I am delighted that the minister is now forming partnerships with optometrists and focusing on diabetic care, particularly in relation to eyes. I applaud those partnerships. I was delighted to learn in a recent written answer that the minister has given a commitment for pharmacists to support and counsel smokers and help them to quit, once prescribing comes forward. I am also delighted to hear that there will be a greater commitment to ECCI. I visited the pilot study at Raigmore hospital, where I saw how the system operated and how referrals were made instantly to the consultant. Papers were not lost and patients were given more information on discharge. We all commend and welcome that. We look forward to the day when that is spread out across the whole of Scotland, not just to assist GPs and consultants but, at the end of the day, to assist patients. I will concentrate my comments on GPs, as my pharmacist colleague, David Davidson, will speak on the subject of health professionals. Although I agree that money could undoubtedly be spent better, members should never forget that we already spend over 20 per cent more on the national health service in Scotland than is spent elsewhere in the United Kingdom. If we cannot get it right—by spending wisely, looking at and rolling out best practice and ensuring value for money—then there is something seriously wrong with the management of the NHS in Scotland. We hear constantly from the minister how proud she is to have abolished the internal market and to have denied GPs the opportunity to be fundholders. Yet it was fundholding that provided the lever and incentives for change; brought forward so many excellent initiatives for care and treatment at the local doctor's surgery; and brought closer collaboration with the primary care and acute sector. One initiative put forward by the minister, in place of fundholding, was the joint investment fund, but the minister then made it impossible for GPs to access that money. I believe that the joint investment fund, or JIF as it is called, has sunk without trace and that nothing has been put in its place.  Fundholding was in its early days when it was abolished and I say to Nicola Sturgeon that when she insulted fundholding—I think that she called it "lunacy"—she insulted every single GP who operated within that system. I quote from an article "GPs: We're Sick of the NHS", in the Sunday Herald of 18 February 2001. In the article, Dr David Shaw from Dundee, who has been in practice for four years, was reported as saying: "Changes in recent years, including the scrapping of GP fundholding, which allowed doctors to manage their own budgets, have left doctors with little control over the care of their patients. He said: 'Whatever the rights and wrongs of GP fundholding, it did mean that GPs had an opportunity to deliver care more towards the particular needs of their patients. I think we have thrown the baby out with the bath water. There is no longer a chance to deliver services tailored to local needs.'" Other GPs quoted in the same article included Dr Helen Jackson, a GP for 22 years, who said: "Doctors are leaving the profession in droves - they . . . would do anything rather than this." Dr Gregor Venters, a GP for 10 years, is now leaving the profession because he is sick of the paperwork and of having too little time to treat patients. Another GP is quoted as saying: "The care my patients get at hospital level is atrocious . . . I'm ashamed of the NHS and of the care I'm providing." It is one thing for Opposition members of Parliament to use soundbites and quotes, but this article allows us to hear doctors speaking out as they have never spoken out before.

It certainly is: they cannot all be wrong. Those views were confirmed in a recent BMA study of more than 2,200 Scottish GPs, which has already been mentioned in the debate, and I say to the minister that GPs do not feel that they are in a win-win situation at present.

I cannot comment on an account of a one-way conversation that Fiona Hyslop had with a GP. I can comment not on the situation of four years ago, but on the situation that we face today. It would be far better if we were all a bit more professional and responsible, as we need to identify and address the problems that we face today, not the problems of four years ago.  The BMA study showed that 82 per cent of GPs said that stress has increased in the past five years; 72 per cent said that morale had declined in the same period; 60 per cent said that they were more likely to consider a career change or early retirement; 65 per cent cited increased bureaucracy; and 76 per cent said that they had no sense of involvement in the current NHS changes. I like much of what is set out in the health plan, but how can we vote for a motion that states a commitment to change if the prime movers of that change have not even been involved? On the changes that have been put in place, 14 per cent of family doctors are optimistic about the future of LHCCs—indeed, I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say about the future plans for LHCCs. She rightly admits that some are evolving, some are moving forward, and many are struggling simply to stand still. According to 79 per cent of GPs, the quality of service care in hospitals has declined. The debate is not about the acute sector, but when there are problems in that sector, patients go along to their GPs, who deal with 90 per cent of patients' problems, and ask them for help. Problems in the acute sector, therefore, directly impact on the primary sector. Given the fact that GPs deal with 90 per cent of patient cases, they still receive less than 10 per cent of the budget, and they are far from ecstatic about any of the minister's so-called plans and commitments. According to the recent GP survey, there is no doubt that, after four years of Labour government, things are not getting better in Scotland. Recent cuts in GP funding have meant that many excellent initiatives have been curtailed. The scrapping of fundholding has taken away the incentive to treat patients closer to home just as effectively. The BMA's "Valuing Scottish General Practice" says: "Clear benefits in relation to the monitoring of the quality of hospital services which were inherent in the internal market have been lost to the detriment of patient care." That has led to many problems in the acute sector. Waiting lists are up by 10 per cent on the past year and 1,000 more people are waiting than when Labour came to power. As I said, people constantly go to GPs when they have to wait for a long time to see a consultant and for surgery. GPs are the first line of defence. Anger and frustration with the acute sector are undoubtedly focused back on GPs. That increases their work load and the bureaucracy that they face. It is hardly surprising therefore that emergency admissions to hospitals are rising by between 10 and 20 per cent throughout Scotland.  While people wait to see a consultant or for surgery, many conditions deteriorate as a direct consequence. That is an added pressure on GPs. Examples of such conditions are heart disease, arthritis and particularly mental illness, which is an increasing element of GPs' work load. Patients turn to GPs to ask them to put pressure on the hospital sector. I heard what the minister said about the smooth journey for patients and look forward to hearing the minister's proposals. That matter undoubtedly has to be urgently addressed. Although the debate is not about the acute sector, we can surely recognise from it that the NHS is a team exercise and that failures in the acute sector impact heavily on the primary care sector. It is reported that Aberdeen royal infirmary has only six out of 16 general surgeon posts filled. An applicant who recently applied for a job at the Beatson Institute reportedly described it as a slum. In response to the serious crisis in primary care, there is an announcement of 50 salaried GPs. That sounds good, but only £18 million has been allocated and the minister expects that to be recouped by the movement of current GPs from their existing contracts to new contracts. That was in the press release. The Scottish Conservatives will fully support any motion on and commitment to better patient care and treatment for people in Scotland. However, we need more than mere soundbites: the national health plan may be a plan for action but, to date, it is only a plan. I move amendment S1M-1699.2, to leave out from "affirms" to end and insert: "further calls upon the Scottish Executive to address urgently the serious problem of low morale among GPs, the associated issues of workload, bureaucracy and lack of resources, and to look to greater recognition of and partnership with community-based health professionals in order to ensure greater utilisation of local services and to put the patient at the heart of the NHS."

I, too, met Mike Rowell at a surgery in Oban. He clearly outlined the situation. Is the minister saying that Ballet West is not an incorporated college? Is he saying that its degrees and diplomas are not validated along the lines of the other colleges that  he mentioned? As I understand it, Ballet West fits all the criteria that normally pertain to funding in further and higher education.

Will the minister give way?

I am pleased that my intervention was delayed, because the minister may have answered my question. I was going to ask how we can make progress towards achieving the 50 per cent target. What sort of sanctions can be applied, or encouragement given, to health boards such as Highland Health Board, which contribute only 27 per cent to Highland hospice?

I thank Trish Godman for giving us the opportunity to raise awareness of and debate the hospice movement in Scotland. Furthermore, I commend her for her compassionate and extremely competent proposal that we are debating tonight. I also want to commend the cross-party group chaired by Michael McMahon in the work that it has done, is doing and is planning to do about raising awareness of palliative care in this Parliament. In the light of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill, members had the opportunity this week to question the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care on whether the hospice movement would come under the regulation of care. I ask Malcolm Chisholm to tell us, in winding up, whether a hospice will come under the title of independent hospital in section 55 of the bill, as that would be helpful. Trish Godman has mentioned a few points that I was going to raise. I shall quote from the Scottish health plan. It says that the Scottish Executive "will ensure that effective palliative care services are  supported" and "will expect NHS Boards to work closely with hospices to ensure that people's care needs are met". None of us would disagree with that. However, it is difficult to pinpoint where the 50 per cent funding will come from. I have been in touch with Trish Godman today. She perhaps has documents that I do not have. We need clarity on that issue, not only for this year but to plan for the future. In Inverness, the Highland Health Board currently meets only 27 per cent of the Highland hospice running costs, which is the lowest percentage of any health board in Scotland. The current running costs are £1.7 million and there will be substantial salary increases. That is a very worrying situation, and the focus should be on care rather than on expending time and energy on finances and fundraising. The funding is not to stand still. Members know what has been said about our hospices in Scotland: they want to move forward and develop their services. The Highland hospice has also raised the issue of the hefty increases in water charges that organisations face. That increase was 43 per cent last year and will be 12 per cent this year. My colleague John Scott has reminded me that the water charges for the Ayr hospice are currently nil. However, the hospice will have to pay £20,000 on a transitional basis, over five years, starting with £4,000 next year. That is a crippling bill for a hospice to face, given its remit. MEL 104 originally applied only to adults, which fact has created difficulties for the children's hospice movement. Although adult hospitals tend to be regional, the children's hospice movement is undoubtedly national and a special case. Rachel House receives only 17 per cent of its funding from statutory sources. The remaining 83 per cent comes from fundraising and endowment interest. I ask the minister to give us further clarification on whether the 50 per cent funding is a target and the agreed level of funding. Although I am sympathetic and compassionate, I do not think that the hospice should simply send the Executive a bill for 50 per cent of its costs each year. I agree with the point that is made in the directive, that there should be an agreed level of costs, and we have a responsibility to clarify what constitutes agreed costs and core funding. As with all care and treatment services, there is no doubt that greater integration of the hospice service would benefit all, including the patients, and lead, as Trish Godman said, to a much more compassionate approach to the end of life.

I will give the minister another opportunity to stop us asking the same question every week and to stop us having continually, as he says, to dance on the head of a pin. I understand that the minister accepts the principles of Sutherland but, as the chairman of the development group, does he accept the definition of personal care in chapter 6 of the Sutherland report—or is his remit to narrow and redefine that definition? I give him my word that if he gives us a clear answer I will not mention the matter again until after the development group has reported.

Will Karen Gillon give way?

As someone who has also spent the past 20 years in the classroom, I welcome the salary increase for teachers, which recognises their service. What is Mr Butler's view on further and higher education lecturers, who also have to work extremely hard and whose contribution to education is equally vital?

As someone who examined the league tables and chose a school for their children, I believe that it is the right of every parent to choose their children's school to give them the best education that is available. Parents have only one chance to decide on the best opportunity for their children and I find it insulting that Colin Campbell feels that parents should not have that chance.

I suggest to Donald Gorrie that when in a hole and digging and digging it is better not to continue digging but to go into reverse and do something positive for the elderly in Scotland.

I thank Margaret Smith for proposing the Health and Community Care Committee report so competently. I also commend all the members and staff involved. I have a distinct feeling of déjà vu about this debate. This Parliament once again has the  opportunity to vote for free personal care as defined by Sutherland. It is the strength of the committee structure in this Parliament that we worked in partnership and put care in the community before party politics in reaching conclusions and producing recommendations in our report. I again put on record my respect for Margaret Jamieson and Duncan Hamilton, as we worked together on our visit to the Western Isles. People were probably surprised that we were able to work together positively and put health first rather than knocking political spots off each other. Against that background, I consider the Executive's response and its amendment today to be disrespectful to the cross-party Health and Community Care Committee and divisive in the workings of this Parliament. People in Scotland have a right to expect us to put their health first. They will not thank the Executive for its wrecking amendment to the unanimous, cross-party consent on this issue.

I am just getting started. Apart from the ill-judged amendment, which only adds to the confusion over personal care for the elderly, I also find the Executive's responses to our recommendations insulting, especially those related to the joint future group. The Minister for Health and Community Care had to set up her own group—chaired by the then Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, Iain Gray—to reach its own recommendations. That group ran parallel to the Health and Community Care Committee report and allowed the Minister for Health and Community Care to overshadow and fudge the committee's recommendations. The committee's motion only "calls upon the Scottish Executive to act upon, the recommendations contained within the 16th Report 2000". I hope that all the elderly in Scotland are listening today, because the Executive could not even do that. Anyone in Scotland who thinks that the Scottish Executive is committed to free personal care for the elderly has been seriously misled; the Executive cannot even agree that it should be called upon to act upon the report recommendations. The only commitment that we have received in this Parliament is a commitment to the provision of free care to include those dementia sufferers with the greatest need and the establishment of a development group on long-term care, which will consider a new system of assessment and criteria. As things stand, the elderly in Scotland will not receive one ounce more of free personal care than anywhere else in the United Kingdom.

If that is the case, perhaps Malcolm Chisholm will clarify that point when he sums up. Why does the Executive have to refer to the care development group, which was set up to define personal care, and why, as Nicola Sturgeon said, does it have to refer to the debate on 25 January, which was all about that definition. If the Executive has nothing to hide, why does Malcolm Chisholm not come clean and say honestly what its commitment to community care is?

I want to move on. When Stewart Sutherland was asked by Malcolm Chisholm in the Health and Community Care Committee whether he envisaged any difficulties in implementing the definition of personal care, Sutherland replied: "If I were in charge of the money, and had a mean mind, I would say that expenditure could be reduced by defining down personal care, and eliminating certain things." In response to Malcolm Chisholm, Sir Stewart went on to say: "The haggling that will go on will be over how personal care is defined."—[ Official Report, Health and Community Care Committee , 31 May 2000; c 961.] How right he was, because that is the position in which we find ourselves. When the committee discussed personal care, it was always the issue of personal care according to Sutherland, as it was the only definition that members knew. It was not the haggled-down, narrowed definition that Susan Deacon might give us in nine months' time. When the First Minister replied in relation to this issue, he said: "If it quacks like a duck and waddles like a duck—it's a duck." If we must relate personal care to ducks, will the minister assure us that we are talking about the Sutherland duck, not the Deacon duck? Furthermore, I ask him to stop ducking this very serious issue. Although Jim Wallace might consider that to be a very silly semantic point, it represents the life and soul of dignity and respect in old age. That said, I welcome the Executive's commitment on our recommendations 10 and 25  which relate to a single funding stream and budget-holding body. I want to raise the issue of bedblocking that both Kay Ullrich and I have mentioned so many times in the past two years. Last week, 18 of the 24 female patients in the medical assessment ward of the Royal Victoria hospital in Dundee were waiting to be placed in residential wards and in home care, which means that 75 per cent of the beds in the ward were blocked, with the patients receiving inappropriate care. That is why we are so passionate about this issue, and why we will keep raising it over the Parliament's next two years. I also seek further assurances on our 13 th recommendation. The committee found that it was difficult to audit-trail the community care pound, and I ask the minister for a simpler and more transparent guide to the funding of community care services. The Conservatives support the Health and Community Care Committee's motion. I am very sorry that the Executive found it necessary to lodge its despicable amendment, which we will not support.

Given that Mr Stone is so experienced in proposing the toast to the lasses, does he agree with what Burns wrote on the hand of nature in "Green Grow the Rashes": "Her prentice han' she try'd on man,  An' then she made the lasses, O"?

The Conservatives welcome both the debate and any move that would benefit the care of the elderly. We also look forward to the Health and Community Care Committee's debate in the chamber in February. Today is an opportunity for all MSPs who are committed to personal care for the elderly to vote for it. Not only is the Executive's response to the Sutherland report disgraceful, but the Minister for Health and Community Care's response to the Health and Community Care Committee's report is overrun by references to the joint future group, which she set up. It is clear that she responded in that way in order to state the Executive's case and to overshadow the committee's report with her ideas. I find it galling that other ministers are able to work effectively with their subject committees, while the Minister for Health and Community Care continually drives a wedge into what could be an excellent working partnership. I will examine the background to the debate. In 1997, the Royal Commission on Long Term Care was set up. The Sutherland report was published about 18 months later. We are now two years down the line from the Sutherland recommendations. We believed that Labour could  not procrastinate any longer with focus groups, strategies, commissions, reviews and working groups, but what do we get? A development group. If the minister wants to hear a soundbite, I will give her one from Alzheimer Scotland, which said: "the Development Group is a stalling device." The reason for the additional delay centres on the definition of personal care, which is set out clearly at chapter 6, page 68 of the Sutherland report. The report says that personal care "falls within the internationally recognised definition of nursing, but may be delivered by many people who are not nurses" and should be based on assessment of need, not on demand. How can the Executive and the Minister for Health and Community Care have any respect for old age when the minister recommends that free care should be provided only to those dementia sufferers with the greatest need?

I want to finish my point. Dementia can only get worse. The minister is setting up a system that will continually test and assess the frail and elderly until they are sufficiently ill to fit her definition. How cruel and demeaning can she be? When she considers her views on personal care, will she follow the advice of the chief nursing officer? Point 29 of the report by the chief nursing officer for Scotland's group on free nursing care states that those who refuse assessment "need to be made aware that to do so will prevent their nursing care being paid for." Point 26 says that "reassessment of need should be as frequent as the person requires". Where do respect and dignity fit into that approach? The care of someone with mild dementia is not paid for. The care of someone who is cantankerous, thrawn or downright independent is not paid for. Someone who values their self-respect, dignity and independence in old age gets no help. However, someone who submits to endless assessments until they finally fit the new Deacon definition of personal care might just get help. What does it profit a man to gain the minister's grudging, tight-fisted measure of personal care if he loses all his dignity and self-respect on the way? As Alzheimer Scotland says, the development group is a delaying tactic. We know that the vast majority of Labour members support the funding of personal care for the elderly. Today, they have run  out of excuses and run out of time. Today is their opportunity to help old people in Scotland.

No—I am on my final sentence. There is political will in the Parliament to give our old folk care, dignity and security in their old age—can Labour members afford not to support the motion?

There is no doubt that, in the past three months, the Executive has led Scotland to believe that it will fully fund personal care. That has never been denied in any media reports. As Sir Stewart Sutherland said, the Executive has marched people up to the top of the hill. That reminds us of the grand old Duke of York. The Executive has led "thousands of women and men to believe the tale  when you're old and frail  that Scotland would care  if only you dare and they'll never trust Labour again."  We now have another group, another committee, another delay, another commitment and another year. We had a lottery of care between young and old, then between nursing care and personal care. Now we have a lottery of care on the type and level of dementia. How much more do the elderly have to be demeaned by the Government? When it comes to personal care, what about the single budget that was recommended by Sutherland and by the Health and Community Care Committee? This Parliament is not dictated to by the Minister for Health and Community Care. The cross-party Health and Community Care Committee fully agreed that we would recommend the funding of personal care, and I ask the minister to give all Labour and Liberal MSPs the opportunity to vote with their conscience and not according to Lord Lipsey. I ask the minister to clarify the difference between two things that she said in her statement. She said that personal care, where assessed as needed, will be fully funded by the state. She went on to say that there would be free care to dementia sufferers with the greatest need. That needs clarification.

In reply to my question S1W-7523, the Minister for Health and Community Care said: "It is expected that the report will be published in the summer, when the Executive will give its conclusions urgent consideration."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 15 June 2000; Vol 7, p 115.]  I appreciate what the deputy minister is saying about health boards, but is there scope for an Executive national strategy?

I thank Alex Neil for securing this debate. One of the strengths of the Scottish Parliament is that we can address issues such as hepatitis C and work to raise awareness and address serious problems in Scotland. I will not repeat the comments that were made by the depute chief medical officer, but if we do not screen because we do not know about a disease, we are going nowhere. Whether we move forward on one front or another, we must move forward in some way. Surely a screening programme would be the first step towards identifying and measuring the problems that exist  and the problems that we might have to address. Equally, further research should be done to ensure that there is greater understanding of the disease and that the appropriate support, advice and treatments are made available. As other members have said, the head-in-the-sand approach will get us nowhere. I feel that it is more appropriate to set out proper guidelines than the plethora of confusing information that many people download from the internet. I was alarmed to read today that nine out of 10 patients with acute hepatitis have no symptoms. That must be a serious worry. Were they aware, they could adapt their lifestyles and get treatment to address the problem. It is reassuring that half of the patients will benefit from treatment. There is undoubtedly scope for a public health campaign. We need to depart from the view that hepatitis C is caught and spread only by drug users. With an increase in body piercing and tattooing, more and more people should be informed of the dangers involved in what would seem to be quite an innocent practice. Given that it is believed that between 50 and 80 per cent of drug-using prisoners are hepatitis C sufferers, would this not be an ideal starting point for a programme of screening, drug rehabilitation and counselling aimed at stopping the problem spreading even more widely? It would also give us an excellent opportunity to test the effectiveness of herbal remedies, acupuncture and other treatments and advice on lifestyle changes—which tend to crop up in any information that we come across about hepatitis C. I understand that a treatment known as SHARP—substitute harm reduction prescribing—has been developed by a prison doctor in Scotland. Given that the Executive's health plan makes a commitment "to put more resources into tackling the modern epidemics of HIV, Hepatitis C and Chlamydia" could some of those resources be allocated to prisons in the first instance, and could progress be made to develop a Scotland-wide strategy to include trials of innovations in treatment? Finally, I ask the minister to outline the Scottish Executive's response to the Scottish needs assessment programme report, which was published last summer—the Executive was to state its conclusions.

To ask the First Minister whether sufficient information is available to patients in the NHS in Scotland to enable them to make an informed choice about their hospital referral and treatment. (S1F-768)

Will the First Minister confirm or deny reports that the Scottish Executive's head of presentation attempted to gag hospital trusts that wanted to give information that is contrary to that promised in the health plan? Does he accept that patients and general practitioners have a right to know mortality rates and hospital-acquired infection rates for every hospital in Scotland?

Malcolm Chisholm was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee when it dealt with the petition on Stobhill to which Paul Martin spoke, so he will know that one of the conclusions of Richard Simpson's report was that, although MSPs and others were not satisfied with Greater Glasgow Health Board's consultation, the health board was obeying all the guidelines for consultation. Given that a national acute services review is taking place, is a national set of guidelines necessary to ensure that health boards and trusts keep in touch with the people and do not just inundate MSPs with their proposals?

Greater Glasgow is not within the area that I represent, but the Health and Community Care Committee has just considered Greater Glasgow Health Board's lack of consultation on Stobhill. Is the member saying that the board has not taken on board any of the recommendations of Richard Simpson's report, nor taken any cognisance of that report or of the humiliation that it suffered as a result of its lack of consultation on Stobhill? Has the board learned nothing?

The Conservatives are pleased to accept the bill as it relates to Scotland. We welcome the end of preserved rights, which will ensure consistency and equality of funding based on appropriate health care. I will flag up some issues on prescribing. Given that many of them are devolved and are in line with long-term planning and the successful implementation of the bill, I think that it is appropriate to raise them at this stage. There is a need for absolute clarity about who retains clinical responsibility. My colleague David Davidson—a pharmacist—has given me some advice on the matter. It is important that the control of a patient's management and care is fully known and integrated. One person must hold a full record of all prescribing. How will all the new prescribers be aware of a patient's clinical history and care? Will that require the use of smart cards and a fully integrated information technology system, as mentioned in the health plan? The success of the initiative seems to depend on that. The extension of prescribing rights leads us to seek further reassurance on training. I understand that ophthalmic opticians are trained in prescribing drugs and therapies in relation to their professional obligations. However, will dental auxiliaries be given full training before the new prescribing regime is implemented? David Davidson raised with me the point that osteopaths and chiropractors do not tend to prescribe medicines as part of their care. The new prescribing rights would be quite a departure from that conventional line of care. Again, that raises issues about training, clinical responsibility and knowledge of a patient's history. I fully endorse Nicola Sturgeon's point about consultation. The question of liability is also crucial, particularly in relation to the side effects of drugs. How will liability of the prescriber be determined, given that one patient can be prescribed drugs by several health care professionals? We seek assurances on who is ultimately responsible for the patient's health. Much has been said about nurse prescribing. The Royal College of Nursing has pointed out that all those who gain prescribing powers will already have undergone professional education—they will be on a professional register and they will be expected to comply with a code of professional  conduct. However, are we not asking nurses to take full responsibility for prescribing without full and adequate training? Given that nurses have a broad input into health care, how can we limit the number of drugs on the list and the disciplinary action that can be taken in the event of a lack of judgment?

I very much welcome this debate on the lack of appropriate provision for people with ASD and their parents, carers and organisations. I spent some considerable time during our holidays reading the papers on MMR and autism. I am sure that everyone will understand that, if it were otherwise, I would have discussed any conclusions I have come to with the Health and Community Care Committee. The thing that struck me most in all the papers and newspaper articles was the parents' letters, and their concern and guilt that they are not doing enough to provide support and care for their children. That struck home, because when support services are not in place, parents take on themselves the responsibility and guilt for that provision. It should be our responsibility to provide that. I believe that good provision of care can be addressed only by good diagnosis. Without consistent and thorough diagnosis, we cannot understand the problem or measure it, let alone try to address the needs of the individual. Many people have mentioned the fact that we are now much better at diagnosing autism, but I truly believe that there is vast under-diagnosis of autistic spectrum disorder. I understand from the SPICe note that the Scottish Executive has funded a project in the Borders, which is devising good practice in diagnosis of autism and other disorders. I hope that we will all receive a copy of the external report so that individual MSPs can check that the provision in our areas is as good as the best in  Scotland. In a debate last year on pre-school education, Peter Peacock gave me an assurance that he would consider integrating a diagnostic test into the procedures for nursery children. That would be a great help and relief to many parents and would address the support and needs of their child before precious time is lost. It is tragic that so many people go through such a long part of their lives and miss so many opportunities simply because we cannot get our act together to diagnose their problems. Nick Johnston highlighted that problem with the example of a person who was diagnosed at 22. When I was a lecturer in further education, we often referred students to educational psychologists. Some of them had autistic disorders and a great many of them had dyslexia. It was a tragedy that many were in their 20s, 30s and 40s and had slipped through the whole educational net before a further education lecturer—without any training—spotted something. It is incumbent on the Scottish Parliament to continue to monitor and scrutinise the 29 excellent recommendations in "The same as you?", which cannot be allowed to gather dust on the shelf. I would like to focus on two points in the document. Recommendation 28 suggests that the Scottish Executive "should commission research into the number of people with learning disabilities in prison or in secure accommodation and the arrangements for assessing and providing them with care." That would be an excellent example of joined-up government. The other point is the personal life plan. I understand that, in September, the Scottish Society for Autism and the National Autistic Society provided the information to develop a national network for people with ASD. I ask the minister to assure the Parliament that that is progressing. Will he also update us on the excellent recommendations in "The same as you?", which address the whole subject of the debate?

How will the minister hold councils to account for their spending on care for the elderly, given that the Sutherland commission found that £750 million that was given to councils in England and Wales for care of the elderly was not spent on the elderly, and that Sir Stewart Sutherland confirmed, in evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee, that £75 million had possibly been lost in Scotland?

I will be brief—for no other reason than that Alex Neil has used up half the time for my speech. I welcome this debate about safety at home, on the roads and in the community. I was taken aback when I discovered that one third of accidents happen in the home. I appreciate that the motion is not only about children, but I have found some interesting information in the NHS information and statistics division figures for last year. Accidental deaths among children under the age of 15 have fallen. In 1980, there were 56 deaths in the home; in 1997, there were 10. In 1980, there were 65 deaths on the road; in 1997, there were 24. In 1980, there were 40 deaths in other types of accident; in 1997, there were 14. We must welcome that downward trend in all three categories—home, road and other accidents. However, I am sure that we would all agree that one death is still one death too many. In the road accidents and other accidents categories, the figures for emergency hospital admissions for children under the age of 15 have gone down. However, it is concerning that, in the home accidents category, the figures have gone up—from 4,076 in 1981 to 5,271 in 1997. The figures for adults show a reduction in the number of deaths from accidents—a total of 2,312 in 1980 and 1,413 in 1997. However, although the number of deaths is down in all three categories of accident, it is startling to note that emergency hospital admissions due to home accidents have doubled over the same period, rising from around 11,000 to almost 22,000. Therefore, although there are fewer deaths, the number of accidents in the home has doubled. That is a cause for serious concern. The motion "acknowledges the importance of creating a central database of information relevant to home safety". I assume that that acknowledges the excellent information, broken down into categories, provided by the information and statistics division. Having heard Cathy Jamieson speak, I have no doubt that there is scope for further information and for a further breakdown of that information. It is only by  identifying the causes of accidents that we can make progress with—and I never thought that I would hear myself saying the word—a strategy, review or whatever. The biggest single cause of accidents in the home is human error, and I doubt that Malcolm Chisholm—even with the greatest of Christmas spirit—can legislate for human error. As Cathy Jamieson said, specific attention should be paid to the elderly, as their environment undoubtedly becomes more hazardous as they become frailer and their senses become impaired. Quite often elderly people have worn carpets and poor lighting and they often try to do things that they are no longer fit to do. Perhaps the training of home helps and care workers could include looking out for potential hazards in elderly people's homes. The good news about home accidents is that the vast majority of them are preventable. I congratulate Northern constabulary, Highland Council and Highland Health Board on working together to develop a strategy to reduce the tragic number of road deaths and accidents in the Highlands. By working together, the three organisations intend, from January, to raise awareness and to help to educate children. I hope that East Ayrshire Council will also adopt that joined-up approach.

Given the lack of recognition in the first formula for the unique needs of the 26 inhabited islands in Argyll and Bute, does the minister share my concern about the comments of John Aldridge? He said: "If ferry kilometrage, as well as road kilometrage, had been included in the formula, that would have resulted in a worse outcome for island communities."—[ Official Report , Health and Community Care Committee , 25 October 2000; c 1242.] Will the minister consider the formula again in relation to small islands?

There are many points in the plan that I would welcome, but given that it has been delivered to us only in the past hour, it is quite difficult to respond to it. I acknowledge the commitment to mental health, greater patient information, greater support for parents, child health promotion and, in particular, the commitment to GP services in poorer and remote areas. I agree with the Minister for Health and Community Care that it is implementation that counts. I am glad that she can remember all the plans, strategies, reviews, consultations and focus groups. They are beginning to fill a library. It is difficult to believe that the minister will endorse and implement the plan announced today when it is a full admission of failure. Labour has had four years—not two years as Nicola Sturgeon says—to get waiting lists down and to show how Labour works for the NHS. I would like to know the answers to the following important questions: how will the new boards be responsive to local needs, how can the minister be sure that they will implement the strategies that she announces and how will she hold them accountable? What is being done to fully integrate general practices into the health service and to  encourage them to provide more services and greater innovation?

rose—

Indeed, we have a grand Parliament—we are gathered together to discuss a Scottish health plan about which we know nothing. The plan was delivered about five minutes ago to my colleague, Ben Wallace. In this Parliament—we who shall not be lobbied, who are so squeaky clean, who cannot accept a gift that that may influence our thinking, who have a Standards Committee and a Procedures Committee and who are so worried about lobbygate and sleaze—such is the way of things that I find that I have to phone up journalists to ask for information on the Scottish health plan in order to contribute to today's debate and respond to statements. If that practice continues, I will have to consider purchasing a few brown paper envelopes and arranging a few clandestine meetings, just to get some information for future debates. We could criticise the SNP for using its time to debate an unreleased health plan. But why not? After all, the health plan was not leaked to the press—it was briefed to the press.

Why do we need a health plan? Precisely because, as the motion states, there are 3,000 blocked beds, waiting lists are rising by 15 per cent a year—in the past year in Tayside they have risen by 48 per cent because our hospital finances are in the red—there is a 10 to 20 per cent increase in emergency admissions, there are more hospital-acquired infections and there was a tragic winter crisis last year. Those are the reasons why we need a health plan. The minister's abolition of the internal market was not a great success. Even the Royal College of General Practitioners has said that clear benefits relating to the monitoring of the quality of hospital services, which were inherent in the internal market, have been lost, to the detriment of patient care. How right that is. We need a health plan because Labour said that things could only get better. However, after Labour's four years in government, an extensive MORI poll showed that only 13 per cent of Scots—that is one in eight—thought that things had got better. It is time for drastic action. We also need a health plan after Tony Blair's television performance on Tuesday night. He is the man who follows drying paint and is told only the good news. To think that John Swinney and David McLetchie wrote to ITV to express their concerns. A few weeks ago, the minister briefed us on the health plan. She talked about rewiring rather than restructuring the NHS. Well, the next time that I need an electrician, I know who not to call. The primary care trusts have had 18 months in which to make things work. Even managers in the Scottish Premier League get more time to build a winning team. We read, courtesy of Tom Peterkin of Scotland on Sunday and Douglas Fraser of The Herald , that savings will be reinvested in patient care. Will that be on the same basis as the previous £44 million savings that were reinvested in the writing-off of Glasgow's housing debt? We also read—my colleague, Ben Wallace, has just confirmed this—that councillors will be represented on the new health boards. Given the well-documented mess that councils have made of care in the community, the dissatisfaction with councils that was clearly shown by the MORI poll, the wait for assessments, the wait for treatment once assessed and the complete lack of openness and accountability, it is clear that the councils have created many of the problems that the Administration now faces. Unless care in the community is in place under a single budget with personal care being paid for, the NHS will continue to suffer from council-made problems. I do not remember ever seeing or hearing a councillor  accept responsibility for the failings of care in the community. The only thing that matters is that people get the care and treatment that they expect, when they expect it, and in the hospital that they want. Given that people are waiting longer than ever, with 2,000 more on the waiting list in Scotland than when Labour came to power, will the Executive clearly state its policy on the complementary role of the private health sector? If Jim Norris of Dunfermline can be treated privately on the basis that the NHS wait would have put him out of business, and his employees out of work, and then be able to claim the full cost of treatment—£1,500—from Fife Health Board, does that rule apply to all? The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care must answer that today. Why is there no word of the use of private beds to treat NHS patients when the service cannot cope, despite that being at the heart of Tony Blair's plan in England? Will the Scottish health plan address many of the points in the motion by agreeing with some of the points in the English health plan? I quote Alan Milburn: "The time has now come for the NHS to engage more constructively with the private sector." Again, Alan Milburn said: "Ideological boundaries . . . should not stand in the way of . . . care for NHS patients." Finally, Alan Milburn said: "NHS care will remain free at the point of delivery, whether care is provided by an NHS hospital, a local GP, a private sector hospital or by a voluntary organisation." Will we have equality of treatment in Scotland, or does no leak mean no commitment? The thousands of frail and elderly people in Scotland are not interested in grandiose national plans. They want to know simply that they will be cared for with dignity and respect. We need to know whether the elderly will be given Henry McLeish care, Susan Deacon care, or Peter McMahon spin. That is not in the programme for government, so is that an admission that the issue is not at the heart of government? The elderly need to know. I move amendment S1M-1453.2, to insert at end: "and further notes the Royal Commission on Long Term Care's recommendation on free personal care and calls upon the Scottish Executive to unequivocally commit itself to this recommendation and come forward with a firm date for its implementation."

I am grateful to Scott Barrie for securing this  debate. I have signed the motion and I would like him to know that the Conservatives are committed to the issues that he has raised. We are all grateful that we now live in a society that does not tolerate bullying. For that reason, the booklets are extremely welcome. It is important for the organisations mentioned in Scott Barrie's motion to work and talk through those booklets with vulnerable groups of all ages, in the community and in supported care. It needs to be stressed that reporting bullying does not help only the individual. If people had reported bullying many years ago and if it had been taken seriously, not only would it have helped the individuals concerned, but it would have helped others by sending out a clear message that bullying is not tolerated; it should never have been. It can be difficult to address bullying, because bullies make it difficult. It may be perceived as a sign of weakness, or childish, to report bullying. In the case of the mentally ill and those with learning disabilities, it may send a message of being unable to cope. When it comes to care in the community, I imagine that there is sometimes a fear that people may lose the precious independence that they are working towards. It is also the case that parents and carers take on a guilt for not tackling bullying. They feel that they should have noticed and they therefore feel anger and frustration. The booklet seems to assume that most bullying and harassment will be from those waiting at bus stops and in public places. I was pleased that Scott Barrie pointed out that more emphasis should be given to those in responsible positions and those with responsibility for caring and supporting. There was a recent and very sad case in Inverness of the headmaster of a local special needs school who was found guilty on four charges of assaulting young, vulnerable pupils. He was fined £1,000. The climate under which those assaults happened gives serious cause for concerned. The sheriff stated: "You failed yourself as a teacher of many years' experience, failed your colleagues round about you, failed your children and their parents and relatives." There is a need for staff to ensure that people are not bullied, harassed or mistreated in their presence. Press reports on the case make shocking reading, but they epitomise the points that Scott Barrie raised. According to the local press, teachers talked of "a culture of intimidation and bullying at the school and . . . felt isolated and fearful. Most staff said they did not officially report the incidents at the time because they did not know who to turn to. The headmaster had to be informed of all  incidents." The press went on to say: "Nobody from the education authority had any contact with the school. The authority was showing absolutely no interest in Drummond School." It is my belief that bullies also need help. There should be someone whom they can talk to about understanding their own behaviour. It may be that redeployment or retraining can be offered, but confidential counselling should be offered to people who may not be coping with the full pressures of their job and responsibilities, and who are allowing that frustration to be taken out on the most vulnerable members of our society. I feel that that would encourage people to take responsibility for their actions and recognise the problem and address it.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the expert group set up to investigate the influenza drug Relenza will give advice to the Minister for Health and Community Care on its availability in the national health service in Scotland. (S1O-2674)

I am delighted that the group has met once and that tomorrow we will get the report without a delay. Can the minister tell members why we need an additional expert group to give advice on new drugs, when we already have the National Institute for Clinical Excellence, the Health Technology Board for Scotland, the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland, the Scottish drugs and therapeutics consortium and local drugs and therapeutics committees?

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing today's debate and thank him for giving us an opportunity to discuss dentistry. I would also like to take the opportunity to say that he is looking very dashing tonight in his full Highland regalia. The action plan that Mike Rumbles highlighted is excellent, but I refer him to another document: "Workforce Planning for Dentistry in Scotland: A Strategic Review". I am the first to criticise glossy documents, but "Workforce Planning for Dentistry in Scotland: A Strategic Review" sets out how to put the plan into action. It is an even better document than "An Action Plan for Dental Services in Scotland" because it takes the plan one step further. I have found it to be an excellent document. Access to dentistry in Grampian depends on the training not just of new dentists, but of dental nurses, dental hygienists and dental therapists. There is no doubt that the two documents will increase the demand for dentistry in Scotland. We have a problem at the moment and if we are to fulfil all the recommendations in "Workforce Planning for Dentistry in Scotland: A Strategic Review"—which I fully support—we must increase the supply of training, to increase access to dentistry. We need more training to ensure that dentists can fulfil the recommendations for their continued  professional development. As a fellow of the Institute of Personnel and Development, Mike Rumbles will know all about that. We need such training not just for dentists, but for dental nurses, hygienists and therapists. We have never trained dental therapists in Scotland. The debate should not concentrate on dentists, because I understand that dental therapists will now be able to carry out extractions and fillings as well as other monitoring of patients. That may be one way of helping to fill the gap in dental services. Given that training is so crucial in creating access to new dentists, I would like to highlight the fact that Dundee dental school—one of only two dental schools in Scotland—is currently facing a deficit of more than £250,000, in a health trust that is suffering a deficit of more than £19 million. That is one of the two dental schools that will have to provide funding, training and access for all the courses that I mentioned, as well as the consultant specialties that are needed to achieve the level of training recommended in the two documents. Nora Radcliffe mentioned postgraduate training, which is a crucial aspect of the debate. I would like to take the opportunity to ask the minister to clarify an issue. Last week, the Dundee dental school was told that it was to be given funding for a postgraduate centre in the Frankland building, adjacent to the dental hospital. However, the next day, the school received a phone call from the management executive to say that it would not get that funding. I seek clarification on that issue.

Will the member give way?

I want to confirm that the economic terms for the countries that have entered the single currency are euro zone or euroland. Those terms are used in all the economic journals.

rose—

It was a great pleasure. I thank Jamie Stone. Now I have almost forgotten what I was going to say.

If the lower interest rates throughout euroland are appropriate for the UK at this time, do the Liberal Democrats think that the monetary policy committee of the Bank of England is setting an inappropriately high interest rate in order to control the rate of inflation?

I appreciate the minister's comments and am delighted that mental health is one of the Executive's top three clinical priorities. Can the minister be sure that the issue is also a major priority at health trust level? The Mental Welfare Commission has raised concerns that its recent visits have highlighted the same problems as it highlighted five or 10 years ago. Although I appreciate the minister's commitment, can we be sure that the issue is a major priority locally as well as nationally?

Given that there is compulsory professional development for dentists, why was Dundee dental hospital offered £2.8 million for a new postgraduate centre last Wednesday, only to be told by the management executive on Thursday that it had made a mistake? How can the dental schools plan future training and education without the support of additional resources?

To ask the Scottish Executive how the consultation on any proposals to fluoridate the water supply will be conducted and who will carry out such consultation. (S1O-2581)

Given that a University of York study states that the research evidence is of insufficient quality to allow confident statements to be made about potential harms, or about whether there might be any impact on social inequalities, will the minister ensure that up-to-date research is done and that accurate information is available before decisions are made in Scotland? Will she also recommend that members of her party are allowed a free vote on the issue?

Members' business is becoming an opportunity to raise awareness of conditions that affect thousands of people and somehow get lost in the grand scheme of things. I am very grateful that Margaret Jamieson has raised this issue today. I began last week hardly able to pronounce mesothelioma, but by the end of the week I knew more about the condition. Similarly, I must admit that I have only heard of tinnitus; however, through this debate, we can raise awareness of the condition and find out more about it. If I were to say to colleagues in the tea room at the back of the chamber that I had ringing, whistling, buzzing, hissing, whirring or humming noises in my ear, it is unlikely that I would attract much sympathy or serious medical concern. In fact, it is more likely that I would attract a humorous comment. That made me think that there are probably sufferers who do not even want to talk about their condition, because they feel that that is what is likely to happen. At its worst, tinnitus can cause ceaseless loud bangs, whistles and metal-clashing noises inside the head. That is bad enough, but it also leads to anxiety, insomnia and depression. Bringing more attention to this chronic, neglected medical problem will help to bring greater understanding of its effects on people and will, I hope, encourage sufferers to join organisations, such as Tinnitus Action, that can offer free information and advice. Even just giving an explanation and offering reassurance to sufferers that they are not the only people in the world with the problem can do much to help understanding of the condition, to alleviate suffering and to help people to live with the problem. We must raise awareness of the long-term effects of exposure to loud noises in younger people, which is probably the leading cause of tinnitus. Loud music has an obvious effect, but there are also issues to do with health and safety in the workplace. Employees should be fully informed of the potential long-term effects of exposure to loud noise. It should also be incumbent on employers to offer and insist on the use of measures to protect hearing. I understand that certain drugs are used to treat tinnitus, the major one being Triptafen, which is usually prescribed for depression. That illustrates the depth of the problem and people's inability to speak about it.  I thank Margaret Jamieson for raising the issue. It has helped us to understand the problem and to bring awareness of the problem to a wider audience.

I, too, welcome Duncan McNeil's debate, which raises awareness of mesothelioma. Clydeside Action on Asbestos is addressing many issues. I congratulate it on the excellent work that it has done. Today, I met Mr and Mrs Brown from Ayr who, I am delighted to see, are in the gallery. Mrs Brown's father, Edward McCleish, died of the disease 20 years ago today. It is fitting that Mr and Mrs Brown are in the gallery tonight with their daughter, Adele, because 20 years later, they still feel that an injustice was done, and they want to lend their support to those fighting for recognition and compensation. Mrs Brown, who is a nurse, described her father's inch-by-inch death. Other members acknowledged the slow process. I was shocked to read a letter sent to Mr McCleish's widow—Mrs Brown's mother—dated 24 July 1984, which reads: "We have to advise you that the Insurers have made a purely nominal offer of £100 in connection with your claim. In all the circumstances, we have no doubt that it is an offer  which ought to be accepted". I hope that the widows and families who were persuaded to accept such paltry payments will also be acknowledged in the new campaign. I have also spoken to Gordon McVie of the Cancer Research Campaign, who stated his concern that people are still working on buildings and ships with asbestos without being given the proper advice or taking the proper precautions. Indeed, he mentioned that some companies are exporting asbestos for use in developing countries. I understand that trials are being carried out in Newcastle that offer a glimmer of hope of improving treatment and prolonging life, but that it will be five to 10 years before gene therapy, although exciting, is widely available. It is interesting that medical research has been done on work-related cancers for more than 200 years. I hope that this debate will help to support not only those suffering from mesothelioma, but those likely to suffer from that condition in future. I also hope that appropriate health and safety checks are done to ensure that our problems are not exported to other countries and that employers take adequate measures to protect staff in the light of the known dangers of asbestos.

Will the minister consider measures for early diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders, to ensure that all children have the opportunity to improve their standards?

Given the member's concern for those 2,000 people, does she support the SNP-led council in Angus, which is abandoning local authority responsibility for home care and making it possible that 900 people will not receive any care? Is that the SNP policy in action?

Will the member give way?

I find it quite insulting that Nicola Sturgeon stands up to declare the issues as though she had suddenly discovered them. When the Health and Community Care Committee first met in June 1999, we drew up a list of priorities that we thought should be addressed in the new Parliament. Many concerns were expressed, but the overriding priority was care in the community for the elderly, the disabled and the mentally ill. That priority was agreed unanimously by committee members. Over the 10 months of our wide-ranging inquiry, we heard evidence from people throughout Scotland—from carers to royal colleges, from the decision makers and from those who depend on the services. We not only heard evidence, but got out there to see how the service worked. We witnessed the attitudes and cultures that exist and we heard stories that we will probably never forget. That allowed us to compile a cross-party report that is a tribute to the committee and a document of which the Parliament can justly be proud. In that vein, I was keen to visit the Western Isles to engage with the different structure of services, the smaller population and the traditional culture. I must admit that, if I had had to choose a companion for that week, from this chamber, Margaret Jamieson would probably have been near the bottom of my list; the dark islands became less appealing by the minute when Margaret suggested that she would come along. However, as we pursued similar lines of questioning it quickly became apparent that the dignified care of the elderly, the disabled and the mentally ill was—in our book—well above party politics. Across the political divide, our views may differ on the means of achieving the objectives, but identifying the problems and applying the principles to them was never a problem. It was quite a shock to those whom we met that Duncan Hamilton, Margaret Jamieson and I could work as a team and put the health of the people of the Western Isles well above party politics. Duncan Hamilton has received various jibes in the chamber about his age, but in my opinion Duncan has wisdom and compassion beyond his years.   [Applause.] That is quite true. The people of Scotland have the right to expect the Parliament to put their health care needs above party politics, and I am proud that the Health and Community Care Committee achieved that. It is therefore with sadness rather than anger that I turn to the SNP motion. As our confidential committee report makes several recommendations on tackling the problems that have been raised, and other recommendations that impact indirectly on the subject of the motion, I cannot speak of those recommendations. I can only move the amendment that is consistent with our approach in previous debates on the funding of personal care and the monitoring of council spending. I look forward to the frank and full debate that will take place in January following publication of the Health and Community Care Committee's community care report and the Executive's response to that report's extensive list of recommendations. I do not want the Executive to come back within 24 or 36 hours with a quick-fix response to a serious problem. The extensive list of recommendations in the committee's report requires a measured, considered, detailed and financially focused response, which will take time. I find it insulting to all members of the Health and Community Care Committee that this subject has been chosen for debate only days before the publication of a report that has been 10 months in the making. Nicola Sturgeon is right, however, to say that something is very wrong, and I acknowledge that local authorities have a serious problem with the difficulty that they face over home care. Given the SNP's choice of subject today, we might assume that that party's urgent concerns would be a major priority in Angus Council. Such is the commitment of that SNP council to care in the community that, this week, it proposed a novel approach. The Courier and Advertiser reported on Tuesday: "One of the main proposals . . . was a plan to phase out local authority home care services and replace them with a voluntary organisation. Social work director Bill Robertson admitted yesterday that such an option could not be achieved . . . He said that under a move away from council-run home helps, nearly 900 people would no longer receive care . . . this would mean an unacceptable risk was being transferred to a voluntary organisation." That is SNP policy. Thank goodness that the good folk of Angus have a caring social work director to look after their interests, because they certainly cannot depend on their SNP councillors. I suggest that before SNP members preach to others, they get their own house in order. I move amendment S1M-1356.2, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "agrees that the best way forward is the eventual  implementation of the Sutherland Commission's recommendation of free personal care, and urges the Scottish Executive to monitor the use of new monies allocated to local authorities for community care in light of winter pressure to ensure that the elderly receive the appropriate care and support."

There have been some concerns about the shortage of flu vaccines. Will the minister clarify whether manufacturers are experiencing short-term problems and whether the supply of vaccines will be sufficient to meet the level of demand over the winter?

I appreciate the fact that the additional money that was allocated to local authorities is being audittrailed and is based on clinical outcomes, such as how many people are being given home care. Does the minister agree that, on the basis of experience, all money that goes to local authorities should consistently be audittrailed and based on clinical outcomes?

Does Frank McAveety disagree with the claim of the British Medical Association and the Royal College of General Practitioners in their submission to the Scottish health plan? They say: "Clear benefits in relation to the monitoring of the quality of hospital services which were inherent in the internal market have been lost to the detriment of patient care." Have all the doctors got it wrong?

Like Nicola Sturgeon, I welcome the tone of the motion, although I do not welcome the tone of the minister, which was unfortunate. I welcome the priority given to "improving governance and accountability" and the fact that "proposals for change" are set out in the health plan. I welcome Malcolm Chisholm to his new position and see it as a good example of partnership, as he was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee for 18 months and I am sure will bring forward many of our views and concerns. The minister frequently refers to the internal market. If she seriously thinks that it is the major problem, I fear that she will miss the opportunity to thoroughly examine the deep-rooted, elitist hierarchy and culture of the NHS and she will not improve the patients' experience or help their voice to be heard. We must ask ourselves whether patient care is any better since the abolition of the internal market. We urgently await the response to the MORI poll in the health plan. I welcome coterminous health decision-making boundaries. David Mundell has asked me to say that he would welcome consolidation of the health boards and trusts in rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway and will be writing to the minister about that. However, where there is coterminosity—for example, in the Highlands—the problems are the same as, if not worse than, in the rest of Scotland. It is part of the answer but not the only answer. The 160 blocked beds in the Highlands—more than 10 per cent of hospital beds—show that the boards and trusts and the local council are not working together as well as they should. Talk of governance and accountability must start in the Parliament with initiatives and examples.  There must be clear lines of policy, priorities, objectives and targets in place to set a framework by which we can judge governance and accountability. It is difficult enough trying to unravel and understand the health budget when it has to be judged against so many strategies and plans—the priorities and planning guidance, "Towards a Healthier Scotland", "Designed to Care", the review of services for people with learning disabilities, the carers strategy, "Investing in You", the dental action plan, the report on work force planning, to name but a few. Although those documents all address serious health issues and priorities, it is time to tie the clinical priorities of cancer, mental health and heart disease in with those documents and with the budget so that clear signals, strategies and priorities are set out by the Executive. If managers are to manage, they must be told what the priorities and objectives are, and the Executive must face up to and accept economic realities. I am not often sympathetic to NHS managers, but imagine trying to base decisions on the three clinical priorities, all the strategies, all the reviews and new legislation, perhaps with a few damning Scottish Health Advisory Service reports that call for funding thrown in. Then they discover that a new scanner is being provided that calls for £400,000 to train personnel and to run it. Then they must unblock beds, reduce waiting lists, get rid of the financial deficit, do an acute services review, a maternity services review and stand by their HIPs and TIPs—and now we have a new health plan. I do not often extend sympathy to bureaucrats but in this case I do. As the Minister for Health and Community Care sits at the Cabinet table, handing over a few million here and a few million there for historic monuments, Forest Enterprise and the paying off of Glasgow's housing debt, she must tell the people of Scotland why those are greater priorities than front-line health care and how the new joined-up thinking with forestry leads to health benefits from the decisions to reallocate funds from the NHS.

I thank Frank McAveety for his prattle. If money were going towards investment in good housing and warm homes, it would help to address health care problems. That is what I would hope for. However, if the minister is to  preach accountability, she has to accept responsibility and accountability. I can almost see that writing off Glasgow's housing debt could lead to investment in better housing, but if Frank McAveety, who is now on the Health and Community Care Committee, can tell me how money for historic monuments and trees can benefit health, I await his words of wisdom. In this new world of focus groups and glossy brochures, we also have overlaps and interrelationships between such organisations as the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland, the Health Technology Board for Scotland, the clinical resource and audit group, SIGN and, of course, the National Institute for Clinical Excellence—NICE. Do we really need all those organisations as well as local drugs and therapeutics committees? Does the existence of all those bodies do anything to simplify and clarify the system and the lines of governance and accountability? The minister should not create additional and separate organisations and then question why they do not collaborate. Devolution gives us the opportunity to integrate and simplify the structure of the NHS in Scotland. Last week, I submitted a question on the Public Health Institute for Scotland. Does it have to be a separate organisation from the Health Education Board for Scotland? Perhaps it does, but we need to be clear about it. If the patient is to be at the heart of the system, local authorities in Scotland have to accept the responsibility of providing care in the community and the accountability and transparency that go with that. We should expect no less in standards of openness, transparency and accountability from councils than we expect from the health service. I look forward to the results of the MORI poll that will compare patients' experience of the NHS with their experience of our so-called local democracies. A total of 10,000 people are waiting for assessment for home care and aids and adaptations, and a further 10,000 people have been assessed as needing care packages for which no money is available. Many such people end up in hospital, after which they cannot get back home because social work departments either refuse to fund their care or do not have sufficient funds. That failure to identify and address care needs not only fails the person needing the care but results in further complexity and confusion. In any partnership, the system is only as good as its weakest link. Sutherland found that £750 million was being lost into what he described as a black hole between the allocation of money to councils and the provision of care. That figure equates to £75  million for Scotland. I am told that many councils spend money on children's services. I do not doubt that children's services are a priority, and I do not doubt the worthiness of investing in them. However, when money is earmarked for care of the elderly, we have to ensure that such decisions are transparent and clear, and we have to hold councils to account for their spending. As far as councils are concerned, the problem is not theirs. As long as a person is being cared for in hospital, it becomes convenient for councils to pass the buck. That results in delayed discharge, bed shortages, longer waiting lists, inappropriate care and treatment, and cancelled operations. We cannot keep throwing money into councils to solve NHS problems. Openness and partnership working must be welcomed. The more chaos councils create, the more money they get. However, we do not know how or why they spend their budgets on community care. I hope that the minister will include that in the health plan. The elderly do not complain, nor do the mentally ill. However, yesterday, the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland published a damning report. The same problems arise in the care of the mentally ill as they do in the care of the elderly. The director of the MWC, Dr Jim Dyer, said: "The Commission is aware of many people about whom there is unequivocal agreement that they need residential or nursing home places or other community care, but who remain in hospital—often for many months or even years—either because there is no apparent local authority funding for their placement or there is disagreement about responsibility for funding." Given that we have had and are currently pursuing a phased programme of closing down the old psychiatric hospitals to offer care closer to the patient and more appropriate to their needs, it is totally unacceptable that patients are entering psychiatric institutions and find themselves unable to get out. Last week, at my surgery in Inverness, I was visited by a lady whose mother had been in council residential care and had been taken to the local psychiatric hospital for a two-week assessment. Four months later, her mother was still there—her room had been reallocated and her clothes and belongings stored in a cupboard. The residential home said that that was not its decision and the hospital said that it was not its problem. The doctor said that the matter was out of his hands. When the lady finally tracked down a councillor, he did not want to know. For that case and others, I welcome the initiative that recognises that the patients voice must be heard. I hope that an update of the patients' charter will be introduced to ensure that patients and their families know who is in charge and whom to go to if there is a problem.  There is a need for a common agenda. In Inverness, prisoners who had come off drugs and had come to terms with their habit were released into the community and there was no care for them. There is a new initiative in place and the governor of Porterfield prison is working closely with the primary care trust, which has provided a drugs officer in the prison for three days a week. It should not need parliamentarians to tell people to do such things. It is about good practice, good will and putting the patient first. I am also concerned that most diagnoses of autism are when children are six or seven years old. Previously, I raised with Peter Peacock the issue of testing and diagnosing children in nursery school. Autism is diagnosed once children have failed to keep pace with the first year in school. Given the dramatic rise in autism, we should introduce a system in which health visitors, general practitioners and others can apply the tests to ensure that early diagnosis is made to allow children access to care and treatment. If we do not start to give the patients information, the patients will start to give us information. Many doctors and consultants are faced with the latest downloaded, wacky American version of a wonder cure for their ailments—the patients turn up with pages printed from the internet. In that respect, I am pleased to hear that the SIGN guidelines will be printed in patient-friendly language, so that patients know what to expect. I welcome the debate. I hope that it will lead to a clear structure with clear lines of accountability and will reduce the bureaucracy that has bedevilled the history of the NHS.

Does Nicola Sturgeon share my concern that it took three and a half months from the announcement of the allocation of money for bedblocking for that money to reach health boards?

I welcome Andrew Welsh's motion. I note that he has raised this issue in the House of Commons, which is appropriate given Westminster's responsibility for pensions. If we have learned anything from issues such as BSE, it is that we should always listen to the patient. When we lose sight of that, we become divorced from reality. I am delighted that Mr Duggan is here today. We are listening to him and congratulate him on the progress that is being made on this issue as a result of one man's anger. My colleague Ben Wallace was scheduled to speak in this debate. He is more familiar with this matter than I am, but he regrets that he is unable to speak in the debate because he is not well today. The chamber will have to forgive my lack of knowledge on the issue. There have been two NRPB reports. It was stated in a written answer to Andrew Welsh in the House of Commons that the report in 1988 confirmed that "participation in the UK tests has not had a detectable effect on the participants' expectation of life, nor on their risk of developing cancer in general. It did, however, raise a reasonable doubt that leukaemia (other than chronic lymphatic leukaemia) and multiple myeloma might be due to participation. Whilst the NRPB Report did not causally relate leukaemia and multiple myeloma specifically to participation in the nuclear weapons tests, its evidence was nevertheless accepted as raising a reasonable doubt that leukaemia (other than chronic lymphatic leukaemia) and multiple myeloma may have resulted from such  participation."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 12 May 2000; Vol 349, c 497W.] I am pleased to reiterate the point that Andrew Welsh made about the 1993 report, although its conclusions may not have been to his satisfaction. The 1993 report suggested that the small hazard of myeloma, which was suggested in 1988, was not supported by the additional data. However, the possibility of a risk of developing leukaemia in the first 25 years after participation could not be ruled out. There is no change in the policy, which was effective from 11 December 1993, if the participant developed a condition within 25 years of participation in the tests. I am pleased that the research did not begin and end in 1988 or 1993. From that point of view, I welcome the contribution that Dundee University—and Sue Roff in particular—is making to moving the research forward. I know that politicians are easy targets for criticism, but how many members—apart from Richard Simpson—are scientific academics with a great knowledge of the research on these complex matters? I will put in a word for politicians here—we can rule only on the best evidence available to us. I am delighted to hear that the clinical assessment programme studies will help to clarify the situation and that the work in Dundee will help to develop a diagnostic system for use in the nuclear industry, in all its forms, to establish occupational health hazards. I am delighted that that will help in the understanding of variations in radiosensitivity among individuals. Although I appreciate that the funding relates specifically to war veterans, there is no doubt that the research will enable us to gain a greater understanding of these issues for the benefit of everyone who works in the nuclear industry. At this point, I note the billions of pounds that have been allocated to decommissioning the Dounreay plant. I am the reporter for the Health and Community Care Committee on the alleged link between the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine and autism. If I have learned one thing from that, it is that it is very difficult to consider contradictory evidence and make a reasoned, considered, fair and just judgment. I thank Andrew Welsh for raising this issue today.

Does Pauline McNeill's party support the provision of free milk in schools in Scotland?

The recommended number of dental graduates each year in Scotland is 120; Glasgow produces 70 graduates and Dundee produces 50. Dundee is allowed to fund 59 graduates in the first couple of years to allow for drop-outs. Does the member disagree with the figure of 120, which is met adequately by the two dental schools in Scotland?

I, too, welcome the opportunity to debate the important subject of primary dental care services, including the plans for early registration schemes, fissure sealing and other proposals. I am pleased that my son and daughter, aged 26 and 27, have no fillings and I think that that is because they had fissure sealing at the appropriate time. I welcome Robin Harper's speech. I hope that when the time comes we will have a full debate on fluoridation, from the environmental as well as the health point of view. I hope that the decision on fluoridation does not go through the Parliament added on to dental treatment, as the issues are wider. In the Conservative party, we would have a free vote on fluoridation because many people have strong feelings for and against it. I regard "An Action Plan for Dental Services in Scotland" as the kind of vision that Bishop Devine spoke of earlier and "Workforce Planning for Dentistry in Scotland" as the real plan for action. Today, therefore, I will consider the outline of the latter document, its aims and objectives and how it addresses concerns about current practice; I am pleased to say that it goes a long way towards doing that. Page 4 of the document lists seven areas of increased demand and 12 factors that illustrate the reduction in supply. That variance produces a huge gap, which the document largely deals with. There is not only a training gap, but an action gap and a major funding gap. I am pleased that we will consider dentistry again in the new year, as we have made a professional and responsible start in  dealing with that important subject. The proposals will mean a significant increase in the number of patients who are seen by dentists. To allow that to happen, we will need more dentists and many more dental personnel. Figures in the document outline that in the European Union, the average number of inhabitants for each practising dentist is 1,634. In the United Kingdom, the average is 2,645—1,000 above the European average. The recommendation for the number of dental graduates in Scotland—120 a year—has been accepted by the two major dental schools. I was pleased to hear that the dental college in Dundee recruits more than 50 students to allow for a drop-out rate and to ensure that 50 students graduate each year. As Nicola Sturgeon mentioned, serious problems exist in our system, even before we consider the implementation of the proposals. At Glasgow dental hospital, waiting times are 71 weeks for oral medicine; 69 weeks for anxiety treatment and hypnosis; 34 weeks for oral surgery; 11 months for prosthodontics; 30 weeks for dental conservation; and 22 weeks for children's dental health. We have a lot of work to do in facing those problems. Similarly, Dundee dental school is not without its problems. It faces a £250,000 deficit and has to work under the constraints on investment and expenditure that result from Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust's £19 million deficit. Will the Executive ensure that the expenditure for the dental hospital in Dundee is ring-fenced to ensure that the hospital is given the opportunity to rise to the challenges in the action plan and the work force planning review? The minister mentioned the need for adequate funding and incentives. I am pleased that funding and incentives will be further examined for general dental practitioners. The recent case of John Evans-Appiah—who has had 44 jobs in 22 years—gives rise to concern over the 1,701 new entrants to the dentists register in 1999. Of those new entrants, 54.2 per cent qualified overseas. Can we be sure that those dentists have undergone the rigorous and extensive training that Scottish dental graduates have undergone? We want to ensure that there is no repeat of the exceptionally bad working practices that occurred with John Evans-Appiah and that led to such tragic events. The cost of educating a dental student is accepted to be far greater than that of educating any other undergraduate. The supervision of dental students is much more intensive than on other courses. That gives rise to a serious issue of underfunding. Will the Executive consider ways of  providing funding to allow all dentists to fulfil the obligations for continuing professional education that are outlined in both documents? The General Dental Council has approved the concept of continuing professional development and lifelong learning for dentists and of linking a proportion of that training to attendance at verifiable courses. On that point, we must ask whether our dental schools have the funding, the resources and the facilities to meet those demands. The dental schools are already stretched, so resources must be made available to recruit more staff to allow the new courses to be run without an adverse affect on clinical activity and clinical university teaching. Training must be given and posts created for speciality practice, in addition to more facilities being made available. I have praised the work force planning document, which is excellent. None the less, little is said in the document about specialities—for example, surgical restorative orthodontics and prosthodontics—although such disciplines are essential to achieve the continuing professional development that is outlined, the aims and objectives that are contained in the action plan, and equality of access throughout Scotland. I refer members to page 29 of the work force planning document, which states: "The lack of significant expansion of the consultant grade in the dental specialities in comparison with medical and surgical specialities is of some concern to those involved with training and improving clinical practice." I hope that Scotland can continue to work towards being a centre of excellence for dentistry. To achieve that and the levels of training that are outlined, we must address the personnel issues. However, the recent announcement that all dental general anaesthesia outside hospitals will end by January 2002 offered no positive suggestions for the proper resourcing of alternative methods of anxiety management, or increased training for general dental practitioners. Morale in the dental profession is a matter of serious concern. When an NHS plan devotes 144 pages to the medical profession and only eight lines to dentistry, dentists do not get a sense that their contribution to NHS care is valued. I hope that when we produce our Scottish health plan in November, we will devote more attention to dental needs. It is time for the minister to put her money where her mouth is and commit fully the resources that are required to benefit oral health in Scotland.

I thank Tricia Marwick for securing this debate on an issue with particular significance to Scotland. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton asked me to extend our gratitude for the opportunity to meet the MS sufferers in the Hub at lunch time. Meeting people face to face to listen to their problems is better than reading about them. I tend to associate MS with beta interferon. Because I do not have a health background, I tend to ask for advice from people who know much more than me. Last November, I wrote a letter to Harry Burns, the director of public health at Greater Glasgow Health Board, and he has given me permission to quote from his letter, as I feel that a lot of information regarding beta interferon is a wee bit misleading. According to the Multiple Sclerosis Society, only one drug—beta interferon—is known to slow the symptoms of MS in some cases. The availability or otherwise of beta interferon on prescription epitomises the unfairness of postcode prescribing. I remind the minister, as the drug is the one most associated with postcode prescribing, that the press release of last November does not stack up with the Health Technology Board for Scotland's announcement that it will put an end to postcode prescribing. An MS website states that beta interferon injections may limit the development of new diseases and may also lower the incidence of relapses. The drug is expensive, and its use is rationed by health authorities. As I understand it, beta interferon is an excellent drug for some people with MS and helps them enormously. However, it is a false hope to say that it can help everyone. Harry Burns wrote: "I do not think Beta Interferon is the answer to this disease. I think it important that further research is carried out so that a genuine cure is found." On hearing that beta interferon was the only drug available for MS, I looked through my file and found that another drug, Copaxone, is being considered. To put the cost in context, I cite the example of the spending on taxol, which is used  for cancer. Taxol is typically measured at £25,000 per quality-adjusted life year, whereas on that measurement beta interferon costs between £500,000 and £1 million. Copaxone can affect the course of MS; all other treatments simply treat the symptoms. It is available in 18 countries, and I hope that, given the points that have been raised, the Health Technology Board for Scotland will come to a sympathetic conclusion on it before Christmas. It is time to examine drugs and therapies, to collate the information and to issue clinical protocols on MS to ensure that all sufferers are given clear, accurate information and the appropriate treatment and care for their needs. I hope that the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network will also take up the challenge.

Like Nicola Sturgeon, I welcome the fact that the minister has addressed issues such as variations in home care charging and disregard of the value of a person's home for the first three months. Furthermore, I welcome the advance notice of the ministerial statement and thank Murdo MacLeod of Scotland on Sunday for the opportunity of reading the ministerial statement in advance. The Sutherland commission was set up because the current long-term care system was not working. I will use that system as a benchmark: 10,000 people are currently waiting for assessment; 10,000 have been assessed and are waiting for care; and the care plan and care needs of many more thousands are totally different because councils cannot afford to provide the services. In the light of those facts, does the minister agree that the figure of 7,000 that she mentioned is grossly misleading? Many elderly people go into care due to council cuts and end up in blocked beds because councils cannot provide a care package. In many cases, people must wait a year for occupational therapists. At the weekend, I heard that people were waiting nine months for care and repair schemes. I have used that as a benchmark to measure what has been proposed today. Do the minister's recommendations stand up to challenges under the European convention on human rights? Does the minister agree that personal care falls under the internationally recognised definition of nursing care for the frail and elderly? Will the minister explain the statement on page 7 of her statement, that free personal care "would not be right"? Why should we discriminate against people with Alzheimer's? Sutherland's second key recommendation was a single budget and a single point of entry. Why is the minister not funding personal care and why has she not accepted the single budget, as recommended by Sutherland? On the local authority loans, what criteria will be used and how will they be paid back? When the chief nursing officer makes her recommendations to the minister, will she accept them? Will she give a promise to fund the recommendations? Finally, if the Health and Community Care Committee decides to recommend the funding of personal care from general taxation, will the minister accept the recommendation of that cross- party committee?

Given that the children's panel in the Highlands currently refers young offenders who are in need of drugs rehabilitation treatment to Lincolnshire, will the minister also consider a care and rehabilitation package in Scotland for young offenders whose offences are associated with drugs?

Will the member give way?

Will Hugh Henry give way?

Will the member give way?

I am delighted to have the opportunity to debate the Sutherland report and to expand on the excellent paper by Dr Richard Simpson on proposals for the implementation of the recommendations. I would also like to commend the work that has been done by Richard Simpson, Christine Grahame, Margaret Smith and many other members in progressing the Sutherland report. In reference to the headline of Holyrood magazine, I put one question to the Parliament: "Do we dare to be different?" Now is the time to be bold and to dare to be different. We must use the Scottish Parliament to address the health needs of the people of Scotland. We do not need to wait for action by the Westminster Government or for an election at Westminster—devolution allows us to make decisions that are relevant to Scotland. The Scottish Conservatives took time to sign up to the key recommendation of the Sutherland report—the funding of personal care. We supported that only after hearing the evidence that Sir Stewart Sutherland gave to the Health and Community Care Committee and after examining the exact difference between nursing and personal care. It is worth outlining personal care as it is defined in the report. However, I must say that I regret the tone that was adopted by Iain Gray. Last week we had an excellent debate on public health, in which we showed that we could leave politics behind us and make health a priority, but I am saddened by the tone of today's debate. As defined in the Sutherland report, personal care covers all direct care related to personal toilet; eating and drinking; managing urinary and bowel functions; managing problems associated  with immobility; the management of prescribed treatment; behaviour management and ensuring personal safety. According to the report, all those elements fall within the internationally recognised definition of nursing, although many people who are not nurses may deliver them. We fail our elderly if we nit-pick definitions of nursing. Personal care is the care that is appropriate for people with dementia and frailty. The vast majority of frail elderly people do not need high-tech care; they need personal care—physical care—that incorporates issues of intimacy, personal dignity and confidentiality. The defining condition of the Sutherland report is that unless the review addresses conditions such as Alzheimer's it will not be good enough. If the Scottish Parliament votes only for nursing care and not for personal care, we will have passed a level of care for our elderly that will not be good enough. Personal care is at the heart of today's debate. The Health and Community Care Committee has taken hours of oral evidence and stacks of written evidence. I would like to quote the reply given by Dr Heath in response to a question from Margaret Smith, who asked: "What would be the impact on the delivery of community care services in Scotland if the recommendations of the Sutherland commission were not implemented in full and we followed a similar line to England? Dr Heath: It would be a tragedy, for a number of reasons. For the first time, somebody's eligibility for free care would be based not on an assessment of their need, but on the job description of a specific health professional." —[ Official Report , Health and Community Care Committee , 13 September 2000; c 1160.] As Sir Stewart Sutherland pointed out in the evidence that he gave to the committee, if someone falls off a mountain and sustains injuries, or they fall ill because they drink or smoke too much, their treatment is free. However, if a person becomes old and frail or develops dementia or Alzheimer's, they are means-tested. The Parliament has the opportunity to end that discrimination.

I am sorry, but I am running over.

All conditions, whether caused by smoking or other factors, are debilitating, but Alzheimer's cannot yet be cured by medical intervention. For that reason, the Scottish Conservatives ask members to work together and to support personal care for the elderly in Scotland. The principle is one of equal care for equal needs. The debate today is about equality in  need and equality in care. I ask members of all parties to put their votes where their hearts are and support the motion.

I thank Lloyd Quinan for raising this problem. Is he aware that it was addressed in the Health and Community Care Committee this week, where there was cross-party concern about the contradictory evidence? The committee decided to appoint a reporter to examine this matter. I have offered my services as a reporter, although other members may have done so too. Will Lloyd Quinan work with me on this problem?

Like Kay Ullrich, I am pleased that the Minister for Health and Community Care has toned down her usual self-congratulatory motion to a form of wording that identifies challenges in public health. The minister will always have the Scottish Conservatives' support if she addresses real ways of improving public health in Scotland. During the previous health debate, I was accused of not being committed to public health because I did not go to the Healthy Scotland convention in Glasgow. Most members in the chamber find it difficult to prioritise diaries; on that particular day, I was with Maureen Macmillan, Rhoda Grant, John Farquhar Munro, Jamie Stone and Fergus Ewing, meeting the Highland health boards and trusts at Craig Dunain and the New Craigs hospital. I should tell the minister that I am committed to public health and to working cross-party to address that issue. In the Tory years, we worked to change the emphasis from a national sickness service to a national health service, with greater emphasis on preventive measures. The Scottish Parliament gives us the opportunity to continue that process and to deal with public health in Scotland. Our approach must be radical, visionary and based on sound partnership working. Progress has been made on infant mortality: the figure was more than halved during the Conservative years and continues to decrease. Rates of survival for heart disease, stroke and  breast cancer have significantly improved and continue to do so. I agree with the minister that more can be done and I commend her measures on occupational health. In moving my amendment, I want to emphasise examples of partnership working. Kay Ullrich mentioned local authorities. In my role as a member of the Health and Community Care Committee and regional Highlands and Islands MSP, I have noticed that local authorities and voluntary and community organisations, which provide a tremendous service, do not feel valued. I hope that the new allocation will help that situation. On Tuesday, Keith Harding and I visited the Perth Association for Mental Health day centre. The staff there certainly do not feel valued, despite the service that they provide. In fact, the centre faces closure at the end of the year, with nine redundancies, the loss of many excellent volunteers and 70 mentally ill people in the community who will not receive the support, counselling, advice and companionship that they need. As a result of council cuts and an increased demand for respite care, local people in Harris in the Western Isles now fund-raise to provide crossroads services to carers and people in need. Partnership working requires good communication and understanding of the issues as well as funding. There is a serious need for stability and continuity of care, and we must give the voluntary sector the means and ability to plan such services, as the public pound buys far more care and support in that sector. We must still tackle many areas where there has been a worrying lack of progress. For example, the issue of drugs constantly comes to my attention. West of Scotland figures are now critical and it has been stated recently that they are worse than the figures for north America. There are concerns that the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency and drug action teams are fast becoming talking shops, instead of seizing the opportunity to work together and to address the issues. As for methadone, I have problems with giving people medication with the aim of reducing crime. I ask the minister to include in the drugs strategy a system of supporting and counselling people whose drug habits are stabilised using methadone. There is a clear need for a system to reduce drug intake, instead of simply focusing on containment. We also have an opportunity to examine better continuity of care and working relationships between agencies for offenders and ex-offenders. Too often, much of the help and support that is given to prisoners is lost when they are released  into the community because of the lack of continuity of care. The Executive talks about strategies and reviews, sets up focus groups and task forces, and publishes glossy brochures, but I want to give an example of one individual. A 15-year-old addict in Lochaber was recently made the subject of a supervision requirement at a children's hearing and given a condition of residence in a place that I was shocked to hear the location of. I am not familiar with the facilities for drugs rehabilitation in Scotland, but I was shocked that it was recommended that that person, from the remote area of Lochaber, should attend Middlegate Lodge in Lincolnshire at a cost of between £20,000 and £30,000. That organisation has an 85 per cent success rate and is a specialist resource that works with young people who have drug problems. In relation to drugs and public health, I call on the minister to consider support, counselling and rehabilitation for the addicts and their families who are crying out for our help. We should have such facilities in Scotland, rather than having to send our children down to Lincolnshire. I will take this opportunity to read the words, as reported in the Lochaber News , of a parent speaking after his son committed suicide. "Evil comes in many disguises and our youngsters are being sucked in before they even know what is happening—by that time it's too late. They know that there's a problem but have nowhere to turn for help." It is not only the children, the teenagers and the drug addicts and victims who do not know where to turn for help—nor do the parents. Today's generation of parents does not understand the drugs culture and desperately needs support and advice. I am sure that the minister agrees that we should be much less judgmental and attach less of a stigma to drugs. The Parliament needs to be more understanding, more compassionate and more helpful to people who are crying out for help but do not know where to go. Smoking is an important issue. The incidence of lung cancer has increased, particularly in women. More women now die of lung cancer than of breast cancer. I note that the minister addressed that point today. In particular, it is worrying that young women seem to think that starting smoking will stop them eating. Smoking has somehow become a fashionable habit and we need to address that. I am also concerned about Zyban; my brother-in-law is on it and I have heard about his experiences. I believe that the drug is useful only for smokers who are highly motivated to quit. I am not convinced that GPs and pharmacists are aware of the need to question people about how highly motivated they are. The drug is being issued to anyone without the proper procedure being followed.  As Bristow Muldoon said yesterday, people who use the drug require support and counselling. My brother-in-law told me that he had received no support, but we realised later that there is a freephone number on a piece of paper in the packet. Given that the drug is expensive and can be successful, I am concerned that people are not being made aware of the support and counselling that is available and the correct way of using the drug. I worry that Zyban will not fulfil its potential.

I would like to think that the case was isolated. I have read two newspaper articles about it. Bristow Muldoon asked yesterday about Zyban and counselling, and several pharmacists have also been in touch with me on the matter. I am pleased to hear that Margaret Jamieson is making progress and getting the support that she needs. Chlamydia is a disease that is increasing at an alarming rate. It is now the most common cause of infertility in Scotland. The Scottish diet action plan offers good advice, but it is now time to move to implementation and support. I support the establishment of the institute of public health and the fact that it will outline what can be done rather than simply what needs to be done. I hope that the institute will be an improvement on some of the advice from the Health Education Board for Scotland—a recent HEBS document includes the following priorities: "a national strategy would be helpful as a basis for co-ordinated action . . . there should be further work to explore the potential of the media as a vehicle for health promotion". That is hardly a revelation—I really wonder what those people get paid for. When money and resources are allocated to organisations such as HEBS and the institute of public health, we do not expect them simply to state the obvious, but to give us help, advice and support to move forward. Frankly, if the statement that I quoted is the best that HEBS can come up with, we are not going anywhere. It is time that HEBS got down to developing a clear vision and strategy to address the obvious problems that are prevalent in Scotland.  The motion "values the contribution of local authorities, voluntary and community organisations and others". I therefore ask the minister to deal with the uncertainty that is faced by voluntary and community organisations. We have given our commitment to any proposal that will benefit public health in Scotland and have outlined our areas of concern, which we hope will be given more emphasis. In return, will the minister confirm the recent report that, despite the major problems that we face in public health, £15 million is to be spent on a new image for the NHS? I move amendment S1M-1196.2, to insert at end: "and further notes that progress towards a healthier Scotland is dependent on many factors and that progress will only be achieved through a partnership that matches the work of health professionals with public health education and an increased appreciation by individual Scots of the responsibility they have for their own health."

I also welcome today's statement, but it is unfortunate that the minister did not have the courtesy and good will to bring the final report before the Health and Community Care Committee. Across the parties, the committee's members have recognised the problems that are mentioned in the Arbuthnott report and have worked well together in taking the work forward. I have two questions. First, given the pressure on health boards and trusts to reduce waiting lists and times, to prepare for winter pressures, to alleviate bed blocking, to alleviate financial deficits and to make efficiency savings, how can the minister be sure that the funds that will be reallocated will tackle poverty and deprivation? Secondly—I refer to the table on page 55 of the final Arbuthnott report—given that the Highlands is a net beneficiary of the Arbuthnott recommendations, what impact will the 7.7 per cent reduction in the share of cash-limited and non-cash-limited general medical services have, particularly on the potential number of general practitioners?

Is the minister satisfied that adequate screening is being done to identify those committed to quitting smoking before they are given Zyban and is he satisfied that adequate counselling and support are given to those who are now taking Zyban?

Given the minister's commitment to increase the number of dentists, how will the capacity and resources of our dental hospitals be increased to allow them to train and educate additional dentists? I believe that they are currently working to full capacity.

Will the health boards and trusts be allowed to spend the resources that are to be redistributed under the Arbuthnott report in line with their clinical priorities, or will the minister issue more guidelines, targets, aims and objectives? Will the drive to achieve efficiency savings be relaxed under the new guidelines?

I commend Malcolm Chisholm on securing the debate, which gives us the opportunity to ask whether dementia is treated on a par with other chronic illnesses under the national health service. I quote from a leaflet on Alzheimer's disease: "A person with dementia continues to be a person of worth and dignity and deserving the same respect as any other human being." That is particularly important as far as this illness is concerned. Despite dementia care being person centred, a recent survey revealed that 80 per cent of social care workers, including care assistants, had no relevant training or qualifications. That is stated in Alzheimer Scotland's "Action on Dementia" briefing paper, which also states that 60 per cent of people who care for people with Alzheimer's suffer ill health or nervous problems  as a direct result of caring. As Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, Margaret Smith and I visited the Mackenzie Centre in Inverness last week, as part of our community care inquiry. The centre is a particularly good partnership between organisations, offering care and essential support for people with dementia and their carers. It is a day centre that provides respite and stimulation, and helps to keep the mind active. The project is funded jointly by the health and social work services departments of Highland Council, and is managed by Alzheimer Scotland. The paid staff have all had specialist training in dementia. The problems that are faced at that centre probably epitomise the problems that are faced across Scotland. A pilot project, funded by the Clutterbuck bequest fund, was recently run at the centre. It was very successful, and provided up to 50 hours of home care to people in the early stages of dementia, when intervention is essential—a point that Malcolm Chisholm recognised. The home care is also aimed at people who do not want to go into day care. The social work services department of Highland Council examined closely the success of the project, but simply has no money. I commend the good practice in such projects, which helps to keep people in their homes and to ensure that they get companionship, nutritious food, mind stimulation, and care and support. It also saves money on residential and hospital care and ensures that patients receive treatment that is appropriate to their needs. It is sad, in this day and age, that where a recognised, successful project exists, we cannot find the money to support it. I hope that the recommendations of the joint futures working group, the Executive response to the Sutherland commission and the recommendations of the community care inquiry report will ensure that such good, sensible practice, which is backed up by empirical data demonstrating success, will be made available to people with dementia across Scotland.

Will the minister give way?

I am delighted to have the opportunity of speaking in this debate, which I thank George Lyon for initiating. Last week, I promised students from Inverness College that I would lodge a motion on this subject, but the next day George Lyon's motion was in the business bulletin. None the less, I welcome the debate. I am sure that there will be cross-party support for George Lyon's motion, just as there was cross-party support when we visited the new facilities at Craig Dunain in Inverness on Monday. I make that point because the Minister for Health and Community Care seemed to think that I should have been in Glasgow. We all have different priorities and I think that the priorities of the Highlands are important. It is in the interests of no one in the Highlands to see the demise of UHI, given that degrees were previously conferred by the University of Stirling. I am sorry that Sylvia Jackson is not here, because her husband, Professor Jackson, did so much, in partnership with Inverness College, to establish degree courses in the Highlands so that students,  including mature students, could gain the qualifications necessary to get local jobs. That partnership also helped colleges in the Highlands to stay open. Distance learning is all right, but we also need the personal approach. From my experience as a lecturer delivering a degree in business studies at Inverness College through that successful partnership, comparisons with the UHI became evident. This year, students of business studies at Inverness College are still graduating from the University of Stirling. There is no doubt that the concerns about UHI—such as the claims of poor working relationships and poor management and the complaints that were mentioned by George Lyon—should be dealt with. Whatever the rights and wrongs of those difficulties, they must be overcome. There must be openness, transparency and accountability. It is not acceptable for us to read in newspapers such as the Highland News comments from unidentified UHI sources. If an institution receives public money, it should be publicly accountable. It is not sufficient to convene an independent inquiry into UHI grievance procedures. Surely the inquiry should also address the reasons for the grievance. The fact that the UHI project will not receive university accreditation for five years is a concern. I am worried about a written answer to Fergus Ewing, which states that the many criteria for university status include student numbers. Is the criterion that 3,000 students are needed applied elsewhere in Scotland? If so, I would be seriously concerned. As a lecturer at Inverness College, I found the experience disheartening: we were working harder and harder; we doubled, then trebled, class sizes; we could not get photocopies; and we had to stop using the phones. We did all that only to see more and more money pouring into the UHI. We need greater understanding and a greater sense of partnership. More than anything, the UHI project must include and encompass all the students within it. As we speak, 15 people in Inverness are facing redundancy. The UHI project was not about 13 colleges obeying a centralised, bureaucratic structure. We fully support the UHI project and ask the minister fully to support getting the show back on the road with the right manager, who must have the appropriate skills to lead and to achieve that.

Will the minister give way?

rose—

I thank the minister.

Does the acting First Minister have some sympathy with the people of Tayside, who are now facing "six years of austerity," as Paul White, the chief executive of Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust put it? Can he advise the people of Tayside how to overcome the £19 million deficit? Is he concerned about GP referrals to consultants  at Ninewells hospital being reduced by 19 per cent?

rose—

Will Alex Neil give way?

Would the financial wizard from the SNP condone or condemn Jack McConnell, who started the year with a zero budget and now has £435 million?

Does the member think that the closed system to which he refers can be opened up by the minister's refusing to enter into dialogue with the British Medical Association?

We come to this debate in the fourth year of a Labour Government with a chancellor's war chest of £18 billion and a further £22.5 billion from the mobile phone auction. The Government said that it would hit the ground running; it has been running ever since. The bigger the problems, the faster it runs in the opposite direction, towards focus groups, commissions, inquiries, glossy brochures, working groups, consultation—anything that prevents it from addressing the problem. Never before have we heard daily of so many problems. Never before has the medical profession been so outspoken about those problems.

I have not even started. Maureen Macmillan should sit down and listen to what I have to say. Today we are faced with a motion that does not address the crisis; it is self-congratulatory and ill deserving in the extreme. It is insulting and wholly insensitive to those working in the national health service and the patients whose lives depend upon it. The Executive will not be forgiven for its arrogance, complacency and total lack of sensitivity to NHS staff and their patients.

The motion refers to "commitment to the NHS". Would that be the commitment to the £135 million underspend, to the ever-rising financial deficits, to the 135 vacancies  for consultants, or to more spin and fewer doctors?

The voice of Scotland's doctors states that the Executive is all spin and no doctors.

If I had been going to give way, I would have done so by now. [Laughter.] It is the last day of term—Hugh has had a busy year and should have a rest. The motion refers to "improving the health of the Scottish people" at a time when the cure rate for lung cancer in Scotland is half that of France. Would that be the improvement in waiting lists, which have increased by 17 per cent in the past 12 months? Could it mean the Executive sitting on £135 million while cancer patients die as they wait for treatment? The motion mentions "a modern health service". This modern health service cannot afford training and has had to slash investment in medical equipment and technology. This modern health service cannot even reply to the man who invented keyhole surgery, which is now practised throughout the world—he cannot get a reply to his letters, despite being promised funding by the previous health minister, Sam Galbraith. This modern health service cannot even give Scotland's 26 medical directors their terms and conditions of employment, despite the fact that they have been in post for 16 months. At a time when the aim is to change the way in which clinicians practise, who better than the medical directors to bring about that change? When they move, the doctors move, and, until the doctors move, no one moves. The motion says that the Parliament "welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to target its . . . investment . . . to areas of greatest need". How would Susan Deacon know the areas of greatest need? She does not even talk to the British Medical Association. John Garner said at the BMA's national conference: "We currently have no significant involvement in the development and direction of health policy." While the minister talked of partnership, John Garner went on to say that "the BMA in Scotland has had no dialogue at all with the Executive over the new monies . . . But we are not alone, the other health professions and indeed the public are equally frozen out from the process." As for targeting resources, the minister called the members of the Health and Community Care Committee numpties when they dared to disagree with her over the Arbuthnott report. It would seem  that the modernisation board can propose anything so long as Susan agrees.

The spin-doctors have to apologise for that, as it was published throughout Scotland. There is not even a pharmacist on the modernisation board, despite the fact that Scotland's pharmacists see 600,000 people every day. What are the modernisation plans? Is there a plan? Is there a vision? Is there a strategy? Or is it the case, as John Garner of the BMA said, that everything is being done by "a new army of special advisors, civil servants and spin-doctors"? The BMA is the voice of Scotland's doctors. John Garner went on to say: "We believe it is vital that the Executive understands that those who work in the service, those who pay for the service and most importantly, those who use the service, are central to modernising the service. Scotland needs a long-term strategic plan of expansion and modernisation involving meaningful and constructive dialogue". One would not have thought that the Executive needed to be told that.

John Garner went on to say that, rather than sound-bite politics—

Hugh Henry is so persistent that I shall give way.

I am delighted to say that William Hague has given us carte blanche to make health policy in Scotland to suit Scotland's needs and Scotland's patients. Ann Widdecombe is not the health minister; the next time that Hugh stands up with his wee interventions he should remember that. We are talking about something called devolution. I know that it is difficult for Tony Blair to understand, but that is what it is called. All the shortcomings that John Garner described come from an Executive in which one is sacked for leaking but keeps one's job for incompetence. If the minister had discussed with the professionals how best to use the money for Scotland's health, she might have used £80 million to invest in and modernise the aging diagnostic equipment to bring it up to satisfactory minimum standards. A written answer to a question from Kenny Gibson confirmed the huge reduction in investment in medical equipment. How can trusts invest when they have to transfer capital to revenue budgets to meet political, rather than clinical, targets? Money could have been invested in training, by revitalising the study-leave budgets that, over the past five years, have continually decreased in real terms. Even £50,000—a drop in the ocean—could fund a Scottish course to train tutors of lip-reading, which would benefit 370,000 hearing-impaired adults in Scotland. Surely, as a management consultant, the minister must recognise that change must be managed. However, the clinical director of Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust, who quit after 40 years of service, described "the stress of trying to run clinical services when instructions from the centre, particularly the Health Minister, are incompatible with running that service". When the minister wants to talk about partnership, I suggest that she starts by looking for a dictionary definition and then works on that. The £135 million underspend is a result of sheer hard work by staff in the NHS who, as Kay Ullrich said, were under the illusion that it would be ploughed back into the health service. Many of those staff worked 16-hour shifts to get the NHS through the winter. It is hardly surprising that good will and trust has now been broken and that morale is seriously dented. Is it any wonder that staff in the NHS are feeling let down, angry and frustrated? This should be about clinical priorities, not political priorities. Let the health service get on with managing. Let NHS staff get on with treating the patient—they know what needs to be done. The £135 million underspend did not just appear on 31 March. When did the minister know of the potential underspend? Was it when patients in Inverness were being offered the nearest intensive  care bed in Birmingham? Did she know of the underspend when the cancer patients in Tayside and Glasgow found out that their tumours had grown too big to be treated? Did she know of the £135 million underspend when services were cut at Stracathro month by month? Why was it that justice, local government, the Parliament and administration all negotiated to keep the full underspend with no clawback? Previous practice was that the health service retained 100 per cent of any underspend, not 75 per cent. Why did the budget rules change this year? Why did the minister agree to a £34 million loss to the core services of the NHS? Did the civil servants not tell her about common practice, or is Jack McConnell a little bit too smart for her? If she cannot fight to retain £34 million in its rightful place in our NHS, how can she be trusted to represent Scotland's interests in negotiating the Barnett formula for our funding from Westminster? However, the Minister for Health and Community Care has a contingency plan. When things go wrong, she blames the managers. If that does not work, she threatens to sack them and to dock their pay. If that does not work, she threatens to cull them. If that does not work, she blames the doctors and consultants. If that does not work, she blames the GPs. If that does not work, she blames the patient. If that does not work, she blames Jack McConnell. Those policies sound like the rhyme "Solomon Grundy". They are born on a Monday, leaked on a Tuesday, spun on a Wednesday, denied on a Thursday, rejected on a Friday, dead on a Saturday, buried on a Sunday. That is not the end of Solomon Grundy, however, because it is all reannounced the following Monday. Surely the time has come for the Executive to put Scotland's patients before ministers' career prospects. I move amendment S1M-1091.2, to leave out from first "the Scottish" to end and insert: "that the delivery of a modern NHS requires both resources and reform; calls upon the Scottish Executive to abandon those policies which foster a spirit of divisiveness, to adopt policies which will restore the morale of the health service workers at all levels and to work with medical professionals and relevant authorities to address the need for investment in equipment and training and ensure that the £135 million underspend is fully committed to benefit patient care, and further calls for the development of a new approach to long-term and community care through unified health and social work budgets."

How can clinical standards be raised in Scotland when the man who invented keyhole surgery cannot even get a reply to his letters, let alone the recognition that would allow advances in technology in that field? A leading consultant has today stated that, due to your funding cuts, cancer patients in Tayside are dying more quickly than would be expected.

The budget process has certainly been an enlightening experience for the Health and Community Care Committee—enlightening in the sense that the more questions we asked, the more confusing it became. I welcome this opportunity to unravel the information that is available, to help to understand the data and to have a reasoned input into future decisions on the allocation of resources in the national health service. I also welcome Lord Watson's recognition of the constructive points that have been raised by MSPs and the minister. The Scottish Parliament gives us the opportunity to scrutinise such information on the budget process rather than accept the way it has aye been done. Given the task, I would not expect the process to be perfect by next year; none the less, I expect significant improvements to be made. I shall speak about "Investing in You" in relation to health matters. We should begin by stating the five strategic aims and the three clinical priorities; only after they have been stated can we start to track resources to ensure that they are being directed to meet our aims and priorities. There is no system of tracking money to clinical targets, which are currently cancer, heart disease and mental health. We need a system whereby ministers can state clinical priorities and we can ensure that money is routed to them. We then need a national financial framework so that we can see how spending is split to address the aims and priorities. The main concerns are the serious lack of transparency in health and community care spend. Given the responsibility of councils for care in the community, we must ensure that they receive adequate resources and that those resources are  spent on care in the community. I cannot speak for members of the Health and Community Care Committee, but there seems to be consensus in that committee that resources should be shifted in the budget to put greater emphasis on preventive care and that there is a need to take a longer-term view. We need clear and concise data to ensure that that shift of resources can take place. That is not possible with the current information—that view was confirmed by the director of finance of the health department The health improvement plans and the trust improvement plans are the chalkface of addressing resources to the practical issues. HIPS and TIPS set out targets and objectives for five years, based mainly on "Priorities and Planning Guidance for the NHS in Scotland", which is two years old. The Executive sets out aims and objectives annually—not to mention additional announcements throughout the year in response to various crises and initiatives. In other words, we have an annual budget here, but we expect our health boards and trusts to have five-year and seven-year budgets. Those budgets have to come in line with each other. Sixteen objectives are listed in "Investing in You", most of which apply until 2002. None of them is costed or tied with sufficient clarity into the published strategy documents. I would like documents to be integrated with spending plans. We could then have a much more meaningful input. We have received confusing evidence on some initiatives, such as walk-in, walk-out hospitals. We need to be satisfied that there are proven benefits for patients before we grant additional resources.

It would be helpful to understand the revenue implications of the agenda for modernising the health service, particularly if a new service is to be introduced before an old one is discontinued, as undoubtedly significant financial implications arise from that. The well-informed readers of the budget document who gave evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee expressed concern about the difficulty of interpreting figures. If people who are medical directors and directors of public health experience difficulty, how can we expect Joe Average to understand the information? Finally, I will refer to a point that Pat Dawson raised about the inclusion in the 2000-02 budget of £15 million for demonstration projects. Written clarification from the Executive showed that that funding was £5 million a year over three years rather than £15 million in one year. Once we have addressed all the issues that I  have raised, considerable improvements can be made.

It was quite amusing when speaker after speaker spoke about the dearth of policy proposals in the motion. At one point, I thought that Kenny MacAskill was advocating that we go to work on a lawnmower. That would be a unique and innovative idea.

But we would never get to work on time. I get annoyed when people assume that petrol is much more expensive in the Highlands than it is elsewhere in Scotland. I do not think that that does  too much for tourism. It is true that petrol is more expensive in the islands, but the prices are exactly the same in Inverness as they are in Edinburgh. The issue is not the Highlands versus elsewhere, but urban versus rural. Petrol is more expensive in rural communities in north-east Fife such as Anstruther, Cellardyke and Auchtermuchty than it is in the Highlands. Pricing people out of the car and into public transport is a laudable proposal for overcrowded cities. However, there is no reasonable alternative to the car in most parts of rural Scotland, especially for tourists. From our office window, we can watch people taking a tour of the whole of Edinburgh in a double-decker tourist bus. To see the Highlands of Scotland would cost £200 or £300 in petrol. It is impossible to see the Highlands by public transport. Alasdair Morrison and Rhoda Grant mentioned the investment in the petrol station at Klilchoan in Ardnamurchan, which is the most westerly point in Britain. However, the investment was aimed not at bringing down the cost of petrol sold but at allowing the petrol station to stay open. It would be misleading not to point that out. I am concerned about the inelasticity of demand for petrol. Petrol—however high the price—is a necessity in the family budget that must be met before budgeting for food and other household expenses. That means that people on low and fixed incomes are penalised more heavily by petrol prices. The same applies to the cost of employment: travelling to work costs those in a rural area much more than those in an urban area, although the wages might be the same. In the Highlands—despite the fact that residents of the area get only 80 per cent of the average EU income—car ownership is much higher than it is in the lower-income categories in major cities. Two thirds of people in the Highlands who earn less than £10,000 a year own a car. In Glasgow, very few people in that income group own a car. The car causes deprivation in low-income groups. It is ironic that the poorest members of our rural society might be paying more in tax on petrol than they pay in income tax. The repopulation of the Highlands and the stabilisation of the economy has gone hand in hand with increased mobility in the form of the motor car. As Mike Rumbles said, to price people in the Highlands out of the car would have a devastating effect on the fabric of rural life and might reverse the repopulation that has taken place. Rural areas have benefited from increased car ownership as people have access to centralised public services and jobs while continuing to live in remote and rural areas. Many people would be unable to visit a hospital in less than a day without a car. They would have to pay for public transport  and overnight accommodation and would also waste time. Although this Parliament does not have the powers properly to address the issue, we can give a clear message to Westminster MPs—including those sitting in this chamber—that the matter should be debated in a place where decisions can be made.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive how the initiative Beyond 2000 will benefit the Ambulance Service. (S1O-1957)

Does the minister believe that a priority-based dispatch system is the best means of improving response times? Furthermore, does she share concerns that the interrogation in 999 calls might result in less assertive callers being given a lower priority?

I welcome the motion and the tenor of the minister's speech. The motion calls on the Parliament to note the report of the learning disability review, "The same as you?", to progress towards implementing the recommendations and to look forward to  "a future where all relevant agencies work together with people with learning disabilities to ensure that they can live as full lives as possible". Like the minister, I welcome this historic occasion. Today is the day on which a glossy brochure became reality and I truly welcome that. I have been critical of all the glossy brochures, but I endorse the practical approaches outlined in this one.  The review continues the reform of services for people with learning disabilities, building on the community care reforms put in place by the Conservative Government. The number of patients with learning disabilities in long-stay hospitals has fallen from 6,500 in 1980 to just over 2,000 now. There is a need to increase confidence in our service so that it does not reduce to containment or a form of babysitting, and so that services are provided to suit the needs of users. Of course, all the recommendations cannot be achieved overnight, but there is no doubt that many of the 29 recommendations can be progressed by good practice and improved practice. Section 50 of chapter 2 gives a good example of that—the bringing together of the Scottish Society for Autism and the National Autistic Society for a managed clinical network. This debate does not deal only with today's problems; it puts in place mechanisms to avoid and address future problems. Some points are crucial to the whole debate. First, we need more and continued research on the increase in the number of people with disabilities. The number has been rising at a rate of more than 1 per cent a year for more than 35 years now, and I am pleased that the Health and Community Care Committee is pursuing and investigating the alleged link between the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine and autism. I would welcome further similar research. The key to successful implementation of the recommendations in the review document is, as I have said before in the chamber, assessment. It must be extended where appropriate and carried out as early as possible so that those in need of support get help that is uniquely tailored to their needs and adequately funded. Not only will assessment lead to better quality health care, it will lead to savings elsewhere in health and education, as the minister said in his opening remarks. A friend of mine has a son with Asperger's syndrome. He was not assessed until he was over 18. They thought he was just a very difficult child who could not make contact with others. Once they decided that he had Asperger's syndrome and his condition was addressed, he flourished. He is now getting a job. It may be a tedious job, but children with Asperger's syndrome have talents that, once recognised, can help them to find fulfilment and independence and to be confident in their own abilities. I also endorse recommendation 28, which suggests research into the number of people with learning disabilities in prison or in secure accommodation—they also have the right to be assessed and appropriately supported.  Prisoners' health care needs should not be judged by their offences—they have every right to assessment, care and support as people. I am delighted that that is included in the recommendations. Assessment is the key to successfully addressing individual needs and providing appropriate health and educational support as well as the full range of services to fulfil present and future needs and to make personal life plans workable. My next point is the partnership in practice—the PIPs Duncan Hamilton mentioned—to achieve integration and assessment. There is a need to address current practice and current levels of support and care positively. In requiring agencies to work together, it is not good enough, when the quality of care is reported to fall well beneath the minimum standards, that councillors turn round and state that they can look after their own centres. That happened recently in Highland. I hope that in future councils will be more open and accountable, will listen to and address problems and will improve care rather than defend the indefensible. I welcome the new partnerships. We also welcome the direct payments, which will give people and carers more control over their care, freedom and choice to buy services. The change fund must be open and transparent. We must be able to track the money to the provision of services. We have had a bad experience in resource transfer in relation to care of the elderly, as Duncan Hamilton mentioned. I look forward to a more open and transparent relationship in future. Finally, while it would be easy to pick out preferred recommendations, I especially like recommendation 21, which states: "There should be a long-term aim to promote public awareness about learning disabilities and including people with disabilities in the community." I believe that we have progressed that by using the title "The same as you?" and I look forward to the new centre for learning disability being set up this autumn because I believe that it will take forward better understanding in a move towards sensitivity, greater tolerance and greater inclusion of people with learning disabilities.

To ask the Scottish Executive what proposals it has for the provision of services for anorexia sufferers in Scotland. (S1O-1865)

Given that a recent survey showed that there are specialist centres in Aberdeen, Perth and Edinburgh, that more than half of Scotland has no specialist service and that one in every hundred people develops anorexia, with the condition proving fatal to more than 13 per cent, what plans does the minister have for implementing the recommendations of the British Medical Association's report, "Eating Disorders, Body Image and the Media"?

Will the minister confirm whether the National Trust's remit has changed from that of guardian of our culture and heritage to that of a profit-making organisation with an economic advantage, capable of putting local people out of business?

I am pleased to have an opportunity to debate the Scottish heart transplant unit and I commend Kay Ullrich for bringing forward this topic for debate today. Conservative members will support Kay Ullrich's motion because we want a fully functioning and well-maintained heart transplant unit; but we will also support the Executive's amendment, because it addresses some of the current problems in order to achieve future stability of the service. There are underlying problems with the Scottish heart transplant unit that have to be addressed. I wish to raise three issues in the short time that is available today. The first concerns the management and the current problems. It seems strange that the whole unit depended on one man. I do not intend to mention any names today, but they are all fairly obvious from recent newspaper articles. We have professional clinicians talking about the lack of enthusiasm of others. We have heard of professionals being marginalised from decisions as they watched the unit grind to a halt. We have heard of a young surgeon who wanted to  stay but who was told there was no place for him, and we hear about there being no confidence in the trust to solve the unit's problems. There are allegedly four surgeons who have been trained for heart transplant surgery—two in Australia and two at the Freeman hospital. We have to ask the management of the North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust why they were not employed. Where was the clear line of management and where is the clear forward planning? Those issues have brought this debate to the chamber today. The minister promised last month that health service managers would have their salaries cut if their performance did not come up to standard. Will she consider cutting the salaries of the management of the North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust for their complacency or incompetence?

That is my next point, but there is no doubt that job advertisements, manpower planning, human relations and personnel issues are the responsibility of the trust, not of the Executive—although I take Mr Hamilton's point. My second point is about funding. The unit receives hypothecated funding. There is no gain for the North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust in failing to fill these posts. With no financial gain, we can only assume that there was a lack of commitment and enthusiasm. Kay Ullrich made a point about accountability and transparency. Why have no transplants been carried out in Scotland's only heart transplant unit since January? Who is monitoring the unit? When our only unit does not carry out heart transplants for four months, surely alarm bells have to start ringing.

In a minute. Although the amendment goes only so far, I commend it because it addresses many issues—although in future better monitoring must be in place.

I did not hear a word that; I gave way to Richard Simpson.

We must draw attention to the fact that this issue came to the public's attention only when hearts were being turned away. That may have been another problem, but that was when the issue was highlighted in the press. My third and final point concerns how the present situation affects patients. We are talking about patients who are already seriously ill being told to travel even further, not only for their operation but for the first phase of post-operative care. One patient from Inverness, who has to travel to Glasgow, finds it difficult to make that long journey. His journey to Glasgow is probably equivalent to travelling from the central belt down to Newcastle. That constituent, who is on income support, has often been unable to afford the journey and the meals, and he certainly cannot afford the overnight stays. Under the current arrangements in the national health service, there are no additional means of funding these patients. As has been mentioned today, it is the aftercare that keeps patients alive. My constituent has picked up colds and flu on the train and on the bus, which has meant additional stays in the heart transplant unit in Glasgow. Whatever we may think, patients are worried that there will be a lack of continuity and consistency. The additional travelling puts a severe strain on patients. We need not only a commitment from the Executive; we need to ensure that the management is capable of ensuring that staff and resources are in place to serve heart transplant patients in Scotland and, in future, lung transplant patients.

How will the proposals affect the current regulations for foster carers?

To ask the Scottish Executive how patient care in Scotland will be affected by changes at the heart transplant unit at Glasgow royal infirmary. (S1O-1735)

On the long-term arrangements, given that the review of transplant units in England recommends that the number of units should be cut from eight to four, and that each unit should have four surgeons, will the minister commit to having four surgeons for Scotland's only heart transplant unit, so that we never again have to depend on the decisions of one individual?

Taking into account the points made by John Farquhar, who is the former convener of Highland Council's roads and transport committee, does he share my concern that from October 1999 to March 2000 people were unable to take up residential nursing care places, despite urgently requiring them, because of lack of funding? Does he share my further concern that, six weeks into the financial year, Highland Council's social work department's budget is "already overspent by five persons"?

Will Hugh Henry give way?

rose—

I greatly welcome the debate on community care, which is one of the many serious health issues that face Scotland today. First, I want to address the Executive's motion. The word that really sticks in my throat—I think the same is true throughout Scotland—is "commends". We are invited to commend "the Executive's approach to community care". What is the Executive asking us to commend? The 2,500 patients who languish in Scotland's hospitals because councils have no money to place them? Is the Executive commending itself for slashing the home help service throughout Scotland? Is it commending itself for the cuts to councils and the voluntary sector? Those cuts led to a group in Highland Council having to decide how to save £220,000 and which services—Victim Support, Crossroads, or drugs and alcohol counselling—gave value for money. How is it possible to put a value on the care and counselling that is given by Victim Support and compare that with the value that is given by a  respite carer? That is what the Executive is forcing people throughout Scotland to do. Fortunately, Highland Council found savings elsewhere in its budget, so the cuts were put on the back burner for a year, but the same problems will arise again next year. Perhaps the Executive is commending itself for the bankrupt and semi-bankrupt residential and nursing homes. Or is it for the council fees freeze for social work funded places? Or perhaps for the many letters—I receive them, and I know that the minister and her deputy receive them, because I receive copies—about patients whose conditions have deteriorated so much as a result of their delayed discharge from hospital that they are now unfit to return home? The Executive knows the price of everything, but the value of nothing.

Not now, Hugh—later. People in Scotland might have some respect for the Executive if, just for once, its policies honestly addressed problems and positively provided solutions. Let us consider the solutions that have been outlined. Once again, I have to hand it to the Executive—10 out of 10 and another gold star for "Modernising community care: an action plan", which is a wonderful-looking glossy brochure. The Executive really knows how to do them. Of course I welcome all of these packages, announcements, strategies and documents. I especially welcome the modernising of community care and the progress in the strategy for carers. The problem is, when I tried to find out yesterday about the progress on the strategy for carers, no one knew anything about it, including the Scottish Parliament information centre. I need, and Scotland needs, there to be a recognition of the needs of carers. When will the Executive's words and spin become real? When will carers really be helped and supported, and how will that be done? Of course I welcome—my party welcomes—the joint futures group that was set up in 1999. Again, I sought information yesterday on the progress of that group; again, from SPICe and elsewhere, no information is available.

When the Executive is asking people to vote on its progress, it is only fair that a report of that progress is given to Parliament so  that even Labour members know what they are voting for. I welcome the fact that the group has been set up, but we want action—not simply words and lots of meetings. I also welcome the point the minister made about it being time to move onwards and upwards, but does it really take a politician to tell social workers in the national health service to share their information? It is tragic that we have to tell them that.

Just a second. I strongly welcome the learning disability review, especially the changes that have been recommended. Recommendation 4 is on the change fund. Of course my party welcomes that. I would like to think that the money will go to help people who are most in need. That has not been the record of councils in the past. I also welcome chapter 2, paragraphs 46 to 51, on autism and Asperger's syndrome. I have raised points on those issues in parliamentary questions and during education debates. I am looking for action, not simply recommendations. We also welcome the lifelong plan. As they get older, many elderly carers worry greatly about how the people they care for will be looked after in their old age. However, the 29 recommendations all include the word "should". I hope that "should" will become "will" or "must". People know what they should do, what they ought to do and what they can do; we in Scotland have to get into mature, grown-up politics and we have to address needs. I sincerely hope that this is not just another glossy brochure that will gather dust; its recommendations are excellent and I hope that they will be implemented.

Really, Margaret. I do not have to take any lessons from you. The Conservatives decided to spend more on services, more on patients and more on helping, to have fewer cuts and to spend less on glossy brochures. I welcome the wise words in the documents; I think Margaret Jamieson should accept that. What is said is excellent, but I hope it will be put into practice. I endorse the strategy and the practical measures. We are, however, left with this cultural incompatibility and an attitude of professional preciousness between social work and the NHS. One radical solution is to be found in our amendment and is supported by many of the—

I will finish the point I am making. Actually, as you have interrupted me, go on.

The beds are certainly blocked. My information is based on submissions to the Health and Community Care Committee. One solution is to have one unified budget to deliver seamless, effective and appropriate health care. That would overcome the current two-tier system of community care, in which those who are self-funding are placed instantly and those who depend on social work wait for months or years. Neither can it be right that a social worker can override a consultant geriatrician's decision about where an individual should go for care. That point also was made to the committee. We must also address another matter that was raised with the Health and Community Care Committee. Both the Accounts Commission and the Scottish Affairs Select Committee identified £166 million being spent on resource transfer, yet it is not clear how or where that money is spent. If we are to move forward, there must be transparency and accountability. The Scottish Association for Mental Health stated: "It is beyond dispute that mental health spending is not keeping up with general health service spending, despite the fact that mental health has been declared a priority." Funding for mental health associations has gone down from £40,000 to £10,000 in the past three years. I was pleased to hear the minister say this morning that the framework for mental health, which is now two and a half years old, is beginning to make some progress, because a month ago SAMH was at the Health and Community Care Committee and said that no progress had been made on it. It said that too much time was being spent in long meetings between health and social work, that there were lots of strategy documents and that nothing much was appearing in front-line services.  Can it be right that, in 2000, mental health has a bed requirement of more than 100 per cent, with the result that, at the weekend, we have people with acute mental states taking over the beds of patients who are going out with weekend passes? That is the information we received from SAMH at the Health and Community Care Committee. I have received other correspondence on community care. The Western Isles community care forum hardly commends the Executive's approach to community care. In an e-mail yesterday it stated: "There are elderly, very elderly and infirm people living in their isolated houses, with no relatives or neighbours to help them, who receive half an hour's help in the morning for fire-lighting, half an hour in the evening and no attendance during the weekend. " It would hardly support the Executive's community care strategy in Ballachulish, where a community councillor returned home one day to find two elderly people sitting in his living room. They thought it was their home. That hardly gives us confidence in the assessments for community care. The motion's commendation of the Executive's approach will ring hollow throughout Scotland. A letter I received yesterday from a care home in Nairn stated: "Unless this deplorable situation is addressed as a matter of urgency, care in this community will have reached an even greater state of crisis come the heavy demand on services during the winter months." People all over Scotland feel that they are letting down their old folks and their own people. They write to me that they feel guilty that they are letting down their mothers, fathers and grandmothers. Those people's guilt should be ministers' guilt. I ask ministers to bridge the chasm between their spin and reality; not to assume that a glossy brochure equals success; and, for once in their lives, to accept the responsibility of their position and put patients, carers, and their families at the heart of the health service. I move amendment S1M-868.2, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert:  "notes that the Scottish Executive's approach to community care has resulted in a 40% increase in blocked beds in acute hospitals since 1997, to a total of 2,400 in the latest delayed discharge census, and that this costs the NHS in Scotland up to £96 million per year compared with the cost of nursing home places; further notes that many local authorities across Scotland have been forced to reduce services and increase costs for community care clients as a direct result of the Executive's latest local government financial settlement; further notes that many nursing and residential homes are facing severe financial pressure, due to decisions by councils to freeze fees for social work funded places despite cost increases; calls upon the Scottish Executive to unify health and social work budgets within Community Health Trusts involving NHS  community services, social work services, the voluntary sector and the private sector; and believes that NHS resources wasted on blocked beds should be transferred to Health Trusts in order to provide more community care places and to deliver seamless and more effective community care services for clients. "

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has for walk-in-walk-out hospitals and one-stop clinics in Scotland. (S1O-1686)

Given that one-stop clinics and walk-in-walk-out hospitals require considerable investment in diagnostic scanning and radiography equipment, will the minister explain how that will be achieved when capital spending on equipment is currently less than half what it was in 1997; when, as tonight's Edinburgh Evening News  shows, in Lothian it is down by 75 per cent over the past four years; and when even her own proposed future increases will still leave the national health service with less capital spending than there was under the Conservatives in 1995 and 1996?

I am pleased to support the motion in the name of Margaret Ewing and I congratulate her on making her points with compassion and empathy, not only for the children at the school, but for the rural way of life that everyone who represents rural areas—including, I am sure, the Deputy Minister for Children and Education—values. It is Parliament's responsibility to ensure that rural voices are heard. I agree that we need clarification. There is a test case that we can examine. As a list member for the Highlands and Islands, I have received representations from parents and communities from Ulva Ferry Primary School on the isle of Mull and from places such as Boharm and Glenrinnes in Moray. I attempted to contact Moray Council to ask it why Boharm School is being closed. I was assured by the chief executive that it was for educational, rather than financial, reasons. I see that Margaret Ewing has also been given that excuse. I asked him for research that would prove that children from small schools go on to achieve less in terms of qualifications and careers than their counterparts in larger schools. I asked him to point out to me the ways in which children in  smaller schools are disadvantaged. Unlike Jamie Stone, I received a letter in reply. I will be very happy to pass it on to him. The letter says that "coupled with issues such as drug education, citizenship and behaviour management there is clearly the need for an increased level of peer interaction between children such as cannot always be provided in a very small school situation". I say to the minister that if we extended that attitude to the rest of Scotland, I would be seriously concerned about the future of dozens of schools in Moray and throughout the Highlands and Islands. The next criterion that was mentioned was "The need for groups of children of similar developmental stage to be linked together in working or investigative groups . . . including team games, orchestras and bands, peer group activity." Can we truly keep a school open only if it has 11 guys for a football team and if it can mount an orchestra and support a band for pupils to march in? The situation is becoming farcical, but those are justifications for closing a school from the chief executive of Moray Council. The letter goes on to talk about management and administration. I believe that the administration of some small schools in Ayrshire has been transferred to larger schools. That has allowed the smaller schools to stay open. I hope that Moray Council will examine good practice elsewhere. Probably the two most telling reasons for proposing to close the school are "Best Value for available resources" and "disparities in funding levels with regard to pupil average costs". Although the council talks about education, its main concern is finance. I believe that it is the responsibility of Moray Council to ensure far greater utilisation of the school buildings. As has been said, the school is the hub of the community. I ask the council to consider some of the points that have been made by parents. There is concern that a precedent is being set here, due to pressures on local government finance. That will affect not only children's school experience and education, but the rural fabric of the rest of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Scottish health technology assessment centre will ensure equality of access throughout Scotland to new and existing drugs and treatments. (S1O-1597)

The Health Technology Board for Scotland will provide advice to health boards. In a written answer to me, the minister stated: "Boards will be expected to take account of that advice".— [O fficial Report, Written Answers, 26 April 2000; Vol 6, p 25-26.]  Is it the case that health boards will still ultimately determine which drugs and treatments are provided, and that postcode prescribing will not be stamped out, contrary to what the minister promised last November?

rose—

I am delighted to speak to the motion. The Executive and the Parliament will be judged by how they care for the most vulnerable in our society. I am pleased to take part in this debate, to ensure that the views are heard of those who are unwilling or unable to speak up for a better service. I commend the Health and Community Care Committee for allocating time to this issue and recognising the need for care in the community to be a priority for the health service. I have not been reassured by any of the evidence that we have heard in that committee. If anything, the submissions have served only to heighten my concerns. Although we have to address pressing problems today, we also have to lay foundations for preventive care and support to ensure that the problems of today are not the problems of the future. While I welcome the earmarking for preventive care of £26 million of hypothecated tax from cigarettes, the clear message is, "Smoke more fags and the national health service gets more money." However, if Scotland smokes more fags, the NHS will need more money. With around 2,500 blocked beds in Scotland, not only is the Executive failing to provide those patients with the appropriate care, but the patients are being imprisoned and institutionalised in hospitals, although research shows that that approach disables patients and results in a loss of independence. The enforced bed stays also prevent other patients from accessing health care and cost around £90 million a year. In order to help the elderly, the mentally ill and the disabled, it is clear that we need one budget. The Conservatives believe that that should be a health service budget that can provide seamless care from hospitals to homes and the community. A recent report by the Scottish health advisory service on services for older people in the Highlands says that there is no multi-agency  strategy for older people's services in the Highlands that could create a vision or a model for the delivery of care. I say to the minister that there is no multi-agency strategy for Scotland. The only thing that is clear about the Executive's strategy is that there is no strategy. The report goes on to state that a Highlands-wide needs assessment should be undertaken. I suggest that we need not only a Highlands-wide needs assessment; we need a Scotland-wide needs assessment for the elderly and the disabled. The same report says that there is no vision for older people's services in the Highlands, nor is there a lead person to take services forward. Today we look to the minister to set out a clear vision and to become that lead person to oversee care of the elderly and the disabled. It cannot be right that an elderly person who has exercised his or her choice of taking a place in a home in the private sector is told by social workers that they will receive no funding for six, nine or 12 months. However, if he or she wanted to occupy a room in a local authority-owned home, he or she could have instant access to funding. That makes a mockery of freedom of choice. It cannot be right that there is a two-tier health service for the elderly, in which those who can pay receive the care of their choice at the time of their choice, and in which those who cannot pay are left languishing in hospitals while the NHS and social work departments engage in their system of cultural incompatibility and attitude preciousness—as it was described to the Health and Community Care Committee. We must be able to measure best value, quality and the most effective care for the elderly, whether it is provided by councils, privately or by the voluntary sector. Age Concern says that many older people are being forced to go private, to use savings and to pay for treatment that they previously expected to receive through the NHS. The recent Accounts Commission report mentioned that the highest costs did not always correlate with the highest quality, and that councils should base decisions on the local provision of residential and nursing home care on sound information about the quality and cost of providers. There is also concern that those decisions should be, and are not, open to public scrutiny. Today, I ask the minister to hold not only the health service managers but councils to account for care in the community. In a press release this week, the Minister for Health and Community Care announced: "One year on from devolution, we have achieved a great deal in the NHS." I agree with that statement, and give credit where it is due. The Executive has achieved a flu crisis  the like of which has not been experienced for years. Despite a promise on 10 January to set up a working group, on 4 May there is still no working group. The Executive has achieved more blocked beds in Scotland's hospitals than there have ever been. There have been more petitions, meetings and marches by the people of Scotland, who are worried because they do not trust the health service that they have known and always depended on. The Executive has had an acute services review in Scotland carried out by health trusts in a secretive, arrogant and bullying manner, as it threatens, centralises and rationalises our hospital services. That has not been debated in public, so it is hardly surprising that the public are worried. There are also more than 1,200 unfilled nursing vacancies in Scotland.

I thank Margo MacDonald for her intervention—I, too, have been quite shocked by the bullying, arrogance and secrecy. Ministers treat members' business debates initiated by members of their own party with arrogance, responding with a party political broadcast that does not address the unique points raised. The members' business debate last Thursday, which was initiated by a Labour member, was an example of that practice. If ministers treat their own people like that, there is little hope for the rest of us. If the culture of bullying and arrogance is to change, that change must start with the ministers. We have also heard today that Scotland's only heart transplant unit is turning away hearts for transplant. As we enter the debate of presumed consent for organ donation, the health service lacks the resources to carry out donor transplants. The Executive has also achieved a budget process that is secretive and complex. We cannot trace where the money goes, whether it addresses clinical priorities and whether it provides best value. The Executive has managed to achieve a joint investment fund for general practitioners, to  enable them to offer additional services to patients. However, the process has been made so difficult that no GP practice in Scotland has been able to get a penny out of that fund. We can add to that long list of achievements, as the Executive has managed to achieve more glossy brochures, more focus groups and more announcements on the same pot of cash than has ever been achieved before in the world of politics. In one year, the Executive has achieved a level of arrogance that the Tories could not reach in 18 years. I refer to targets. We were promised NHS Direct by early 2000. Members could be forgiven for thinking that a nurse-led service would involve the Royal College of Nursing. However, the RCN has not even had a telephone call about that service. Another target is that the Executive "will launch a new generation of walk-in/walk-out hospitals." Yet the Scottish Association of Health Councils knows nothing about that target, saying that no patient has ever benefited from that type of care or been assessed under it. The chairman of the board general managers group said yesterday that health board managers had been given no targets or guidance on walk-in, walk-out hospitals. On top of that, we have the target of establishing 80 one-stop clinics by 2002, yet no planning or budget allocations are in place. More statistical information is given about the Meat Hygiene Service than about the national health service. When we ask civil servants about income, we are told that income is "netted up"—a few more weeks of such jargon and civil servants will be more than "netted up". All that adds up the fact that spending by the national health service in Scotland and by councils on health care is difficult to trace. We cannot even identify the money allocated to health targets in Scotland. What has happened to the patient-centred health service? The minister is in a position to address the problems of today's health service, and to set in place plans for care of the elderly and disabled—

I will give way to Kay Ullrich, although I am on my final sentence.

This debate is about community care, but as members of the Health and Community Care Committee are aware, we cannot  see where money is being spent on community care. We are asking for accountability and for the needs of the elderly and disabled to be met, and for that to be done, the appropriate management structure must be put in place.

I ask the minister to address the problems of today's health service and to put in place plans for the care of the elderly and disabled. I ask him to get a grip of the health service and to start to listen to the people whose lives depend on the services that he manages, in order to ensure that they are given dignity, respect and the care that they need. I move, That the Parliament notes that many elderly and disabled citizens across Scotland feel let down by the Scottish Executive and its failure to deal with issues which most directly affect them; further notes that such citizens are being faced with escalating charges for variable social and other services provided by local authorities; believes that many local authorities are taking measures which restrict choice for the elderly in their selection of nursing or residential care; considers that a lack of local authority resources for nursing home places and a lack of co-ordination between health and social work has led to a 40% increase in bed blocking in the NHS since 1997; recognises that local authorities are systematically withdrawing financial support from facilities used by elderly and disabled citizens, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to abandon its agenda of political correctness and replace it with a programme that delivers to Scotland's elderly and disabled citizens affordable services, freedom of choice in care and the dignity and respect they deserve within our society.

I am grateful for my one minute. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am not in a position to comment on where services should be situated in Ayrshire. Many of the women in the Highlands and Islands who have to take ferries and helicopters hundreds of miles when they are in labour would probably be grateful for the services enjoyed in Ayrshire. I would like to know about Allan Wilson's woman-centred maternity units. I did not know there was any other kind. My main concern is that Irene Oldfather, as the constituency MSP, sat down with the health board for a three-hour meeting two days before an announcement was made on the closure of the maternity unit and was told nothing about it. Speaking as a member of the Health and Community Care Committee, the Stracathro and Stobhill petitions shocked me. We now know that those situations were not unique and that there is a general lack of consultation in a health service culture that is arrogant, bullying, secretive and high-handed. We know that health care is changing, but unless health boards and trusts engage with people, they will lose the confidence and trust we have in the health service, which should be cherished.

I commend Kenny Gibson for raising the subject of suicide for debate and for speaking to the motion in such a compassionate and well-informed manner. It is important that we highlight the discrepancy between the falling suicide rates in England and  the rising rates in Scotland. If this Parliament is to work effectively, it has to find Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. I have no doubt that we are all committed to doing that. We must address the stigma on mental health. We can do that by encouraging open debate, discussion, understanding and greater sensitivity around the issue. We have made a start by addressing the issue today. We also need to consider funding. Richard Norris of the Scottish Association for Mental Health recently gave evidence to the Health and Community Care Committee. He said: "It is beyond dispute that mental health spending is not keeping up with general health service spending, despite the fact that mental health has been declared a priority. Two recent Scottish Health Advisory Service reports into mental health services in Renfrewshire and Fife have identified a lack of investment as causing problems—affecting staff levels, the planning of new services and morale."—[ Official Report , Health and Community Care Committee , 8 March 2000; c 628.] Norris also highlighted the severe financial pressures facing local and voluntary sector mental health organisations—including the Scottish Association for Mental Health. He told us that the mental illness specific grant has been frozen since 1995-96. We can do quite a few things to address this enormously complex issue. Kenny Gibson has alluded to people being discharged from psychiatric hospital. There is an enormous job still to be done to find seamless care for patients, not just the elderly and disabled, but also the mentally ill and the vulnerable. By midday today, my desk was covered with research and data on suicide. I found it hard to come to a conclusion from the complex information and decide on a clear way forward. I believe that the Executive should collate such information at a national level and set out a strategy or a protocol to address the problem. I am particularly aware of the high and rising suicide rate in the Highlands and in the agriculture sector. We need as many solutions as there are complexities to the problem. Within the agriculture sector, the culture and the traditions of independence mean that people do not readily access the services that are available. Some research suggests that general practitioners can help, whereas other research suggests otherwise. For example, the University of Aberdeen concluded that medical contact near to the time of the suicidal act was rare. The most alarming figure in Scotland is the suicide rate among young men. On average, it is 50 per cent higher than in the rest of the UK. We need to examine why young men do not make  good use of health services or take time to care for their health or well-being. We need to examine why they have low self-esteem, why they feel socially isolated and why they are more afraid of expressing emotion. We need to examine why they do not have the confidence to seek help when they need it. There are many reasons, including poverty and discrimination. The information that we are discussing today seems to present a direct plea from a vulnerable strand of our community. I welcome this debate, which is the first step towards addressing a tragic problem.

Does the First Minister support the bid by  Highlands and Islands Enterprise to take over the responsibilities of the Crofters Commission, or does he feel that the Crofters Commission is best placed to represent the needs of rural areas? Alternatively, could it be that this is the first step of the quango review that he promised?

I also welcome the Mental Welfare Commission's  report on the care and treatment of Noel Ruddle, and the honesty, openness and transparency of the minister. Problems have to be identified before addressing them. I will ask my questions in the light of the report and the positive and constructive way in which it has been delivered. Given that the deficiencies in Ruddle's care have been identified and addressed in the report's recommendations, and in the light of the Scottish Prison Service's announcement that it is to put general medical services out to tender, will the minister consider extending the system of assessment and health therapies to those in Scottish prisons, many of whom suffer similar problems to those identified in the state hospital? Given the Ruddle experience, will prisoners throughout the system receive the same standards of health care and appropriate treatment for their problems? That would help to address the high rates of reoffending by concentrating on treatment and rehabilitation, not just containment. Will the health care in Carstairs and our prisons be of the same standard as in the rest of Scotland? The British Medical Association requested that in its response to the announcement by the Scottish Prison Service. Finally, there should be an integrated and seamless service for the continued care of ex-prisoners and ex-patients in the community, not only to ensure health care for prisoners, but to assure the public on safety.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assistance is given to people wishing to train as lip-reading tutors. (S1O-1462)

Given that 737,000 people in Scotland suffer from hearing impairment, what will be done to set up a Scotland-wide service to ensure that people with acquired hearing loss are given the opportunity to attend lip-reading classes, and are not just provided with a hearing aid and then sent home to cope without support? Will the minister consider giving financial support for people who wish to train as lip-reading tutors and for people who wish to attend classes?

Will the £26 million from tobacco duty be allocated to smoking cessation measures? Will the minister guarantee to maintain the differential in health spending, which was recognised by successive Labour and Conservative Governments, in order to meet Scotland's needs?

I welcome Robin Harper's motion—it provides an opportunity to strengthen the links between policies on health, housing and the physical environment. Those links are mentioned in a report by the Scottish Council Foundation entitled "The Possible Scot: Making healthy public policy." Robin Harper's commitment to better-quality housing is a view that is embraced by that document. From the health point of view, I congratulate Robin Harper on his motion. There is no doubt that it is a good working example of a holistic approach to policy making. "The Possible Scot: Making healthy public policy" states: "There is much evidence to suggest that poor health in Scotland arises from the complex interaction of a poor physical environment, adverse social environment, lack of life skills . . . and damaging personal behaviour." It states that well-insulated, damp-free homes contribute strongly to the complex web of interaction from which the health status of the population emerges. If we propose to concentrate on preventive health care, investing in housing could more efficiently improve our health status. A healthy housing policy should enable people to live in a home that promotes physical, mental and social health. Improvement to the physical fabric or energy efficiency of housing brings additional health improvements. The combined consequences of high fuel bills, poor living conditions and low incomes are debt, disconnection and ill health. There is no doubt that damp, cold housing causes chronic health problems and contributes to the winter increase in mortality. The reported rate of asthma cases among children in homes with dampness is double that of those in homes without dampness. It also leads to more absences from school and children missing out on education, training, life opportunities and future earning capacity. Like many members, I visited a home during the warm homes week. I visited a lady in Dingwall who is part of the warm deal. I was able to see for myself that the lady, who is not very mobile, is on benefit and has a fixed income, is able to benefit from the draught- proofing and insulation in addition to low-energy lightbulbs and energy advice. All had contributed to her quality of life, better health and additional comfort. I was impressed with what I saw. That does not mean that it was adequate, but it was undoubtedly a great benefit to her. Many people with inadequate heating keep their windows shut. The lack of ventilation can exacerbate respiratory problems, especially if there are smokers in the house. I have a lot of sympathy for Robin Harper's commonsense proposal of health impact assessments. Damp houses and poor heating also exacerbate arthritic conditions. People with respiratory problems often do not function efficiently and find it difficult to concentrate. There is also evidence that poor quality and damp housing can lead to depression and a lack of self-esteem. For many reasons, including the joined-up thinking and the holistic approach to policy, I commend this motion. With more money being spent on fuel, there is less available for nutritional food, which leads to dietary imbalance that can lead to a person's general health suffering. Good insulation and warm homes are positive measures to advance preventive health care and people's quality of life. I congratulate Robin Harper on bringing this motion to the chamber and on illustrating the benefits of one policy as it overspills and synergises to benefit so many others.

I thought the nearest our impartial Presiding Officer came to saying that the statement was froth and had no substance was his polite indication that it did not contain material that he considered urgent. We very much welcome that. On its web page, the BBC reports that £173 million of additional money will be available to the NHS in Scotland. If we deal with three scandalous problems that were caused by this Administration, we will already have spent £181 million. If we use it to tackle the 1,271 unfilled vacancies for nurses, that will cost £25 million. It will cost £106 million to get rid of bed blocking, while the financial deficits in our hospitals are running at more than £50 million. Will the minister address those problems, or will the money be used to tackle other problems that the Executive is about to create? In 1997, the Government promised that the NHS was safe in its hands. [MEMBERS: "The Tories said that."] In 1999 it promised the same thing. It is doing it again in 2000.

Absolutely—the Government has had three years. The minister says that the investment is linked to reform. We would all welcome that, as there are serious partnerships that have to be identified in the NHS. Today, an official investigation by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments has been announced into the fact that 75 per cent of appointments to health boards and health trusts are Labour political appointments. Will appointments to the new bodies to which the minister has referred be based on merit, or need only card-carrying members of the Labour party apply? The minister announced the national strategy in September. She has had seven months to get it up and running. She is now saying not that she has put it in place, but that she will bring people together. How many strategies, focus groups, commissions, reviews and glossy brochures have to be announced before things can actually happen? Finally, of the eight new hospitals, four were already announced under the Tories. Could we have bit of truth here?

I am delighted to serve on the Health and Community Care Committee, where we tend to leave our political hats at the door and put health at the centre of the agenda. That is what the people of Scotland expect and I am sure that it is  what we will continue to do. This debate is not just about health. Hardly a week passes in which we do not hear about high-handed practice from quangos and other public organisations. I do not intend to name any of them, but I want to stress that the principles that we are debating today do not relate only to health. They are basic principles for this Parliament and for public sector organisations and quangos throughout Scotland. I am pleased that Iain Gray acknowledged Conservative initiatives during the 1990s, such as the patients charter. With hindsight, we think that those initiatives did not go far enough. We are still in the process of improving such matters, but I am pleased that it is acknowledged that we recognised the problem during the 1990s. One of the basic principles of the new Scottish Parliament, as set out in the consultative steering group report, is that "the Scottish Parliament should be accessible, open, responsive, and develop procedures which make possible a participative approach to the development, consideration and scrutiny of policy and legislation". I read that out because I think that it is important that this Parliament leads and sets an example for others to follow. Consultation and basic democratic and pluralist principles must be inherent in the way in which we conduct our business in this Parliament. The CSG report also states that it is essential that "the culture of openness and accessibility is reflected in the working of the Scottish Executive." That culture was enhanced by the questioning of the Greater Glasgow Health Board officials by members of the Public Petitions Committee. That was a clear case of scrutiny and accountability, and sent out a clear message that those executives would be held to account by the Parliament. In our business bulletin every week, there are examples of inclusion of many groups and interests throughout Scotland in the various committees of the Parliament. It is important for the Parliament to provide different channels for consultation, and to review and assess the effectiveness of various approaches. There is also an important positive role for the media. We may not always like what they say about us or our Parliament but, in a democratic society, we should welcome the basic principle of freedom of speech and the right of everyone to be heard, at national and at local level. Whether views emanate from groups in the chamber, pressure groups, Church leaders, campaigns backed by millionaires or ordinary individual  beliefs, principles or value judgments, all have a right to be heard in a free and democratic society. I endorse the mutual respect approach of Henry McLeish and I tend to ignore the "shut yer mooth, yer lucky to be here" approach of John McAllion. It is not in the spirit of this new Parliament, and it is certainly not a good signal to send out to health boards and trusts, to call the members of the Health and Community Care Committee numpties for expressing our views based on evidence and submissions on the Arbuthnott report. I have heard members of the Executive argue and dismiss views even when we are agreeing with them—causing a rammie in an empty house, as I said previously. When things go wrong, there is a tendency to blame the Tories for their 18 years of government. When things are right, it is the result of three years of Labour government. When things have gone wrong in the past three years, it is all the media's fault. Unwillingness to accept responsibility is hardly a shining example to health boards and trusts in Scotland.

That is exactly the type of intervention that is not helpful. In the spirit of openness and accountability, we have to accept what each person says, because each person's view is valid.

Yes, as long as it is truthful. An acknowledgement of the truth would be helpful.

I hope I will get more time if I take interventions.

I like to cause a rammie whatever house I am in, as long as someone else is there to engage in it. Six mechanisms of encouraging participation are outlined in the CSG report, but without doubt the most widely used is public petitions. That may be the most appropriate method for some concerns, but it is by no means the most appropriate for all. It  may be a simple mechanism, and easy to access, but my concern—and that of the committee—is that without adequate guidelines, the Health and Community Care Committee and the Public Petitions Committee are likely to be bombarded with petitions and our agendas are likely to be hijacked throughout the on-going acute services review. The arrogant bullying and dismissive approach of the health boards and trusts with regard to Stobhill and Stracathro not only did not harness participation and consultation, but actually set the health service on a warpath with the local communities. That is the tragedy of it all. That approach damaged relations with the communities that those hospitals serve; it also damaged staff morale and caused tremendous resentment and frustration. That is hardly the caring and compassionate service that we expect. We would probably all endorse the proposal, made at yesterday's Tayside Health Board meeting, that £20,000 be spent on focus groups to gauge local feelings about services and on the setting up of citizens panels. We also know, however, that the answers we get depend very much on the questions that we ask. The outcome also depends on the perception and interpretation of those who are consulting. In other words, they can go through all the motions, but do as they please at the end of the day. Other members will no doubt point out that at the heart of the evidence that we took on Stracathro, we heard health officers say that they had consulted staff about combining wards, while the staff said that they learned about the proposals in the media. There was undoubtedly a serious lack of partnership. My final points concern the human resources strategy "Towards a new way of working". There is no doubt that it is an excellent, forward-moving document, but I just do not think that it is clear and specific enough. It is very vague, and does not give adequate guidelines. In the foreword, Sam Galbraith says that the strategy "will provide a new framework in which people can realise their potential and feel properly valued." That is fine. Geoff Scaife says in the introduction that the strategy is intended to provide "a practical and meaningful way to support people in delivering the objectives of the Health Service." I was pleased to note in the document that partnership agreements had to be in place by October 1999 and will have to be monitored. Perhaps once those agreements have been put in place and are up and running, and once we can monitor them through the health improvement  programmes and trust implementation plans—or HIPs and TIPs—they may prove to be an excellent method. I do not want to judge something that is very much in its infancy, but over the page, under "What this means", the closest that we get to consultation for the individual is: "Changes in the working environment which are planned and managed." For the line manager, the closest we get is: "To work in partnership with staff and staff representatives." and for the trust and health board: "Change will be managed consistently, in partnerships within and outwith the NHS in Scotland." I acknowledge that the strategy is a move in the right direction, but it is hardly a beacon of democratic accountability, openness and transparency. Richard Simpson's first-class report and recommendations were highly focused and uniquely appropriate to the circumstances that surround Stobhill. We cannot praise Richard highly enough for this excellent report. The recommendations that he made are not one-size-fits-all for the rest of Scotland. They are specific to Stobhill. There would be different concerns with regard to Stracathro and other hospitals. My final point is about the structure and accountability of quangos. I hope that we have a further opportunity to address the need for health boards, which cost our NHS £78 million. Their abolition would not only simplify our health service structure, but ensure that the buck stopped at the trusts as they manage and prioritise services in accordance with the management executive's national strategy. There would be no buffer zone, and nowhere for bullying and arrogant officials to hide.

Is the minister aware that courses and staff have been cut back, which has led to fewer students and less income? The college is now less responsive to local training and educational needs. How would he advise the college to build for future growth in those circumstances?

I would like to start by dealing with George Lyon—someone has to.

All right—I will try to follow Annabel's advice. George Lyon's naive and simplistic answer to everything seems to be, "Enter the single currency." The euro was supposed to be worth 71p, but the value of the single currency is falling by the day—it is now worth 61p. Our economy does not fulfil the convergence criteria, it does not fulfil the Treasury criteria as set out by Gordon Brown, and—on recent forecasts—it is unlikely to be convergent for at least a decade. A common interest rate can work to solve only common economic problems. It is hardly surprising that the chancellor, the previous chancellor and the chairman of the European Central Bank are all out of step with George. The Executive's document contains some excellent ideas. I was pleased to read on page 23 that the Scottish Executive believes that "all manufacturing companies, whether large or small, whether from a high technology or 'traditional' sector, deserve support" and that it "is open to suggestions for rationalisation"  of that support, rather than being open to red tape and confusion. Many visitors to Scotland want to buy home-produced goods and would often be prepared to pay extra for them, but because it is not compulsory to label products with the country of manufacture, there is nothing to prevent cheap foreign imports masquerading as genuine Scottish products. Like Alex Fergusson and Christine Grahame, I would like to change the emphasis and get away from the high-powered world of e-commerce, call centres and global, portable, homogenous products. I make the plea that we should not forget our own, unique, textiles industry—although I note that two people from the textiles industry are on the steering group. Textiles is Scotland's fourth largest manufacturing industry; its exports were valued at £0.5 billion in 1998. Although I fully acknowledge the great history of textiles in the Borders, I am obviously more familiar with the Highlands. I am pleased that Jamie Stone is sporting a Hunters of Brora tweed jacket today. I am sorry that he has left the chamber and cannot give us a twirl. No, I am wrong—here he is now. He can give us a twirl. [Laughter.] Well done, Jamie—thank you. I wanted to do my bit for marketing a product of the Highlands. The best of our unique products is undoubtedly Harris tweed. The strength of the pound and accelerating import substitution are making export sales very difficult. I will not go through the list of redundancies—because by mentioning George Lyon, I am now short of time. I would like to talk about Alasdair Morrison's tourism strategy, which contained the excellent suggestion that we could combine enterprise and tourism. The Harris tweed and Scotland's textile industry would make a fine such combination.

I prefer Johnstons of Elgin myself. Such a synergistic approach would help both industries and enable our textile industry to have a presence at more trade shows and missions. When I hear about people closing factories, I remember that Harris tweed is not just a manufacturing industry, but a way of life. The industry is a barometer of the strength of the local economy. The history of the Harris tweed, in particular, conjures up the Highlanders' strength, straightforwardness and hardiness, all of which are respected worldwide. We should be proud of  this unique product, which is hand-woven from Scottish wool in crofters' homes. With the projected 14 per cent decline in the population of the Western Isles, I make a plea that we fully support the industry. Henry McLeish said that he is starting a campaign to change the image of manufacturing, and I noted Irene Oldfather's aggressive marketing strategy. Given the coverage that the Parliament receives across Scotland, the First Minister and the other men in dark and grey suits in the chamber could brighten up our proceedings and help to market our textiles by following John Farquhar Munro's dress code and investing in Harris tweed.

Does Nora Radcliffe share my concern that the increase in the old-age pension is 73p a week and that many pensioners will pay more than that for the increase in their water charges?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any concerns regarding the uptake of the MMR injection. (S1O-1282)

On the figures which were released yesterday, the national average is 92 per cent. Is the minister aware, however, that the  areas of four health boards in Scotland are below the critical level of 90 per cent that is needed to prevent an epidemic? Does the Executive have any plans to do research into the possible link between the MMR vaccine and autism to allay the fears of parents?

To ask the Scottish Executive what proposals it has to reduce the number of deaths from hospital-acquired infections in Scotland. (S1O-1155)

I am pleased to hear that. Is the minister concerned that, unlike England and Wales, no figures exist for hospital-acquired infections in Scotland, and by the fact that recent staff cutbacks have reduced surveillance of infections? She may already have answered this question, but will she ensure that every hospital— [Interruption.] I shall continue anyway. Will she ensure that every hospital has a fully staffed infection team that can carry out the surveillance framework contained in the Scottish infection manual, so that we can be made aware of all deaths caused by hospital-acquired infections in Scotland?

It is difficult to follow that advertising promotion for the Borders. I congratulate Ian Jenkins. He certainly takes advantage of every opportunity. There is much to welcome in this report. Having been involved in the consultation process, I was pleased to see that many of the concerns had been addressed. I was slightly concerned when I read Scotland on Sunday , as I wondered whether that was another leak to the papers that was possibly all wrong. However, the article pretty well covers everything in the document. I register my concern that we received the document only yesterday, although the article that was printed on Sunday seemed to spell out its contents. If that is the chosen way in which to leak such documents to the press, that is fine; however, I question whether we need glossy documents as well. Another concern that has been expressed today is the loss of confidence in the Scottish Tourist Board and the area tourist boards, although I can talk only about the Highlands of Scotland Tourist Board. That serious loss of confidence must be addressed. Yesterday, when I faxed the summary to a few of the tourist operators and asked them to respond, I received a fairly cynical response. One tourist operator in the Highlands said: "Reading between the lines it would seem almost as though the Tourist Board has been caught on the hop by the success of the internet and that many members, like ourselves, are gathering more business from that source."  They continued: "I feel that it has just dawned on the Tourist Board that if they do not make a move soon with the internet they are going to find that people like us no longer need them". There has been a haemorrhaging of members from the Highlands of Scotland Tourist Board, and I am pleased that the matter is being considered. It is a good partnership, but we must address the loss of confidence. The second issue that I want to raise is Ossian. The project is already more than a year late, although it is essential to the industry, and has already cost more than £5 million. We heard today that another £3.7 million, and a further £0.25 million, is needed to maintain it. Last week, in the e-commerce debate, David Mundell spoke of the Egg internet banking service. It took 50 days to progress from the idea of the bank to its being up and running. Why does it take years, and more and more money, to get Ossian right? I regard Ossian as the right tool for the industry, but we should be careful about the way in which the money is spent. Are we getting value for money? Is the money being spent wisely? Are we spending it on the right things? Why is the project so late, and why must we keep pumping millions of pounds into it? I welcome the golf strategy. However, when I heard that Tom Buncle was phoning round tourist operators in the Highlands to set up a new working group, I wondered whether he was aware that a two-year Scottish golf working group, which involved all the relevant organisations, had already been established, but had been pretty much abandoned after 18 months. There is also a Highland golf development strategy. Resources are scarce; therefore, I ask that we do not try to reinvent the wheel. This is an excellent strategy, as was the working group that produced an excellent document, supported by Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Highland Council. Members have already mentioned the fact that the Executive has not addressed the way in which it will shake up the Scottish Tourist Board. There is genuine concern over the fact that, although it is a marketing organisation with a budget of £60 million, only £5 million—12 per cent of its budget—is spent on marketing. We must question that. The remainder is spent on courses, expense accounts, salaries and offices. If the STB is a marketing organisation, the role of which is to market and sell Scotland, we must consider increasing the share of its budget that is spent on marketing. When we compare Scotland with England, Wales, London and so on, we must not miss the point that the amount of one's budget that is spent on fuel during a holiday in the Highlands is significantly more than the minimal amount that  would be spent during a city break. We should take into account the fact that fuel duty is a large consideration for people thinking about travelling to a rural area. I was quite surprised by the total spend figure of £2.5 billion, as we should remind ourselves that £1 billion of that amount is spent by the English, who are our main market. I am pleased to note that there is some emphasis in the strategy on the English, but we must not forget that they are the biggest spenders and our biggest market. While it is excellent that the strategy provides indicators, today we still do not have the figures on the origins of tourists from last summer. We must find ways of getting the information earlier, to be able to act on it. When I phoned Highlands of Scotland Tourist Board yesterday, I was amazed to learn that it still does not know where its tourists from last summer came from. Finally, I wish to take this marketing opportunity to ask members to consider coming to the Highlands and Islands for their next break.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve care of the elderly. (S1O-1109)

Does the minister agree that the 2,000 patients who occupy blocked NHS beds due to problems with social work funding are seriously disadvantaged? Does he agree that a two-tier system has been created under which those who can pay access care, whereas those who cannot pay are stuck in vital NHS beds?

To ask the First Minister whether he will outline the Scottish Executive's response to the Accounts Commission report regarding the £25 million per year spent on temporary nurses by the NHS in Scotland. (S1F-107)

I am grateful for the First Minister's response. In light of his recent staffing problems, how would he advise the NHS in Scotland to correct the management difficulties that are outlined in the report, to ensure better staff management, rigorous employment checks and effective induction and appraisal?

Does Maureen Macmillan appreciate my concern that, in the financial recovery plan for Inverness College to deal with its £4.5 million deficit, the college is considering closing the outreach college in Fort William?

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Health and Community Care last met representatives of health boards in Scotland and what matters they discussed. (S1O-1055)

Why are our hospitals facing a £50 million deficit? What is the minister going to do about it?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

That is bad manners.

I used figures from the Royal College of Nursing about training, about nurses working double shifts and about nurses not being valued; I also used figures from Unison. Does the member agree with the Royal College of Nursing and Unison?

There is certainly room for improvement and scope for learning. I am delighted that the minister now talks about "action, not words" because that will delight the NHS in Scotland. However, we will wait and see. The saddest part of the NHS debate in Scotland to date has been the arrogance and complacency of the Minister for Health and Community Care in terms of the unwillingness to accept responsibility and the refusal to acknowledge serious problems that exist in our NHS. If the Labour Government is able to take pride in the success of the economy for three years, surely it can take responsibility for the failures of the NHS in the past three years. If the minister would acknowledge the difficulties and work together with us—although it looks as if there is a change in mood this morning, which I welcome—the people of Scotland might just feel some reassurance. Instead, so far we have had constant political dogma. The worry about this Executive is that the Minister for Health and Community Care believes her own spin-doctors, who say the opposite of what is happening in the world of patient care. I  will talk about the contrasting situations in Scotland, many of which were raised by Kay Ullrich. Raigmore hospital, in its January update, probably reflects the situation of the NHS throughout Scotland. In fact, Raigmore is in a much better financial position than the majority of hospitals in Scotland. An overspend of more than £1 million is likely to worsen by year-end. Staff work 16-hour shifts, and many have forgone days off and holidays to keep the service running. In January, all routine elective surgery at Raigmore had to be cancelled for two weeks. Out-patient waiting times have increased and there is a shortage of intensive care beds. When the intensive care consultant prayed for help, the reply from the Scottish Executive was that "no additional funding will be made available this year to address the ITU situation, millennium pay costs and winter pressures" or to cover the inflation element of the pay award for staff covered by the pay review body. Yet Raigmore's difficulties are minute in comparison with many other health trusts in Scotland, particularly Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust, which faces a deficit of more than £12 million. That picture is replicated throughout Scotland. Today, I ask the minister what she will do for Scotland's hospitals, given the total financial deficit of in excess of £50 million. How can that serious financial deficit be overcome? What would the deficit be if all the staff, including doctors, were paid for the long hours that they work, well outwith their contractual hours? I hear what the minister and the SNP say about the commitment of staff, but should we be asking staff to work double shifts? Should it always come down to the good will of the staff? Is it not the Government's responsibility to support the staff? I also hear what the minister says about the nurses' pay rise, announced at the height of the flu epidemic. Is she aware that hundreds of GP practice nurses have not yet received their pay increase for last year? She may laugh, but it would do her some good to listen sometimes.

No chance. The system of payments to GPs and their nurses for Tayside, Grampian and the Highlands and Islands, newly centralised in Aberdeen, has been described by GPs as a system in chaos, a total shambles. Let us stop talking about this year. How about paying the GP practice nurses for last year? That would be very welcome. Again I say, "Get a grip on reality".

The deputy minister will have an opportunity to speak. He can write down what I am saying and answer the points that we raise, breaking the habit of eight months. Instead of using agency nurses, which reduces the continuity of care and is more expensive, the Scottish Executive should start looking after the nurses that it has. According to the Royal College of Nursing, nearly half the nurses in Scotland agree that they are unable to take time off for training, compared with only a quarter of nurses in England. Nurses have to fund their education and study in their days off. I quote from the RCN: "If the NHS is to be a good employer, it must stop taking nurses for granted." With funding so tight, the training budget is often the first to be cut, affecting health and safety, the updating of skills and career development. With regard to the flu vaccine, there is no consistent approach throughout Scotland. Grampian Health Board managed the flu vaccination programme by obtaining a list from GPs of all those at risk, writing to them, inviting them in and advertising the centres that people could go to. In the Highland Health Board, by contrast, GPs were sent a letter outlining the at-risk group and left to get on with it, with no assistance. There, again, is the difference between the minister's rhetoric and spin-doctoring and what is happening to people in Scotland. One Highland GP practice, serving a population of 10,000, identified around 1,500 in the at-risk group. It estimated a staff time of around 240 hours, with no payment. If partnership means anything, we must appreciate that preventive care saves money in hospitals and that it should be given financial support. It would be helpful if the minister would recognise the inconsistent approach across Scotland's health boards that leads to inequalities in access. We might then be able to move forward. Waiting times were mentioned. The latest report, covering the period up to 30 June 1999, shows an increase in waiting times of 7 per cent, compared with the previous quarter. Again, the minister needs to keep in touch with reality. The minister boasted about the abolition of the internal market. I would like to give a prime example from this city of what has happened as a result of that. Previously, GP practices in Edinburgh could refer patients to private physiotherapy clinics, where they were seen within days. Now, because of political dogma, all those patients have to be referred to the NHS. Instead of being treated in days, they have to wait months. That not only increases pressure on the NHS but  damages patient care, as conditions worsen because of the long time that more complex treatment takes. Yet Alan Milburn said: "there is no reason why the NHS should not be collaborating with independent sector and other providers in developing new innovative forms of intermediate care." Will health policy in Scotland be driven by political dogma or by the needs of patients? The Minister for Health and Community Care should get a grip on the NHS, get in touch with it, stop bullying and dictating to it, and start working with it to solve problems, rather than deny that they exist.

It is difficult, when we are all using the same piece of research, to come up with something original to say. As the two previous speakers have been making their points, I have scored out half my speech. However, I am delighted to be reminded of the Berriedale braes by Jamie Stone. Recently, I have been having surgeries in Wick and Thurso—I am a regional member. It is certainly not funny driving home when it is icy, especially if one is not familiar with the road. Jamie, I will remember to keep my tights and knickers on, just in case.

I advise the Minister for Transport and the Environment to choose to visit the A9 not on a bright, sunny day but on a dark, stormy, windy, icy night to see it at its worst. This is not just about people in the area; it is also about tourism and investment. I thank Jamie Stone for raising that point. An important issue that has not been raised is tourism, which has increased in some parts of the Highlands in the past year. However, although the Highlands of Scotland Tourist Board figures are still on their way, there is a marked decline in tourism in Caithness and Sutherland—a reduction of 16 per cent—which would not be sustainable over time. Although tourism has increased in some areas of the Highlands, the most marked decrease is in Caithness and Sutherland. Another important point is demography; the population decline in the area has been mentioned, but the population is also increasingly aging. The steadily decreasing school rolls and consequent school closures act as a disincentive for families with younger children to move into the area.

Yes, especially given the health problems and the health facilities that are available in the area. As it takes four hours to reach an acute hospital—and that is only the beginning—the aging population will be an enormous burden  unless the issues are addressed now. I am also concerned about the fact that the Executive's transport policies are based on tackling congestion, yet one is lucky if one sees a car in the area on really dark nights. Issues such as tackling congestion, workplace parking and toll roads have little resonance in remote rural areas such as the Highlands. An air flight costs £243 from Wick to Edinburgh and £404 to Gatwick. That is not to mention the rail link on which it takes four hours to cover 130 miles from Inverness to Wick. It is quicker to take a train from Edinburgh to London, even though the distance between them is considerably longer. I will quote from the presentation, "Caithness—A County in Crisis": "This road is bleeding us to death . . . it is a barrier to social inclusion and it is slowly killing our county and way of life." Another concern, which has not been mentioned, relates to Dounreay and the huge quantities of radioactive waste that might have to be transported around the tortuous hairpin bends of the A9. I would question the fact that—I am sure that Alasdair Morrison will mention this—the strategic roads review assumed a daily traffic flow of fewer than 2,000 vehicles and yet a recent Scottish Office traffic survey showed a flow of more than 3,000 vehicles a day. If social inclusion means anything, it means including all of Scotland.

Like Des McNulty, I was a lecturer this time last year and had a long queue of students outside my door who were suffering because of poverty, working too many hours and not being able to study. We ought to have something in common. Most of today's debate has concentrated on finance, but I am more concerned about standards of education, which are affected by student hardship. I know that in recent years many students have been working more than 40 hours a week in pubs and supermarkets. That results in coursework being handed in late, students having less time to research and study, and a lower standard of work. We should not divorce student hardship from standards in education.  I would like to widen the debate to cover funding and to acknowledge that 48 out of 53 colleges of further education in Scotland are facing serious financial deficits. The college that I worked at in Inverness is facing a deficit of around £6 million. Since Labour came to power, the number of courses and lecturers has been cut. When is a tuition fee not a tuition fee—when it has to be paid at the beginning of the course, or when it has to be paid at the end of the course? Many students have to use student loans to pay for tuition fees; they pay back the money when they finish their course. That is no different from what is being offered today. Anyone who says that, because one pays at the end rather than at the beginning, the charge is not a tuition fee, is certainly naive and perhaps economical with the truth. In the first year of the Labour Government, the maintenance grant was reduced from £1,700 to £700 and travel expenses for students were slashed from 70 per cent of standard rail or bus fares to £2 to £3 a day. In a triple whammy, tuition fees were introduced.

No. We are comparing today's proposals not with the situation in 1997, but with the draconian measures that Labour has imposed since it came to power in 1997. HNC and HND students are exempt from the endowment. All the HNC and HND courses that I taught—accounting, business administration and so on—articulated to a degree course. Will it be the case that students will have the first two years of study free but, when they enter a third year to convert an HND into a bachelor of arts degree, will have to pay £2,000 because they are now degree students? Having spoken about that question to many colleagues in the sector last night, I think that the minister must answer. If it is the case, it creates a disincentive to students going from two years of education into a third year. It also leads one to question whether 50 per cent of students are exempt. The University of Abertay Dundee, where I have also lectured, has moved away from offering HNC and HND qualifications. Students leaving at the end of first year are now offered a certificate in higher education and those leaving at the end of second year get a diploma in higher education. Those qualifications are identical to an HNC and HND respectively. Will the minister discriminate against students taking courses leading to the certificate or diploma in higher education, or will those students also be exempted from paying the endowment?  Another matter that puzzles me is the question of English students who come to study in Scotland and then remain here. If an English student decides at the beginning of his course that he will be domiciled in Scotland, will he have to pay his fees up front, or will he be eligible to pay the endowment fee at the end? When is an English student a Scottish student? Many English students came as far north as Inverness College and then did not go back. Finally, I note that the access bursary scheme will be similar to the present access arrangements. I would be delighted if that were not the case. My experience of access funds is that they do not reward students who manage their finances well and that they put people off—students face extensive questioning about their personal finances. Assertive students benefited more from access funds than shier ones did, who did not want to undergo that form of scrutiny. I hope that the minister will answer the serious questions that I have raised, which are based on experience.

If the minister wants to get more children from lower-income families into higher education, why did the Labour Government, in its first year in office, slash the maintenance grant by £1,000?

rose—

Will the minister consider giving resources to Scottish GPs to cover some of the costs of administering the flu vaccine, as happens in England? Does she agree with the view of the British Medical Association that the lack of resources meant that the high uptake that is necessary for a truly effective vaccination programme could not be achieved?

I am pleased to say that I have already signed Richard Simpson's motion. I start with some words by Garry Mackintosh from Nairn that I found very moving. Garry is serving a prison sentence for drugs-related crime in Armley prison in Leeds. He wrote: "Some call it Brown Some call it Gear   I call it Death It's something I fear 'Go on Gaz, dig it' That's what he said, Before his last hit. It didn't last long, But I knew it was wrong, He shouldn't be blue, But I knew what to do Turn him over Clear his airway Phoned 999 They said he'd be fine I did what I could They said I did good. To the hospital Not far away Sitting beside him He died on the way He'd gone too far under They couldn't get him back It's what you expect When you're hooked on smack!" I welcome the debate, and I hope that when Garry Mackintosh is finally released from prison, such a debate is not all that he can expect. I hope that we have made a start today in addressing the issue of drugs and the needs of drug victims and their families. Most families with drug-related problems want help, but either they are too frightened, and worried about what people will think of them, or they simply have no idea where to start. Even schools need to be much more open. Far too many schools worry about their reputation, when that reputation could be enhanced if parents knew that schools were tackling the drug issue head on. I wish to make three brief points. First, I join the calls for more detoxification and rehabilitation centres; I acknowledge the minister's commitment. Prisoners and other addicts need to sort their heads out and to be made to face up to reality and stop blaming everyone else. I put a point forward for consideration. Could the allocation of money from the Prison Service to the drugs enforcement agency be used to fund a detox and rehabilitation centre for prisoners at one of the three prisons earmarked for closure? With regard to the after-care service, it took me nine phone calls yesterday finally to get in touch with Narcotics Anonymous. There should be a national organisation, and a freephone helpline giving proper advice, so that addicts and their families can call at any time of the day and night. Castle Craig Clinic in the Borders, with its proven record, is at the mercy of individual health board—

Briefly, as I have very little time.

I take Margo's point, but the existence of such a service seems to be little known. I am no expert—I am on a steep learning curve. There is a need for a consistent approach to health board funding. My next point concerns methadone. I hear what the minister and others in the chamber are saying. The British Methadone Alliance in London says that maintained patients show improvement in a number of outcomes. However, it concerns me to hear people talking about methadone being used to reduce crime. Are we simply using it for that purpose? If so, is that ethical? Surely methadone should be used, first and foremost, as a medical treatment—and the most appropriate form of medical treatment. I raise the issue because I read with alarm a research paper from the department of psychology at the University of London and the Institute of Psychiatry, which states: "Methadone significantly increased both positive craving and negative craving for heroin. Additional methadone made 'prime' cravings for heroin in methadone substitution patients . . . Despite its widespread use, relatively little is known of the acute or chronic effects of methadone". The main finding was that an increase in daily methadone dosage increased craving for heroin. I suggest that we have a full investigation and report on the effectiveness of methadone as part of a harm reduction programme. Finally, I am told that children who smoke are more likely to begin to use drugs. I am concerned about the hypothecated taxation on cigarettes, because that will lead to more cigarettes being smuggled—it is a bootlegger's dream. I hope that future increases in health funding will not depend on spending by smokers, who can already buy cigarettes through the internet at £2 per packet cheaper than in our shops.

I do not want the minister to take responsibility for what the Conservatives did in relation to the NHS; I want her, for once, to take responsibility for what Labour is doing to the NHS. Labour has been in government for three years and it is time it started to take responsibility. The minister says that there is no crisis and that the problem is being addressed. That is because of the good will and hard work of NHS staff. Labour cut 670 beds in Scotland in its first year in government and, last year, the British Medical Association described Edinburgh's accident and emergency department as a war zone. Surely some lessons should have been learned from that, yet at one point this year Inverness's nearest intensive care bed was in Birmingham. Many flu cases are unreported, which renders the minister's figure of 793 cases per 100,000 meaningless. Flu is at twice epidemic levels in Scotland, compared with English figures. On that basis, the minister's assurances are less than worthless. I have asked 10 written and oral questions. I have repeatedly mentioned winter pressures and bed blocking in debates, yet the minister has never addressed those issues. I asked my first question on 10 June, yet we still have this arrogant, complacent and scornful dismissal of anyone who dared to ask the minister about those issues in anticipation of this crisis. Why was the flu vaccine slow to arrive at GP practices? Why do GPs in England receive a payment for administering the vaccine, yet GPs in Scotland receive none? This flu has not brought the health service to its knees. The flu has proved that the health service is on its knees. It has proved that the NHS in Scotland is not safe in Labour's hands. How much longer will patients have to wait because their operations have been cancelled so that the crisis can be coped with? When will the minister address the 2,000 beds in Scotland that are blocked by patients who should be cared for in the community? Given her arrogant and complacent response to those concerns, will the minister now apologise to the people of Scotland? Will she break the habit of eight months and, as she said in her statement, listen and learn from this experience by working  with health professionals to set out a clear prevention strategy to deal with winter pressures in future years?

Will the deputy minister give way?

Will the member give way?

I fully support the Executive's commitment to the NHS and the contribution and commitment of the staff. NHS Direct moves towards seamless transfer and guaranteed waiting times. When I read the motion, I read the words "partnership", "public accountability" and "involvement". Is that the type of partnership that is exemplified by the Minister for Health and Community Care, who reportedly called members of the Health and Community Care Committee numpties for daring to express an objective and impartial cross-party opinion on the Arbuthnott report? Is it the type of partnership whereby the Minister for Health and Community Care gives the Health and Community Care Committee a party  political broadcast, followed by a refusal to answer questions that have been raised by the British Medical Association and many others who submitted evidence in the Arbuthnott review? Perhaps it is the partnership with the Minister for Health and Community Care who had death threats made against her after the Catholic Church in Scotland dared to express a point of view. The rest of that tale will go down in history. Is that the partnership the minister is talking about? She is a woman who would cause a rammie in an empty house. What about consultation? Labour does not even consult its Liberal partners, as has been admitted in the chamber, so what chance is there for people in the rest of Scotland? We should ask the people of Angus and the Mearns about consultation and partnership. More than 25,000 of them have put their signatures on a health petition because they do not know what is happening to the health service in their area. All they know is what they have read in the columns of the local paper. Consultation and partnership in Perth means packed public meetings because of a fear of losing accident and emergency, maternity and paediatric care—no consultation, only serious, heart-felt concern among local people that they are being ignored and their health care is being eroded. In Fife, it means more than 1,200 people trying to get into a hall that holds fewer than 200 to express their worries and concerns and to find out what is happening to their health service and which hospital is likely to close.

No. When I visited Oban last week, local doctors asked what was happening to the health service there, what was happening to serve the islands, and whether people from Islay, Tiree and Mull will have to go to Paisley for breast cancer screening. I told them that I do not know. They do not know either. Lectures on partnership and consultation may sound grand in here, but the people outside this chamber are not hearing the minister. Consultation, partnership, accountability and involvement do not come from focus groups. That is something the minister must learn. They do not come from strategies, commitments, reviews, spin-doctors or, indeed, the latest £7.95 glossy brochure. That will do a lot to tackle the problems of women on low incomes living in Shettleston who want to stop smoking.

If I represented the Labour party, I would sit comfortably in my seat rather than waste my energy jumping up and down. The 25,000 people in Angus and the Mearns did not sign a petition in the Tory years. We never had packed halls in Fife, Perth and all over the country and we did not know about any overspend. Margaret Jamieson should not start lecturing us.

I never heard of people in Scotland expressing their concern during the Tory years as they are now. The new hospital programme consists of eight hospitals, half of which had already been progressed by Michael Forsyth and Ian Lang—as the leader of the Scottish National party has already said. That brings me on to overspend, or underfunding—two ways of looking at the same thing. The majority of acute hospital trusts in Scotland are facing severe cuts just to make ends meet. In Tayside, there is a deficit of more than £12 million and there have been suggestions that patients should pay for non-essential treatment. I would like to know what the Minister for Health and Community Care considers non-essential treatment. The Grampian trusts have an overspend of £5.6 million, which has led to ward closures and weekend closures. They cannot fill vacant posts and are reducing training. Is that a health service of which the minister is proud?

In north Glasgow there is an overspend of almost £10 million. I am proud to mention Raigmore hospital in Inverness, but not proud of what it is having to do. The hospital's financial recovery plan, which was forced on it by the minister, involves "the reduction of elective workload and change case mix in favour of less expensive procedures" and demands that the hospital "Withdraw Consultant locum cover to Skye" and "Limit 'Dressings' spend to budget".  God help staff if their uniforms are wearing thin, because there will be no further expenditure on that this year. Also, the hospital will "Introduce differential catering pricing for staff and visitors" It is becoming a joke.

No, I will not give way. The deputy minister will have ample opportunity to spin-doctor his ideas, but I have very little opportunity.

Across Scotland, hospitals are facing the serious problems that I have mentioned. No problems have surpassed those of the Lennox Castle hospital for the care of the elderly, which is undertaking desperate measures. It is asking staff to take patients home—as a newspaper headline said, "to 'adopt' a patient". According to Unison, a similar system has been tried, but failed, in Liverpool, yet it will now be implemented in Scotland. The most vulnerable people in society are being touted around for a good home, which will be paid for by welfare benefits. In the week before Christmas, at the end of this century, is the minister proud of health care in Scotland under which long-term mentally ill patients will be placed in families who may have no experience of caring?

My final point is about the gross distortion of clinical priorities, which has led to people waiting longer to see a consultant, fewer nurses, decision making being taken from general practitioners and consultants being paid thousands of pounds to do minor operations over weekends while major operations have to wait longer. The minister's commitment to the national health service failed. Public accountability failed. Partnership failed. Working with the NHS and the Scottish people failed. Working with the Health and Community Care Committee failed, without even a mark for effort. Now is the time for the minister to accept responsibility and to address real health needs, instead of laughing at points that are seriously made. The minister has maladministered health in this country. I move amendment S1M-383.3, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "but condemns Labour's centralisation and increase in bureaucracy within the NHS and the Executive's folly of pursuing a raw waiting list target that has led to the negation of its promises on health; notes with concern the overspend by health boards in the current year, the increasing levels of bed blocking and the failure of the Arbuthnott Report to address inequality in health spending;  believes that the development of a modern NHS depends on a sustained programme of service redesign, greater public accountability and involvement and true partnership working across the NHS in Scotland, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to make the reduction of waiting times and access to treatment on the basis of clinical need its top priority for all the NHS in Scotland."

I welcome the bill. Adults with incapacity need to be protected, and the bill will certainly make the financial side of an incapable adult's life easier to manage. The Minister for Justice announced some amendments this morning. I believe that the amendments on guardianship and the public guardian's office go some way to addressing some of my concerns, but those concerns should be raised anyway—I will scrutinise the amendments further. As far as I am aware, the Executive feels that section 1 offers protection, as it states that any intervention by a proxy decision maker must be of benefit to the patient. However, it does not give protection against a situation in which there is a refusal to act. There is a fear that the bill may make passive euthanasia possible. Although section 44 gives a doctor a general authority to treat—treatment includes nursing and administration of food and liquids by artificial means—it defines not only the use of a feeding tube but food and water themselves as "medical treatment". That could cause problems—should food and drink be regarded as basic care? I appreciate that the Minister for Justice mentioned some amendments on the definition of treatment and I look forward to further clarification on that point. The welfare attorney has authority to refuse the treatment authorised under section 44. The bill  gives proxy decision makers considerable influence to refuse medical treatment. For example, a proxy or guardian can refuse to allow commencement of tube-feeding for a patient who is not dying but has difficulty in swallowing. That needs further scrutiny. The liability of the welfare attorney is a sensitive issue. Welfare attorneys must act in good faith and their behaviour must be reasonable. Giving power without responsibility to proxy decision makers may—I stress may—allow passive involuntary euthanasia and remove protection for the incapable adult from abuses of power. As the law stands, if medical staff starve an incapable patient to death, they are liable to prosecution for a criminal omission and may be sued for breach of a duty of care. They could also be struck off. Under the bill in its present form, the power to refuse treatment, food and fluids could be passed from people with duties of care to people with no such duties. I appreciate that the Minister for Justice addressed that this morning. If the incapable patient is starved to death as a result of a refusal or omission by a proxy, no one can be prosecuted or sued. That is because, in those circumstances, in order to prosecute a person under the criminal law or to sue them under the civil law, one must first prove that they had a duty to act. I welcome the amendments that the minister put forward this morning and I look forward to hearing the responses.

Will Mr Rumbles answer the question?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there is a national strategy for the treatment of  people with epilepsy in Scotland. (S1O-742)

There are 40,000 people in Scotland who suffer from epilepsy, but epilepsy is mentioned in the health improvement plans of only two health boards. What arrangements are in place for managed clinical networks in each health board area in Scotland?

rose—

Does the minister agree with the study that was issued yesterday by the University of Bristol, which indicated that in the past two and half years the poverty gap in the eight Labour-controlled constituencies in Glasgow has widened? Will she and the Labour Administration accept some responsibility for that?

Sitting beside a pensioner—my colleague, John Young—gives me an interesting perspective on the debate. I commend the Scottish National party on the motion. It is a privilege for us to be able to raise awareness about the needs of the elderly. When I was younger, 60 seemed to be really, really old. However, when one reaches 50 and considers that Tina Turner is now eligible for her old-age pension and bus pass and that Scotland's James Bond is nearer 70 than 60, it brings a new dimension to consideration of what it means to be elderly. Today's new pensioners were born as the war broke out, and older pensioners fought in and endured the hardships of the second world war. Many of them are the most vulnerable people in our society. That background is important to our understanding of the elderly. All too often, applying for income support is perceived as asking for charity and, in some cases, defies a fiercely independent nature. My mother is certainly someone for whom any mention of income support is a non-starter. For once, I am inclined to agree with Des McNulty that care of the elderly is not just the responsibility of Governments. We should not look to the Government to provide all the answers to the problems of the elderly; we should look to ourselves. Responsibility for the elderly is a responsibility for all of us. Against that background, many middle-aged women have given up jobs to care for elderly parents. As was mentioned in the carers debate last week, the welfare bill that was announced by Tony Blair will introduce a second pension and will secure pension entitlement. The aim to eradicate child poverty in 20 years can be criticised because that must be the longest time for the implementation of any policy. Carers can look forward to their pension in 50 years' time. That is ridiculous. Yesterday's report from the University of Bristol, entitled "The Widening Gap: Health Inequalities and Policy in Britain", stated that the poverty gap in Scotland is widening. Alex Neil pointed out the comparison between Govan and Wokingham. As one of the authors of the book said: "Despite pledging to reduce poverty the current Labour administration have clearly reneged on both their commitments regarding health made before the election as well as reneging on much of what key cabinet ministers wrote and said in the past." The Tories can be blamed for the period from  1979 to 1997, but they cannot be blamed for not fulfilling Labour promises in the past two years.

I will not give way because I have less than one minute left. A recent Age Concern survey pointed out that people over 65 in Britain are being refused treatment; they are being forced to use private health care; they are being refused referrals to consultants and physiotherapists; they are being refused referrals for scans; and they are waiting months and years for operations. That is discrimination against the elderly. As Kay Ullrich pointed out, bed blocking in Scotland cannot be mentioned enough, because bed blocking means that we are not looking after our elderly as we should. More than 2,000 patients deemed medically fit for discharge cannot leave hospital because of problems with social work funding. Not only are those patients not receiving appropriate health care, but because of bed blocking, other patients are prevented from receiving health care. When in opposition, Labour criticised the Conservatives for tying pension increases to the rate of inflation. Now is the Government's opportunity, with wages and earnings having risen by 4.6 per cent in the past 12 months, to fulfil its promises. A recent report from Energy Action Scotland stated that results "suggest that heart disorders are aggravated by frequent exposure to cold. Indoor temperatures below 16 o C increase respiratory problems and below 5 o C involve a serious risk of hypothermia." I support John McAllion in his call for a full review of the warm homes initiative. It was promised when Labour was in opposition. Now that it is in government, it should have the review.

Now that Scottish and British beef will be labelled with its country of origin when on sale in the EU market, why cannot meat produced in Europe be labelled with its country of origin in the UK market? When can we be assured that beef from other EU countries has met the rigorous standards that our own beef must meet?

Much of what I wanted to say has been said. I am delighted that there is such consensus on this issue. I would like to think that, whether in a small or in a more committed way, all of us in and outside this chamber are carers who have a commitment to care for people, be they family members or others. I welcome the Executive's commitment in its programme for government to introduce a carers strategy. Conservative members will certainly support the motion. We welcome the consultation with local carers organisations, the monitoring of services, the carers legislation working group, community care plans, the census question, the national standards and the commitment to better-targeted information. It is difficult to put those elements in any sort of order, but perhaps the most important is the question on carers in the 2001 census, as we do not have the information on which to base and target our support and advice for carers. I welcome the fact that we will gain more information in the 2001 census. I read the document that Iain Gray issued yesterday. I found the last sentence the most exciting. It promised: "A second pension for carers . . . and the protection of pension entitlements of carers who have given up paid work to care." Yes, I really liked that and got quite excited about it, until I read the date—2050. If my relative Dennis Canavan thought it rather odd that it should take 20 years to eradicate child poverty, I wonder how he would feel about the fact that it will take 50 years to fulfil that commitment of a second pension. That commitment was outlined in the Queen's speech last week and is in the Carers National Association Scotland strategy. I would like to hear the thoughts of the carers in the gallery today, who proposed the second pension to this listening Executive, on the 50-year phasing-in period. Although we welcome the commitment, I thought that it warranted a reality check, so I looked up the Highland carers strategy, "Working Together to Make a Difference"—I shall briefly mention some of the points that it made. In Lochaber, there is no specialised nursing care for people with dementia and there is a crying need for more family-based carers for children. In Easter Ross, it has been suggested that there should be care managers in general practitioners' surgeries and that GPs and district nurses should play a greater role in caring. In Nairn, people feel frustrated by the fact that they  have repeatedly expressed their needs but no action has resulted. I know that this has already been mentioned, but the working partnership between social work departments and the national health service is nothing short of a national scandal. In reply to Kay Ullrich's question last week, we were told that more than 2,000 patients were blocking beds in Scotland, receiving inappropriate treatment and preventing others who were in need of treatment from gaining access to hospitals. I ask the minister to consider putting some of this money towards the services in the NHS that people really need. Adam Ingram's point about mental illness is one that I have been made aware of by carers. They say that, because of the lack of information, they cannot adequately understand, support and give the appropriate care to the mentally ill. I appreciate that there must be patient confidentiality, but the issue must be re-examined to take account of the needs and problems of carers. Finally, I want to mention a submission from one of my constituents, who said of a local day centre that "the staff are not trained and are often on a 'New Deal' job opportunity or even Community Service! This does not inspire confidence in the system—particularly where vulnerable, mentally-handicapped adults are in their care without supervision."

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it is taking to ensure that the NHS drugs budget for 1999-2000 is adequate to cover the increasing costs of "patient packs". (S1O-712)

Is the minister satisfied that the patient pack is appropriate in every situation? Given the added problems with generic drugs, will increasing costs lead to the rationing of drug prescriptions?

Has Mr Macintosh read the speech?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the recommendations of the acute services review will be submitted to the Scottish Parliament for approval. (S1O-659)

Given the reported £22 million overspend by 14 acute hospital trusts in Scotland only halfway through the financial year, does the minister acknowledge that the rising drugs budget, the 2,000 blocked beds and the potential problems with winter pressures constitute serious mismanagement of the national health service and prove that the Government is failing to deliver on its promises to the Scottish people?

As a parent who depended very much on the good will of my own family, my in-laws and friends, I welcome the child care strategy. There is no doubt that a more co-ordinated and consistent provision will ensure that each child has the opportunity to start school with a similar level of pre-school  experience and education—to start with the same advantage. As Nicola Sturgeon said, the two years of pre-school should not be an extension of school. While I welcome the use of teachers in child care, there is a quite different approach to teaching reading and writing in the classroom and to the learning through play that means that children develop emotionally, socially, physically and in intellectual terms, as outlined in the curriculum framework for pre-school children. Anyone going from teaching into child care needs some form of retraining to address the differences between pre-school education and the more formal approach of school teaching. As a lecturer in further education, I found it heartbreaking to discover people in their 20s and 30s, and even older sometimes, who at that stage found they were dyslexic. I talked to the National Autistic Society and to people experienced in working with children with learning disabilities who believe that the assessing, observing and training required in the child care strategy could be utilised for early detection of learning needs, such as dyslexia, autism and Asperger's syndrome. According to the National Autistic Society, only a small number of pre-school children get the early intervention that would identify and address those problems. It is generally accepted that the earlier a true diagnosis is made the better for the child, the family and those around them, because effective strategies can be employed only if the true nature of a condition is known. I ask the Minister for Children and Education to ensure that the new strategy includes identification of learning difficulties so that appropriate support can be given. I have also been talking to providers of pre-school playgroups who feel that now that we have a more co-ordinated approach, with better health service links and so on, it is an ideal time to address the issue. When we talk about all three and four-year-olds receiving child care, does that mean two years of pre-school education? That question was put to me—the Minister for Children and Education is shaking his head. I am told it can mean one year and four months. I return to Brian Monteith's point, that it is only after their child has begun pre-school education that many parents realise that the child is not mature enough to go to school at the expected time. Is there flexibility to allow the parent to retain the child in pre-school education for a further year?

We are all grateful for the statement. The minister said that every aspect of government has been covered and is millennium ready and that we are moving towards a disruption-free millennium. Why then are we spending three hours debating it?

If Lewis is so keen to join the single currency almost instantly, does he feel that the euro zone interest rate of 3 per cent is appropriate for the United Kingdom at this time? If so, have the First Minister and others made representations to the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Bank of England Monetary Policy Committee on that point?

rose—

I welcome the initiative and the recognition of people with mental health problems who are sleeping rough. Will the minister outline the arrangements to support that vulnerable group?

Does the minister agree that an excellent example of joint working relationships would be to have one budget for the national health service and social work, to ensure that the 1,700 patients who are medically fit for discharge receive the appropriate level of residential care or care in the community?

I sympathise with much of what has been said. On Saturday I had surgeries in Acharacle and Strontian on the Ardnamurchan peninsula, and on Monday evening I had a community care meeting in Wick. I sympathise when people talk about rural issues and the time spent travelling to meetings. I will briefly mention the agricultural business improvement scheme, which was also mentioned by Jamie McGrigor and Duncan Hamilton. The scheme began with £23 million to help farmers to invest in new buildings and to diversify. Although £6 million has been spent on farming, now, at this time of great crisis, there is £1.5 million left in the fund. A delegation of farmers came to see me and the NFU on Friday to ask where the £15 million that has been spent has gone. They asked that I make this point in the chamber.

Sorry, George. I have limited time. We have regularly debated homelessness in this chamber. The farmers came to me with a serious problem: this winter they have homeless cows, and no sheds for them. I welcome the review of tourism. The latest figures show that tourism in the Highlands is 20 per cent down on last year, which is a serious problem. I positively await the new strategy. A problem that is raised regularly in my surgeries, whether in Ardnamurchan or the Black Isle, is the amount of new build housing in the  Highlands. We all recognise that there is a need for rural housing, but there seems to be no control over the enormous amount of housing that is being built. In the Black Isle alone, 7,500 houses have been built. I welcome the University of the Highlands and Islands, but it is important to mention that the majority of the colleges in the UHI network are facing serious financial deficits. Inverness College has a deficit of £4 million. Perth College, a leader in the UHI network, is instituting compulsory redundancies. If the UHI is to mean anything, we must support the 14 colleges that make up the network. Otherwise, there is no UHI. I want to use this opportunity to raise an issue that has rarely been debated. This week we heard about the 1,200 job losses at Daks-Simpson in the central belt. I want to raise the profile of the BARMAC oil fabrication yards at Nigg and Ardersier. As a result of the downturn in the oil market they are to shed 4,000 jobs between now and the end of May next year. Those jobs are not all Highland jobs, but I spoke to BARMAC this morning and found that more than half the jobs are in the Highlands and Islands and many of the remaining 2,000 are based elsewhere in Scotland. Highland organisations have got together—Highlands and Islands Enterprise, the local enterprise companies network, the job centre I spoke to on Monday, the Benefits Agency. They have experienced the problem before in the Highlands. Perhaps 150 does not seem a large number in the central belt, but 150 men going back to the Western Isles with rarely transferable skills is a serious problem. I realise that time has run out, but I will quickly say that if social inclusion is to mean anything, it means giving people living on islands the opportunity to visit the mainland. It was brought to my attention last week that a child's fare from Shetland to the mainland was quoted as £56 plus an additional £28—a £10 tax and an £18 passenger handling fee from Aberdeen, or £11.40 from Inverness. I ask the Scottish Executive to look at passenger handling fees and taxes for islanders.

Can I come back then?

Will the member give way?

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it  can confirm that its health priorities are unchanged and that it stands by its manifesto pledge on waiting lists. (S1O-491)

I welcomed the announcement on waiting times. Does the minister now accept that the Executive's obsession with reducing waiting lists has seriously distorted clinical priorities in our health service? Does she now agree that waiting times for treatment are what really matter to patients, and support our policy of a guaranteed waiting time based on clinical need?

Conservative members, too, welcome the minister's statement. It takes three months to build up immunity to meningitis C, but the vaccine was not available to students before they went to university. I raised that problem in a written question on 10 September—seven weeks ago—after constituents in the Highlands told me that they feared that their children would be vulnerable to infection when they went to university. I would like to know why my question was not answered. I would also like to point out the concerns of students who were vaccinated in freshers' week and will remain vulnerable to infection for the next three months. Moreover, does the minister have plans for the vaccination of second-year and third-year students? They are just as vulnerable as first-year students. The advice that I have been given by GPs is that it takes one minute to vaccinate and five minutes to complete the administration. We all welcome the new initiative but, given the case load that will result, will the administration for GPs be reduced to a minimum to assist the swift implementation of this programme?

Conservative members welcome it very much; there should be no doubt about that. I ask respectfully whether the minister will answer the three questions that I raised. Those concerns are not mine alone; I have consulted widely, and the concerns have been expressed to me by general practitioners.

When the right-to-buy legislation was dramatically changed this year, councils were notified on 21 March—10 days before the change. Is 10 days sufficient time for councils to notify tenants of the huge losses of discount when buying council houses?

I concur with the points that Irene McGugan made  on screening. I fall into the category where I do not get breast screening for several years. When I mentioned that in the past, I was told that I could go to the top of the list. However, I do not wish to do that just because I have made a fuss: I should not have to make a fuss. I will address the point that was made about deprived areas. I was concerned when Professor Graham Watt, a professor of general practice, visited the Health and Community Care Committee recently and pointed out that in deprived areas, patients present themselves later and with bigger lumps. They do not access support groups and, as has been said, do not turn up for screening. I find that alarming. When they access care, of course, there is equality of treatment, but when the cancer is much more progressed, the prognosis is much poorer. Several members have referred to information. The 1960s, 1970s and part of the 1980s were a patient information desert. When a relative had cancer and we had to visit them in hospital, we put on a brave face and pretended that they did not know. That was insulting and wrong. I am concerned that in the 1990s we have entered an era in which, because of developments such as the internet, we have so much information that we have information overload. At times, that can cause confusion and alarm. I welcome the NHS Direct on-line and telephone services, but practitioners have raised concerns with me that that should not be seen as a hurdle to providing important health care. I was pleased to find that so many organisations are involved in research, supporting cancer patients and so on, but the one that greatly impressed me was CancerBACUP, which has a freephone helpline. Many cancer patients listen to what doctors say to them, but because they are under such emotional trauma, they do not hear it. The helpline is staffed by specialist cancer information nurses and is to welcomed in this era of information overload and confusion.

Yes.

I welcome the level of contribution from the Opposition parties, given that we had less than one hour to scrutinise the statement. Not only would more time help us, it would help our colleague Keith Raffan, who would not have to go back to Golden Wednesday 1992. Perhaps Keith could comment on today's statement, rather than on Conservative policies from seven years ago. My first point is on the £17 million for vaccination. [Interruption.] Andy Kerr and Phil  Gallie, will you two stop talking? [Laughter.] Once a teacher, always a teacher. [Interruption.] Keep quiet.

Absolutely. I welcome the £17 million for vaccination, but I am concerned that there are no meningitis C vaccinations in Scotland. I am sure that most members who have held surgeries will have been visited by young students who say that they must get a vaccination before they go to university. Students are vulnerable, as there were fatalities last year. Although I welcome the £17 million, I would welcome more a supply of vaccinations, because students must have a period of time in which to build up immunity.

I am talking about two constituents who came to a surgery in Wick. Their sons were going to Imperial College, London. Last week, they could not get the vaccine in Wick—it was not available. I want to be positive, Iain, and I welcome the fact that you are addressing the matter.

Wind up? I have just started. [Laughter.] I want to make one brief point. It is on bed blocking. I welcome the fact that we should be constantly scrutinising best value for money and monitoring good practice. I am delighted that the Health and Community Care Committee have made care in the community a top priority. My main concern—this is a very brief point—relates to Sir Stewart Sutherland's comments last week about £750 million being missing from the care budget, UK-wide. Not only should we scrutinise what we do in this Parliament, but I would like clear, concise and accountable scrutiny by us and by local government. I think that we should be working towards better working partnerships with local government to deliver the health care that we need. I have a lot more to say.

The same principles apply to spinal injury patients, whose care costs £250 per day. In that case, better working relationships with  housing departments could mean that those patients have the care that they need in their own homes.

Will the minister clarify the £1,800 million of extra spending on health? The figures that were provided today by the Scottish Executive show an increase not of £1,800 million, but of £546 million—a total of £5,161 million in 2001-02 as opposed to £4,615 million now.

Does the minister disagree with Jack McConnell's figures that in 1997 the roads budget for motorway and trunk road improvement  was £120 million, this year it is £23 million and next year it will be £14 million?

The good thing about speaking last in a debate is that my speech is about 10 per cent of what it was. I would like to commend those who substantiated and supported Fergus Ewing's arguments. Under the Conservatives, 75 per cent of the Mallaig road was upgraded—a £7 million contract upgraded the final section from near Lochailort to Loch nan Uamh, completing that 75 per cent. The remaining objections to the section from Arisaig to Kinsadel, the section that Fergus was talking about, went to a public inquiry in Arisaig on 11 March 1997—about a month before the general election. Fergus stood three times as a parliamentary candidate for that constituency and I stood twice. At a chamber of commerce public meeting in 1999, the Labour candidate, who was given the title of home affairs spokesman, promised the good people of Mallaig that the A830 upgrading was top of Donald Dewar's priority list.

I have a very brief point, Jamie. I look forward to Alasdair's announcement that it will be top of the list. In a written reply to Murray Tosh, Jack McConnell said that the budget for motorway and trunk road improvements in 1996-97 was £120 million, that this year it was £23 million and that next year it would be £14 million. That is the real commitment to the A830, as opposed to the electoral promises that Fergus and I heard.

This debate has been enhanced enormously by the practical experience of teachers such as Maureen Macmillan, Margo MacDonald and Robin Harper. Maureen, I realise that one does not need to be a teacher to speak in this debate. We all feel passionate about this issue. I have never taught in schools but I spent the past 20 years in further education. I have seen people who slipped through the net at school. They left school with no experience and went into dead-end jobs. But I have seen how education can transform people by giving them dignity, self-esteem, belief in themselves and the opportunities that they seek in life, so I am delighted and privileged to take part in this debate today. As I listened to Sam Galbraith's ministerial statement, on the basis of my experience I could not help thinking how wonderful and impressive it was. I could not help thinking how different it was from the practical experience that people such as I have faced in the past two and a half years. As a parent—and a single parent—I wanted no more than an excellent educational experience for my children. All of us feel passionately about the fact that the one thing that we can do for our children is to give them the best experience possible in life. I do not see this issue as being all about the EIS, education ministers and teachers; it is about the lives of children and the lives of adults. I hope that members will forgive me if I turn back the clock a wee bit. Having stood in the 1992 and 1997 general elections, I remember how hard people such as Michael Forsyth and other education ministers had to fight to introduce primary school testing, languages in primary schools, school boards, a parents' charter and, indeed, to implement standard grade and higher still. All those initiatives were fought for in the face of bitter, hostile, negative and destructive opposition. If I stand here beside someone who was likened to Mother Teresa and who put forward a positive contribution to this debate, I am proud to be on this side. I am proud that Nicola Sturgeon and others have tried to overcome the historical confrontational approach that did no one any good. I am proud that we have entered into a constructive debate. Many promises were made by the Government. As a lecturer in 1997 I thought that things would be quite wonderful, with more resources and so on. I can talk honestly from my experience. At Inverness College, where I taught higher national certificate courses, higher national diploma courses and degrees, the size of my classes doubled and trebled after 1997. It did not make  much difference when I was teaching. I could lecture to three, 30 or 300, but when the course work comes in at 300,000 words a time and the evenings and weekends are not long enough to keep up with the marking, it does matter. That is no different from the feedback that I am getting from teachers in schools: there is more work for less money, less value and less recognition. There is a limit to how far you can push teachers. I will pick up on a point that Margo MacDonald made about teachers' pay. No one enters the teaching profession for financial advancement. My son graduated last year from Edinburgh and I was shocked when the starting salaries of his friends, as new graduates, were higher than the salary that I earned as a teacher at the top of the scale when I was teaching degree courses. That is shameful. In 1997, Inverness College had a deficit of about £700,000; it is now £4 million. I believe that out of the 53 further education colleges in Scotland—and the minister can confirm or deny this—48 of them are facing financial deficits to the bank. That is hardly a Government that prioritises education. I will mention Peter Peacock.

As convener of Highland Council, no sooner was the ink dry on Peter Peacock's Labour party application than he secured his place at the top of the list and subsequent ministerial position. Peter is not the flavour of the month in the Highlands, because the promises that he made last year are not being followed through this year. If Jamie Stone will forgive me, I will use the example of Tain Academy.

It is estimated that Highland Council needs £28 million for essential maintenance work, £30 million for existing capital and a further £20 million, yet this Government asks us to congratulate it for £51 million. Dennis Canavan mentioned this point. I feel strongly about testing in primary schools. I went to a seminar last week in Glasgow on autism. Far too many people with learning difficulties and disabilities are slipping through the system. It is not right that in this age we are picking up autism, Asperger's syndrome and dyslexia when people are 30 or 35. That should be done in primary schools.

Does Andrew Wilson acknowledge the fact that, in the last four years of the Conservative Government, inflation and unemployment were lower—and falling—than at any time since records began in 1847? Does he also acknowledge that the time is not right for us to join the euro, because our economies are not in any way convergent? He expresses concern about interest rates in the south of England but, given that unemployment in the rest of the European Union is at an average of 11 per cent, how can joining the euro and having interest rates set according to the diverse needs of 15 economies benefit this country in any way?

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what it intends to do to address the inequalities in health between men and women in Scotland. (S1O-366)

Does the minister share my concern at the rising suicide rate among young men in the light of last week's evidence that no psychiatric beds were available in the whole of Scotland?

I agree with Gordon Jackson's emphasis on community service. I have a report from the social work committee of Highland Council, which says that the grant for criminal justice services will not meet the needs that councils have identified. Highland Council and others are having to cut community services at weekends and in the evenings. Does Gordon Jackson agree that that is a matter for concern?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am rather disappointed by some of the contributions today. Maureen Macmillan referred to small fluctuations in the Highlands, but a small fluctuation can mean bankruptcy. The reported drop of 6 per cent this year is an official figure from the Highlands of Scotland Tourist Board, not a fabrication of anyone's imagination, and is likely to be an underestimate. That 6 per cent drop must be considered against the background of last year's drop of almost 20 per cent. Please do not insult people by talking about small or minor fluctuations. If the review is to mean anything, it must mean a partnership in which we listen to everyone in the industry. Now I turn to Alasdair Morrison. A few weeks ago, in response to a Scottish nationalist member's question, Alasdair said that tourist numbers had not changed. I am glad that he acknowledged today that although numbers are up in Edinburgh, they are seriously down in the Highlands and elsewhere. I hope that the Scottish Executive's approach to the review will be similar to that endorsed by Henry McLeish when I met him in Inverness. He acknowledged, examined and discussed the problems in a mature, responsible and professional manner, in contrast to the dismissive comments that have been made today. For example, Elaine Murray said that fuel duty is a minimal part of the price of petrol; in fact, it is 85 per cent of the price. We need a bit of honesty here. As Maureen and Fergus said, tourism is the crucial industry in the Scottish Highlands. This week the Highlands of Scotland Tourist Board announced that tourist numbers for the far north of Scotland have fallen by 16 per cent; that is the most dramatic drop this year. Perhaps Maureen Macmillan's bed and breakfast weekend in Sutherland was all right, but that is not the whole picture. We must look at the problem professionally, rather than having a bit of by-the-bar chat. Another point for Alasdair Morrison to consider is that Caledonian MacBrayne passenger numbers for this summer have fallen by 20,000 while car numbers are down by 4,000. We must have a proper review and an honest debate. I am concerned about many aspects of the Scottish Tourist Board, but it exists for one reason: to promote and market Scotland. Any marketing organisation can plan for the future only if it devotes enough of its budget to marketing and knows its current and potential customer base. The Scottish Tourist Board devotes 12 per cent of its budget to marketing while the rest goes on salaries, expenses, buildings and other costs. As of yesterday, the Highlands of Scotland Tourist  Board still did not have breakdown figures for overseas visitors for 1998, as it is planning for 2000. The Scottish Tourist Board is supposed to be a marketing organisation, but it cannot get the information that it requires from the Department of Trade and Industry. I suggested that it talk to its counterparts, and to Brian Wilson. It is not good enough to be two years behind with figures. The clear message from the industry is that we must promote Scotland. There can be no excuses.  Henry McLeish tells us today in The Scotsman that Scots should believe in themselves. That is not the issue: we need the Scottish Tourist Board to believe in Scotland. Finally, I want to mention Project Ossian. It has already cost £5 million. It is funded from the marketing budget. After two years it is still not up and running. It does not sell tourist beds in Scotland: it is simply the yellow pages of the tourist industry. If we are to take it seriously, we must ensure that it moves along in a business-like manner to provide the services that are required.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to assist Inverness College, which faces a deficit of £4 million, in providing high-quality further and higher education. (S1O-331)

Does the minister agree that considering redundancies to reduce costs—as the principal of the college must do—will reduce the number of courses on offer, reduce the number of students and reduce potential income, and will lead to greater deficits in the future?

rose—

rose—

What are Mr Scott's views on paying off the Skye bridge debt and making the bridge toll free? During the 1999 election campaign, the Liberal Democrats campaigned to pay off the Skye bridge debt and won seats in the Highlands from the Labour party. How do they stand on paying off that debt now that they are in coalition with Labour?

Will Bristow Muldoon give way?

All members on this side of the chamber have fully supported the food standards agency and complimented Susan Deacon on its establishment. There is no amnesia here. We  recognise that this is something that must be done.

The Conservative party welcomes the establishment of an effective and independent food standards agency. The agency will affect not only people's livelihoods, but—more important—their lives. It will improve food safety and increase confidence in our food industry, while monitoring standards of food hygiene to address public concerns. In short, as well as improving health, it will help primary and secondary producers, and it will help to create jobs and prosperity. Nevertheless, some points need to be made, and we will make them in the manner expected of an Opposition party in an open and accountable democracy. I hope that these points will be taken in the positive and constructive manner in which they are made, and I look forward the minister's replies. We oppose any moves that would lead to Scotland facing additional burdens to those experienced in other areas of the UK. In that sense, we welcome the Scottish Executive's single market for the food standards agency. It would be helpful if we could have clarification of the relationship between the food standards agency and the Scottish Executive. Several questions come to my mind. Can the Scottish Executive overrule the agency's recommendations? Will the Scottish Executive accept and fully implement all the agency's recommendations? It is important that this fledgling Parliament is aware of the input of the ministers for health and for rural affairs in that process. Can we be assured that the agency will be truly independent of the Government and party politics? I was pleased to hear Susan Deacon say that information will be readily available. I wanted to make a point about that, but it no longer needs to be made. I would like open, accessible and accountable judgments and I am delighted to hear that that has been addressed. It is important that judgments are publicly available, especially for those who are affected. The agency must be responsible and accountable in issuing information so that there is not undue public concern, whether because of imbalance, lack of supporting advice or any other factor. Will compensation be paid to any producers who are wrongly accused? We all know about the example in Scotland that led to considerable  publicity. Decisions and risk assessments must be open to public and parliamentary scrutiny. An example would be a comparable risk assessment of genetically modified food and beef on the bone. Would the food standards agency have the authority to lift the beef-on-the-bone ban? I am aware that Alasdair Morgan mentioned that, but we must be absolutely clear about it. What evidence is there that eating beef on the bone has harmed anyone in the United Kingdom? Knowing that would be helpful in educating us all in this debate. I am also pleased that the minister addressed the subject of GM foods. GM crops were not mentioned but I am concerned about them, especially about their environmental impact. There is undoubtedly widespread public concern about GM foods and crops, and the food standards agency—if it were given the power to investigate—would have a role to play in allaying those concerns. There is concern that the agency will add to the many burdens that are already imposed on small and medium-sized British food producers. That brings me back to a question that I raised in the debate in June, when I asked whether we—as consumers in Scotland—could have the same faith in the quality of imported food that we would have in Scottish and British foods. I am pleased to say to Mr Lyon that, in its statement of 13 September, the National Farmers Union of Scotland said of the pig industry: "Prices have been below the cost of production for almost a year and a half . . . Our Farmers are required to meet higher welfare standards than our main competitors, and we are prevented from using certain food components . . . We also suffer from high processing costs, due to meat inspection charges and the cost of by-product disposal." I feel that that statement summarises my points. Although I fully welcome a food standards agency, there must be a level playing field across Europe on which our farmers can compete, with the same standards and the same production costs for all farmers in Europe.

There is no doubt that every person in this country would welcome the adoption  by the other 14 European countries of the consistent, high-quality standards that we are discussing today. I ask Ross Finnie, as the Minister for Rural Affairs, to use his influence to bring that about. That would be very welcome, and I thank him for his intervention. Will the food standards agency act swiftly to ban the import of meat produced in conditions and using methods that are not allowed here? I refer again to the point that the Minister for Rural Affairs made. The relevant examples relate to pig and poultry farming. I commend the patient and competent Convener of the Health and Community Care Committee—I see that she is out of the chamber at the moment—for grappling not only with the members of that committee, but with the increasing number of statutory instruments relating to food safety. I appreciate that the system is in its early days, and that methods are coming into place, but I was alarmed to read the document that came to my desk as I sat down for the committee meeting this morning. It said that, although affected feed had been sold to 416 Belgian farms and exported to France and Holland, the ban applied only to Belgium. Why is that? I would welcome our having a greater input into such matters. We should be concerned about the system of qualified majority voting, under which the ban was put through the European structures. The United Kingdom, with its 10 votes in Europe, could vote against a Commission proposal, yet, because of the weighting under QMV, we could still be liable to implement that proposal. I appreciate that that is called democracy, but it is none the less a matter of concern. The Minister for Health and Community Care mentioned labelling. Consumers could be forgiven for thinking that food labelled "processed in Scotland" was produced in Scotland. Such labelling is used to disguise imported food—especially meat products—as Scottish food. Over-regulation of UK food producers, which is not matched by regulation on overseas producers, puts our farming and food processing industry at a distinct competitive advantage. To eliminate unfair competition, the food standards agency, the Scottish Executive and the Westminster Government should apply the same rigorous standards to foreign produce as are applied to our own.

On a point of order. I am sorry, but I cannot hear.

Will the minister give way?

I support the progress of the University of the Highlands and Islands. Does the minister support it and what will he do to address the £4 million deficit at Inverness college, the lead college in the UHI network?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to enable acute hospital and primary care trusts to meet the aspirations for joint investment funds set out in the "Designed to Care" white paper. (S1O-255)

The new joint investment fund bridges the gap between primary and acute care. Local doctors feel strongly that the funds are not being released and that they are not able to deliver appropriate care. Diabetes is an example—

Will the minister support initiatives such as the care of diabetes to promote patient care under the new joint investment funding?

What does Hugh Henry intend to do to improve the quality of life of the people of Angus and the Mearns—a delegation of whom visited Parliament yesterday—and what will he do with regard to their attempt to keep open Stracathro hospital?

I agree that partnership and sustainability are important for the future. Can Dr Jackson tell me what partnership the Scottish Executive will enter into with Inverness College and the University of the Highlands and Islands to address the £4 million deficit the college faces, to continue its and the university's sustainability?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it intends to take to address the decline in the number of tourists visiting Scotland. (S1O-233)

I thank the minister for his response. I also thank Henry McLeish for his time when he met me last Friday to hear major concerns raised by the tourism industry in the Highlands and Islands. I welcome his approach to working together.  Prior to the November budget, will the Scottish Executive make strong representations to the Chancellor of the Exchequer to alleviate or reduce the crippling duty on fuel that is such a major part of the budget for a holiday in a rural area?

Will Malcolm Chisholm give way?

Will the member give way?

We all agree in this chamber that promoting better health, improving the people of Scotland's health and working in partnership are key priorities for the Parliament. I was delighted to hear Susan Deacon say that no government diktat will make a difference in that, as that is the background to my amendment. Although the "challenge for individuals . . . who can do so much to improve and safeguard their own health" is briefly mentioned on page 62 of "Towards a Healthier Scotland", I ask her to support my amendment to ensure that we give greater emphasis to individuals taking responsibility for their own health.  The issue was before the public eye last week regarding cervical cancer screening-we discovered that many individuals had been called for a smear test as many as eight times. I would like Susan to use this opportunity not just to set out a framework for public health but to encourage individuals, within this chamber and throughout Scotland, to take greater ownership of their own health. I hope that she will support me in raising the profile of individual responsibility, as is endorsed in the white paper.  A successful project in Finland was based on major lifestyle changes through concerted individual, community and Government action. I ask the minister again to bring the individual into this partnership.  There are many wide-ranging aspects to this debate on public health, and I hope that my colleagues Ben Wallace, Alex Fergusson, David Mundell and David Davidson will have the opportunity to contribute to it.  The white paper on health addresses major areas. It also includes nine specific funding pledges. This comes in a week when an additional £80 million is being given to education from other budgets. I ask the minister to honour those nine funding pledges and to state that there will be no reduction in the health budget to fund additional promises in other areas just to keep the Lib-Lab pact on line. I would also like a breakdown of the funding; I will be lodging a written question to that effect.  Apart from the nine specific funding pledges, the action plan also includes the creation of two new national posts, at least one task force, six new strategies, one more advisory panel, another new expert group and various other new groups to co-ordinate activities. At least seven commitments in this white paper are to include the councils. However, I bring to the minister's attention the fact that neither the paper nor her speech mentioned including general practitioners. Social inclusion would seem to include councils, but the Scottish Conservative party would like assurances that GPs will remain at the forefront of health delivery in Scotland and be fully included in the new plans. The record of Scottish council social work departments in delivering care in the community and blocking beds in our hospitals is nothing short of a national scandal, and yet councils are given a priority and recognition beyond that of the tried and tested backbone of the health service-the GPs.  On the smoking ban in public places proposed by Hugh Henry, as a new Parliament we must ask why, in December 1988, Donald Dewar, as Secretary of State for Scotland in Westminster, signed up to a voluntary agreement with the industry in response to the white paper "Smoking Kills", yet now finds it necessary to support and legislate for a ban on smoking in public places.

I would rather continue. I have only eight minutes. Hugh Henry will have his chance.

If Hugh Henry can speak for Donald Dewar, I am happy to give way.

I think that Hugh Henry needs a better spin doctor. Having spent the summer in the Highlands, I read the newspapers like everyone else, which assumed that he was calling for a ban. He needs to employ another spin doctor.  We must consult and work together but, having consulted, we should implement practical measures to address the health of the people of Scotland and not continue building on ever-increasing and expensive bureaucracy and focus groups, only to leave the patients' most-used link with the health service out in the cold.  The health promotion arm of public health has  huge status and a huge cost, but it is not generally recognised as cost-effective. For as long as I can remember, we have identified the problems in Scotland's health. For as long as I can remember, we have ploughed more money into health-even more than our English neighbours-yet we are not making significant inroads into the problems.  I will give the minister three examples of where we could move from bureaucracy and administration to front-line delivery, which I acknowledge that the minister mentioned. I will give three simple examples of what can be done. Part of the health promotion budget should be given to GPs to help them engage more fully in health promotion. Cardiovascular health could be monitored by GPs, as they know all their patients and could take blood pressure and work to treat this chronic disease early. GPs could also assist in a campaign to reduce smoking-that could be tackled along with hypertension.  As I visited various GPs and hospitals during the summer, the most serious concern that people raised with me was chlamydia. Chlamydia is given a passing mention in the document, yet 10 per cent of young, sexually active people are affected by it. It is a symptomless problem that causes infertility. It affects both males and females, yet there is no pilot project in Scotland to address the problem and most health boards have not budgeted for the machine that is used for early detection.  By strengthening the relationship with GPs, we could also address the problem of young men not attending doctors' surgeries. The suicide rate among young men is alarming and I have no doubt that we are all concerned about it. Only 10 per cent of screening for chlamydia is done on males. That could easily be addressed by bringing the GPs to the front line of health delivery. The treatment is a simple course of antibiotics, which can prevent infertility.  I use those three practical examples of how we could improve health care as a distinct option to the grand, centralised, bureaucratic and expensive approach outlined in the document. Where does the document focus on applying direct, immediate help for young single mothers who are smoking? Cigarettes are a cause of deprivation, as they affect the household budget, and smoking-related illnesses cost the NHS £1.8 billion a year. Where is the direct help to bring young males into GP surgeries and tackle the alarming suicide rate? I ask Susan Deacon not to get buried in paperwork and focus groups, but to work with the Health and Community Care Committee and health providers to promote good public health in Scotland.  I move, as an amendment to motion S1M-105, in the name of Susan Deacon, to leave out from "the key" to end and insert "that a partnership between individuals and health providers based on shared responsibilities is a better route to improving health in Scotland than the Executive's plans, based on 'improved life circumstances' and action in relation to 'health topics', which are failing the people of Scotland."

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it intends to take to reduce dental decay in children under the age of 14. (S1O-111)

Dental decay and oral cancer is the most common reason for admission of under-14-year-olds to in-patient and day-care beds in Scotland. Alleviation of the problem of dental decay and oral cancer would reduce preventable pain and save money in primary and secondary health care. Will the minister take up the British Dental Association's suggestion of including oral hygiene, diet advice and registration with a dentist in standard health checks, or as part of the pre-school education programme?

Would Christine Grahame mind relating her left foot experiences to the subject of the debate?

Does the member agree that people living on Skye can buy a book of tickets to travel over the bridge, which costs them less than  it did to go over on the ferry?

Keith Raffan is always a hard act to follow, but I will try my best. I am proud to speak as a member of the party that initiated PFI. I am very comfortable standing by our manifesto commitments and doing what we said we would all along-voting on the issues in our manifesto.

Give me a second please, Richard.  There may be times when Keith and I will agree or disagree, but I hope that we and others in the chamber will put the people of Scotland first, rather than hark back to comments by Mandy Rice-Davies, Alex Rowley or whoever else.  The important principle is being lost in this debate. That principle is the delivery and provision of public health and other services to the people of Scotland. When, many years ago in the House of Commons, the Conservative party argued that tenants should be given the right to buy their council houses, the consumption of the good was the most important thing, rather than who owned it. Rather than saying "public good, private bad", we should try to focus the debate on the delivery of the services.

Could Richard let me get started? I know that he loves intervening when I am speaking, and we seem to be developing a relationship here. [Laughter.]

If Richard insists on being helpful, he can go on.

I do not think that any of us has a monopoly on good ideas, and I am delighted to hear that we took the idea from the Labour party and that the Labour party has now re-endorsed it. I welcome the minister's re-examination of the guidelines and proposals. As mature politicians, it is our responsibility to examine those proposals and to move forward with the commitment to PFI.  Des McNulty was still harking back to the Tory years. I believe that if we are to get a serious grip on Scotland's public finances, many Labour-controlled councils should endorse PFI and public-private partnerships for reasons of service quality and value for money. The debate should focus on providing services. I do not believe that any patient turns up at a hospital and asks who owns it. Patients are more concerned about standards of treatment and waiting times. I have never heard a parent say that they were concerned about who owned a school. Parents, children and we as politicians should be concerned about the standards and the provision of education, rather than about who owns and maintains the building.  Looking across the chamber, I seem to remember that, during our debate on Holyrood, the point was clearly made that the business of this Parliament could be conducted equally well whether we were tenants in this chamber or owners in the other chamber. It is the business and the decision-making that matter.  I am pleased to endorse the excellent idea of PFI and am delighted that Labour members have come on board and done so, too. According to the information centre, PFI projects in Scotland that have been completed or are in the pipeline have a value of more than £2 billion. That is serious money; I would like to hear those who are opposed to PFI make a realistic and honourable suggestion of an alternative means by which we  can provide that level of public services.

I believe that the bill is in the interests of us all, regardless of our different political hues. I find little to criticise in it and the minister has already addressed many of the issues that I want to raise. None the less, I would like to emphasise some of  them.  I believe that a food standards agency would be in all our interests, and not only for our health. It would allow us to use our resources and it would lead to more jobs and to greater economic growth in Scotland. Anything that we can do to increase consumer confidence in goods produced in Scotland will be enormously beneficial.  We welcome the idea of an effective and independent food standards agency that is properly set up and fairly funded. We believe that such an agency would improve food safety and raise public confidence in the British food industry while monitoring standards of food hygiene and addressing public health concerns.  Like Mr Morgan, we also welcome the Government's U-turn over the £90 corner shop tax-which, notably, happened less than 24 hours after David McLetchie made his comments in this chamber. I look forward to future speedy responses from the Government to our constructive comments.  There is some lack of clarity as to how genuinely independent the new food standards agency would be. For example, could it lift the beef-on-the-bone ban? If ministers routinely overrule the agency's recommendations, it is difficult to see how the agency could win full public confidence.  There is also concern that the proposed agency would add to the many burdens that are already imposed on small and medium-size British food producers, because our standards would be higher than those required of imported food. That leads to the crucial question whether we can have the same confidence when we buy imported food in our shops and supermarkets as we have when we buy British food. We must address that in setting up the agency. Will the regulations apply equally to food that is produced in other European Union countries to guarantee British consumers consistent standards and protection?  I have raised this point in the chamber before: the bill makes no provision for the environmental impact of the way in which foods are grown. There is widespread public concern over GM foods and crops; the food standards agency could probably help to allay those concerns if it were given the power to investigate. We believe that not giving the agency that power is a serious deficiency in the bill.  We are constantly faced with conflicting information and contradictory academic research on environmental and public health concerns. That does not apply only to GM food. A headline in The Scotsman today reads: "Consumers 'being sold poisoned vegetables'". I am pleased that the minister is addressing that. It is time, in her words, that we lived by sound scientific advice and not by  the scaremongering headlines that we see week by week.  Risk assessment and decisions must be open to public and parliamentary scrutiny. For example, what is the risk assessment of GM food compared with that of beef on the bone? I believe that the public need to know. We need to reassure them over their concerns. If the agency had the power to investigate GM foods, the public could have greater confidence.  The food standards agency should not be used to penalise Scottish producers unfairly. The over-regulation of food producers, which is not matched by the regulation of EU and other overseas producers, leads to an overall competitive disadvantage for producers in this country-for our farmers and for our food industries. In addressing the food standards agency, ministers should deal with the divergence of standards and the public health concerns arising from that.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to ensure that the division of responsibilities between local authorities and the national health service for the delivery of health-related social services does not result in bed blocking in the future. (S1O-38)

I am pleased to hear that there will be greater integration. It has been flagged up to me that there is likely to be a serious crisis over the millennium, with an expected increase in accident and emergency cases at a time when the number of NHS admissions is higher. Compounded with bed blocking, those are serious concerns. Will they be addressed by the end of the year?

On a point of order, Mr Presiding Officer. Yesterday, in reply to my intervention on a Labour member regarding the Executive's proposals for Gaelic education, I was advised that those proposals were clearly outlined in the Inverness Courier . While I recognise the importance of the Inverness Courier in the Highlands, I ask that a precedent be established that proposals and commitments are announced through this chamber, as the Inverness Courier is not yet available to all 129 MSPs.

I, too, am a member for the Highlands and Islands. Perhaps I missed something this morning, but I was not aware of the Government's commitments to or proposals for Gaelic. Would Mrs Macmillan care to outline those commitments? I am very supportive of her cause  and would be genuinely interested in hearing the proposals.

rose-

I said this morning that many of  our health problems do not need additional legislation. I should have liked health to be further up the agenda, but I made it clear that I was not asking for restructuring of the health service.

I would like to address much of what is not included in the Government's priorities. Having stood twice for Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber and now being a list member for the Highlands and Islands, I can honestly say that  issues such as health and education were raised by far greater numbers of constituents than raised issues of land reform.  I believe that everyone in this chamber came here with a commitment to improving the health of Scotland. Health accounts for one third of this Parliament's budget, it is one third of our responsibilities, yet in the First Minister's statement there was but one passing mention of the chronic heart disease and cancer problems that we have in this country. I must express my disappointment-and, I am sure, the disappointment of many in the chamber-that health has not been given the priority that I feel it deserves.  The people of Scotland will judge this Parliament by how we care for two of the most vulnerable groups in our society: our children and the elderly. In the next four years, the Conservatives will clearly pursue the health commitments that we set out in our manifesto. While I realise that improvements can be made without legislation, I would ask the Government to make it clear what the health priorities are in the Scottish Parliament and when it will address those priorities. Will the Government give us a clear outline of where it stands on health?  Too many concerns to mention in this Parliament today have already been raised with me, as health spokesman for the Scottish Conservatives. An urgent concern, however, is the issue of blocked beds. There are 1,600 to 1,700 blocked beds each week in the national health service at a cost of about £30 million. Will the Government look at the relationship between social work services and the NHS? Our manifesto made a clear commitment to serve the elderly and the most vulnerable people in our society, to give them seamless transfer of care and to give them the care of their choice. There should also be a level playing field between privately run residential homes and council-run homes.  I am shocked to discover that the most common reason for admission of 14-year-olds to in-patient and day care beds is dental decay. When will the Government bring forward a public health bill or address this issue? I look forward to that, as it is a major issue for the British Dental Association, for parents and for children.  Trish Godman and Annabel Goldie, who both spoke on drugs, and Keith Raffan, who has raised the issue in a written question, have shown that every member of this Parliament is greatly concerned about the scourge of drugs in Scotland. Margaret Curran mentioned Mothers Against Drugs and the Conservative party has listened to people such as Patsy Siegerson and Cranhill Mothers Against Drugs. I do not mean to score a point here, but I can honestly say that we listened  to what they said, we heard what they said and we included their advice in our manifesto. I ask the Labour party again to rethink what Mothers Against Drugs and others with concerns about drugs in Scotland have said, and to please listen to them. Do not just listen to them, but hear what they have to say. I beg the Government to address this issue, whether by the legislative process or otherwise.

I will give way, but I first want to speak in support of Keith Raffan's point. Our manifesto suggests finding a method of using money from asset confiscation to fund a national drugs strategy and to give families the support that they need when they have a drug user in the family. Support, treatment, rehabilitation and advice are sadly lacking in Scotland and I would ask the Executive to consider those issues.

Those are examples of measures in health and drugs where there is no need to score points, as we are all committed to curing-or attempting to cure-and to addressing the scourge of drugs in our society. I thank Mr Raffan for his intervention. I have already said that I will be pleased to support him on that issue.  On the subject of waiting lists, the message that I have been given by medical practitioners is that we should stop treating headline figures and interfering with professional clinical judgment by dealing with minor cases so as to reduce waiting lists, while major operations must wait.  The British Medical Association has already flagged up the issue of junior doctors to us. It is regrettable that the Government has decided to block the reduction of hours and that we are now, for the first time in Scotland in many years, facing industrial action by committed professionals in the health service. I am pleased that the Minister for Health and Community Care said yesterday that she was seeking an early meeting with junior doctors.  Much has been said today about social inclusion. As a representative of the Highlands and Islands, I am concerned, as I am sure many other members from the Highlands are, that one indicator for allocating national health service resources is the deprivation index. One of the criteria for that index is car ownership, which assumes that car owners have some wealth. In  the Highlands and Islands, a car is not a luxury, but a necessity. Indeed, the costs of owning and using a car and high fuel prices cause deprivation in other parts of the household budget. I therefore ask the Minister for Communities to address the deprivation index when she considers NHS resources for rural areas, the criteria for which should be quite different from those for urban areas.  Turning to public health, I am pleased that our poor record of chronic heart disease has been mentioned, but it undoubtedly needs to be addressed by the Executive. I also ask ministers to consider more support and education for families of cardiac patients.  Last week, I was told that we had become a nation of spectator rather than participative sportsmen. This week, I heard on the news that Kenny Dalglish has had to go to Bulgaria to find new football players. Why is he not going to Dundee, Aberdeen, Glasgow and Edinburgh?

Standards of sport and access to sport in schools are issues that must be raised. I am sure that Mr McConnell will share that view.  Finally, like others, I am concerned, as a parent and as a consumer, about academic research. Members will probably agree with me that there is a crying need for credible and accurate advice and information. For more than 30 years, women have worried about the side effects of the pill and have been told that it is okay, then that it is not. Last year, they were told that it is okay. Is it, or will there be another piece of research next week that says that there are dangers?  Another major concern for people in Scotland is the measles, mumps and rubella injection. Instead of professors trying to score points against one another, week after week, we need full, credible and accurate advice. I cannot leave out BSE, and Dr Simpson has already made a point about the beef-on-the-bone ban. The Prime Minister tells us that genetically modified foods are all right, but why do we not believe that? There are major concerns on GM foods and I ask the Government to give us some leadership and guidance about them.  My final point is on national parks and I would like to endorse what David McLetchie said. Along with other members in the Highlands and Islands, I attended consultative meetings about national parks throughout Strathspey and Badenoch. At the end of a three-hour meeting, we came away with more questions than answers. It is wrong for someone to say, "It is a national park and so we will vote for it," because there are so many types of national parks. I welcome debate that will arise from that issue.

rose-

Will Ms Whitefield give way?

In this new age of positive and consensual politics, will the minister, apart from addressing the many concerns and issues that have been raised in the chamber today, give us a clear outline of the benefits to the governance of Scotland's fishing industry that will arise from the new boundary?

I question Ross Finnie's commitment to, and empathy for, rural affairs, given his support for increasing the fuel escalator above the level imposed by his new party leader. Higher fuel costs are having a serious effect on the transportation of goods, which affects businesses, tourists and people who live and work in the Highlands and Islands. If the Administration's view is that rural affairs should be viewed solely as an accounting exercise, it is sadly out of touch with the needs and concerns of Scotland's rural communities.  Why was the well-respected highlander, John Farquhar Munro, who has many years' experience on Highland Council and as chairman of its roads and transport committee, not considered for the post of Minister for Rural Affairs?  Having been a lecturer in further and higher education for the past 25 years, I am well aware of the demands that are made on our students and of the highly damaging effect of the imposition of tuition fees. I say to Mike Watson that the students of Scotland need no lessons on who is affected by tuition fees; single parents and the young unemployed are the ones who would benefit most from their abolition.

I will respond to the First Minister's comment about the percentage of people not paying tuition fees. Those who are eligible to pay tuition fees are exactly the people who are choosing not to enter further and higher education. As a student adviser at the University of the Highlands and Islands until one month ago, I had personal experience not only of students deciding not to enter further and higher education but of many who had to drop out.  When Jim Wallace works out how to spend his additional £33,000 salary and Mr Finnie his additional £17,500, will they spare a thought for the thousands of students in Scotland who will pay  a heavy price for Lib-Lab collective Cabinet responsibility? Students who are planning to start a course this autumn do not know whether they will have to pay fees this year, next year or in the future. Will Jim Wallace and Ross Finnie consider the hardship of students in the Highlands and other rural areas-where wages and salaries are below the national average-who require a longer pay-back period? Will they give some thought to the high proportion of students who work long hours to pay tuition fees and to pay for their keep and the effect that that has on their health, studies, future qualifications and life choices?

No, I have almost finished. Will the Liberal Democrats apologise to the voters in Scotland for promises made before 6 May being promises betrayed on 14 May?