6. To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with local authorities regarding the provision of primary school places. (S4F-01859)

Parents at the successful and popular Hillhead primary school have been told by the local authority that their children might not, after all, be entitled to a place at the school because it is so heavily oversubscribed, and that the catchment area might have to be redrawn: a decision which is, not surprisingly, causing a great deal of anger, particularly among parents who have moved into that catchment area. Will the First Minister agree that a system of school placement that is based on catchment areas and is purely supply driven is not working well enough, and that it should be replaced by one that is demand led, in which the money follows the pupil and in which parents have maximum choice to decide which school their children attend?

I thank the minister for an encouraging and comprehensive update on where we are. We are pleased to support the Scottish Government’s motion and the Labour Party’s amendment. A number of members in the chamber were present at last week’s meeting of the cross-party group on sport, which was ably chaired by Alison Johnstone. We heard some key speakers, including the minister, talk about legacy. It was an interesting meeting for all sorts of reasons—in fact, I think that there was a record turnout—but I shall focus on my own thoughts about what was said. No one can doubt the extent of the challenge that we face in providing a meaningful and lasting legacy. I say that because I do not think that it is terribly easy to define the term, particularly in its qualitative sense. I was struck by an article in this month’s GTC magazine written by David Grevemberg, in which the author talks about seeing it “as defining and connecting and giving people a sense of identity. It is ... about ambition, peace, prosperity and democracy”. In other words, it is about some important aspirations and values that are not easy to measure. As Patricia Ferguson rightly said, it must include some aspects that can be quantitatively measured—for example, the increasing number, we hope, of people who participate in sport, the reduction in obesity totals, and how much additional money is raised. Those are all important aspects, but the legacy must be much more than that, and that is the tougher call. Indeed, I am not entirely sure that it is the politician’s job to dictate what it should be, but it is our job, which we must do in line with the other stakeholders, such as sportscotland, Glasgow 2014 and local authorities, to deliver the circumstances that will help communities to develop the more qualitative aspects of that legacy across Scotland. What do I mean by that? For one thing, it is about improving wellbeing just as much as it is about improving welfare—we had a very interesting debate in the context of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill about whether it is possible to legislate for wellbeing, given that it has no accepted meaning in law—and, at the same time, we need to allow communities a sense of purpose, so that people feel better about themselves and can develop team spirit and an understanding of the crucial role provided by volunteers. Patricia Ferguson mentioned the Universities Scotland and Colleges Scotland initiative, the game changer awards, which, I think, are funded by the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. The awards provide new incentives for individuals and communities—in whatever way—to provide that added value in community life and, even if they cannot be measured by a politician, an economist or perhaps even the media, those incentives are important. A legacy is therefore not just about improving the level of physical participation, physical education in schools, additional money or the bigger sports; rather, it must go deeper than that. The Scottish Government is absolutely right to identify the economic and social aspect of that in its motion and the Labour Party has raised the health aspect in its amendment, which is absolutely right and proper. At the cross-party meeting, lots of interesting comments were made about what must still be done to achieve the legacy that we desire. I was struck by a number of things. First, sportscotland commented on the need for a more joined-up approach across the sector. It is clear that lots of good things are happening on the ground, but the fact that there is not always a co-ordinated approach can make life pretty tough in some areas. For example, there is a history of very poor data collection about what facilities exist, who runs which sports programme, who can access them and when and, in some local authorities, an inability to provide local people with sufficient relevant information. That seems to be changing, thanks to an extensive audit that has been undertaken by Audit Scotland and sportscotland, but I was struck by the statistic provided at the meeting that although 50 per cent of senior schools have really good sports facilities, many remain underused. Comment was made about the problem of access or, in many cases, about the high prices that are charged to allow certain groups to use the facilities. That seems to be a particular problem in some of the poorer areas, which are exactly the areas that we need to target when it comes to increasing participation. On the same basis, it has been pointed out that some of the most successful sports clubs are those that have managed to turn aspects of their sports into family affairs and, although that might need a slight refocusing of attitudes, it is clearly something that we need to think about. Invited speakers made several comments that community remains a slight gap when it comes to successful organisation and they urged politicians to consider that when deliberating on policy with local authorities. I was also struck by a second comment on the need for a modern, coherent digital strategy when it comes to the promotion of sport. The BBC and STV came in for a bit of criticism for their coverage of sport. Mention was made of the very high dependence on football, the fact that only 5 per cent of coverage is devoted to women’s sport, their failure to recognise that young people have turned away from both these channels in favour of other online programmes and the poor coverage of so-called minority sports, despite Scotland doing very well on the international stage in some of them. The minister was at the same meeting, so she may wish to reflect on the digital strategy for the future. A key point is about schools and I will focus on that, not just because it is the theme of the Conservative amendment, but because nothing is more important when it comes to inspiring participation in sport than what happens at school. I was sad to hear the reflections at the meeting that made it abundantly clear that there is still a long way to go in some schools to ensure that all pupils have the right opportunities. I know that we have had a lengthy debate in the past about PE in schools, the two-hour commitment, the need for fully qualified PE teachers and how to ensure that more girls are enthusiastic about sport, but the issue is much more than that. Stewart Harris summed that up when he said that developing the right ethos in sport is so very much easier if it happens in school rather than in a club, after the young person has left school. He also drew our attention to team sport. At the weekend, there was much discussion in The Sunday Times about the Office for Standards in Education south of the border and its alleged failing to support teaching methods that foster healthy competition among young pupils. I cannot comment on Ofsted’s activities, but I know that similar criticisms have been levelled at too many schools and, in some cases, local authorities, which, for one reason or another, have chosen not to promote competitive sport. Indeed, in some cases, they have campaigned against it because it was thought to be somehow divisive. Having spent 40 years of my life actively involved in playing sports at different levels and coaching many youngsters from a variety of backgrounds, I am appalled when anyone says that competitive sport should be banned. I cannot think of anything more contrary to the spirit of young people or real life or that does more harm to the self-discipline of young people. It will clearly do great harm to our school communities and, possibly, some of our international development squads. Competitive sport must return to all schools. It should not be compulsory, but the offer must be there for everyone and be enshrined in the legacy of the Commonwealth games. The Conservative Party is happy to support the Government motion and the Labour amendment. I move amendment S4M-08879.1, to insert at end: “, and notes the comment from sportscotland that to maximise the impact of the Games, both in 2014 and in the decades ahead, competitive sport should have an important place in all schools”.

14. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to address reported increases in emergency admissions for people over 75. (S4O-02850)

I thank the cabinet secretary for what was a comprehensive answer and a good news story from the Scottish Government. Notwithstanding the answer that the cabinet secretary has just given, an increasing proportion of people in the post-75 age group are going into accident and emergency departments with dementia concerns. What steps is the Scottish Government taking to provide the specialist nursing care that is required for those patients in acute hospitals?

In her capacity as chair of the ministerial working group on child sexual exploitation, Jackie Brock of Children in Scotland described the issue as “particularly complex”. She is right—and for exactly the reasons that were set out by the convener of the Public Petitions Committee in his opening remarks. As other members have said, not only are there few subjects quite as distressing as this, but few are quite so hard to tackle, given the difficulties in uncovering the true extent of the problem. Several members quite rightly highlighted that, thanks to the researchers from the University of Bedfordshire, we know that the extent of child sexual exploitation is extremely difficult to establish. They state that the problem “is not visible” and it has as much to do with the entirely understandable reluctance of the victims to come forward as it has to do with the hidden nature of the crimes and those who perpetrate them. We know, too, from the very high-profile cases that there have been in Rochdale and Oxford just how sensitive this subject is within the public mood. That point was extremely well put by Jamie Hepburn and John Wilson, and by Graeme Pearson, who made a very thoughtful contribution. Given his experience in the police service, he brings a greater degree of understanding to this issue than perhaps the rest of us do. All this matters because the problem can be addressed fully only if we understand its nature, prevalence and extent. We have a definition of child sexual exploitation in Scotland, but, as Anne McTaggart rightly said, there have been issues around it. The line between such crimes and other forms of abuse can be extremely thin. In truth, there is often a cyclical relationship between the two, which can add even more complexity. As Jayne Baxter rightly said in her contribution, the study that was conducted by CELCIS into the sexual exploitation of looked-after children provided particularly important evidence, not least because it threw up the fact that those who are in that circumstance are particularly vulnerable, because they are often in the care system for the very reason that they have been abused or exploited. Martin Henry of Stop It Now! Scotland has warned that “it would be dangerous to separate child sexual exploitation too much from the wider childhood sexual abuse agenda.”—[Official Report, Public Petitions Committee, 11 June 2013; c 1434.] We have to take that comment seriously, although it adds that greater degree of complexity. Given that, it is easy to appreciate where the ministerial working group was coming from. The problem is very real, but quite often unseen; it is distinct, but closely related to other crimes. As Jackson Carlaw said in another thought-provoking speech, the problem throws up a lot of the dilemmas that we face as parliamentarians. Notwithstanding that, the steps that have been taken are very much in the right direction and the Public Petitions Committee’s report is hugely helpful, as are the deliberations of many in the voluntary sector, including the ever-helpful Barnardo’s. The Scottish Government and the ministerial working group have shown a real determination to address the issue head on and improve Scotland’s national child protection guidance. We have seen in both the drugs debate and the alcohol debate that we have to be bold and, in some cases, go into areas that perhaps would not always be the choosing of parliamentarians. I did not sit through the committee’s deliberations first hand, but for me the committee report sends out some key messages. I will deal with a few of them. First, in this age of rapid online communication, more and more youngsters—even those from secure backgrounds—are in danger of falling victim to sexual exploitation, and clearly some groups are particularly vulnerable. Gil Paterson made a good point about where the responsibility for that lies. The area needs urgent attention and I do not pretend that I have any answers, but it is coming up the political agenda. A second point, which was raised several times in the report, is the need to identify and help victims as quickly and efficiently as possible. We have seen lots of initiatives that have made that more possible, and I take on board the point that several members made about trying to draw that together into a coherent strategy. I fully accept what the minister is saying about the fact that we do not want another war of words or another review—it has to be about action. However, we have some good experience on which to base our future policy. In February 2013, operation dash investigated CSE in the 12 local authorities of the then Strathclyde Police area and worked closely with Barnardo’s policy areas. It was helpful to identify the four categories that help inform us about the responses. We have seen interesting responses in Derby and Keighley in the south, which have also informed policy. I share Neil Bibby’s and David Stewart’s concerns about the Aberlour situation in Glasgow. I am certain that Aberlour is keen to work with the Scottish Government to address the situation. The opportunity to have safe places means so much to children who need help and who need a situation in which they can feel totally secure. I hope that the minister will take up Aberlour’s offer. My colleague Jackson Carlaw set out a third important issue of training and education, and argued that we should not forget parenting. We all have a responsibility to ensure that the information on which we drive forward policy is accurate and can be used coherently. The debate has been very interesting and helpful, and I thank the Public Petitions Committee for its work.

10. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will consider introducing a national confidential alert line for Police Scotland employees. (S4O-02816)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that. Notwithstanding what he has just reported, there have obviously been concerns from MSPs right across the chamber about a number of police officers who have wanted to come forward privately to raise issues about recent changes in policing and the effect on morale. What efforts are being made to ensure that that is happening and that there is effective monitoring of the process?

If the legal experts turned out to be correct and the Scottish Government was not permitted to charge students from the rest of the United Kingdom fees, what would the annual bill to Scottish taxpayers be, in light of the commitment in paragraph 236 of the white paper to free higher education?

The minister referred to the fact that good progress is being made in improving the situation with teaching and making sure that the General Teaching Council for Scotland has more qualified teachers of Mandarin and Cantonese. However, there is a serious problem in relation to local government employment of those teachers. What discussions is he having with local government to help with that?

I have a similar question, which is about children in residential care who have additional support needs. What is the Government doing to provide that care? In criticism that was levelled at it by Audit Scotland just a few months ago in respect of the national framework, it did not come out in a very good light.

Annabelle Ewing has just reminded us that it is less than a year since we celebrated the 25th anniversary of Fife Gingerbread. As she said, that speaks volumes about David Torrance in lodging tonight’s motion and about what Fife Gingerbread has achieved in the intervening time in successfully securing a grant from the Big Lottery young start initiative to develop further the teen parent project in Kirkcaldy. As everyone knows from the all too stark statistics, Scotland continues to face up to the fact that it has a higher rate of teenage pregnancy than many other western European countries. Although the Scotland-wide teenage pregnancy rate among the under 20s has shown some kind of decline—that is welcome—among the under 16s there is still a concerning increase. It is therefore a positive step forward to see the very specific work that is being undertaken to look at how carefully directed support can be provided to the most vulnerable mothers and what interventions can take place to support our youngest families. The teen parent project, as David Torrance set out, has shown its positive value from its pilot days in Levenmouth in 2009 right up to the launch of the much more sizeable project in Kirkcaldy in partnership with the YWCA. I note from the updated briefing document that Fife Gingerbread provided to MSPs that somewhere in the region of 340 parents have received support through one-to-one work, with targeted work focusing on increasing access to other services as well as on developing parental skills, confidence and self-esteem. Fife Gingerbread estimates that the project has had a very positive impact on well over 300 children. The project outcomes are to be warmly welcomed and it is good to see that as a result of the projects, 96 per cent of referrals resulted in the family accessing further support for children—as well as the focus on helping to improve levels of physical, intellectual, emotional and social development in children. Early intervention is something that we have discussed at great length in this place—indeed, the deliberations of this morning’s Education and Culture Committee are evidence of the extensive focus on these issues—and although members might come at some of the issues from slightly different angles, there is general agreement around the chamber about just how important that focus is. That is another reason why I would like to add my congratulations to Fife Gingerbread. Family nurses visit expectant mothers and it is obviously important that those visits are very regular. Family nurses have a great deal to contribute to not only the child’s development and care but many of the preventative measures that we expect, as well as helping with the development of parenting skills and with better diet, education and employment in later years. That programme aims to enable young, first-time mothers to develop their confidence in all those areas, in particular with regard to the parenting angle, and again, although we have slight differences of opinion across the chamber, I think that everybody accepts that there is general cross-party agreement on the importance of that. As regards the issue of young mothers, often children themselves, accessing services, I know that Fife Gingerbread has become rather specialist in the facility that it provides. An awful lot of the other groups around the county can not only gain the confidence to do something similar to that facility but see the real and lasting benefits that Fife Gingerbread has managed to achieve. The minister is, I am sure, very sympathetic to this cause and I hope that in closing she will be able to outline some of the things that the Scottish Government has taken on board from the recent report and how we can push that agenda forward. I add my very strong congratulations to the group and to David Torrance.

6. To ask the First Minister what the impact will be on the Scottish Government’s energy policy of Scottish Power’s decision not to go ahead with its proposed wind turbine development off Tiree. (S4F-01780)

In the spirit of Christmas, I note that I am not given to asking planted questions. Shale oil and gas are revolutionising the United States energy markets by substantially reducing costs, customer bills and carbon emissions. That is why, earlier this week, the United Kingdom Government produced a regulatory road map for shale oil and gas. Will the Scottish Government now produce a road map for Scotland?

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met the board of Scottish Opera and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02720)

In recent months, concern has been expressed in the media about whether the strategic direction of Scottish Opera is coherent and transparent, especially in the context of the public funding to which the cabinet secretary referred. In particular, concern has been expressed about the fact that all other national opera companies in Europe have a full-time chorus or a full-time orchestra—and in many cases, both. Does the cabinet secretary share those concerns, especially the concerns about Scottish Opera’s ability to attract the biggest names in international opera?

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister for that comment. Quality is extremely important. Parents want PE to be provided by qualified PE instructors. When I made a freedom of information request recently, the number of councils that did not hold the relevant information was extremely surprising.

I thank the minister for writing to the relevant spokesmen in the parties back in October to ask us to give some input. I congratulate the young people who have been involved in the draft strategy. As the minister said, it is very important that it is the young people in the front line who help to develop the strategy rather than simply politicians. I think that I am right in saying that it has been six years since Scotland’s sporting landscape was last thoroughly reviewed. Given what we have to look forward to next year in the context of the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games, it makes sense to take stock of what still needs to be addressed. Notwithstanding some very good progress, there are still some key concerns. I turn to the Conservative amendment. I think that I am right in saying that, in the 2007 Scottish National Party manifesto, the strong commitment was for two hours a week from specialist physical education teachers. That is one reason why it is extremely important.

Absolutely. I think that the two are complementary. The fact remains that specialist PE teachers were mentioned in the SNP manifesto. There must have been a specific, important reason for that, so we need to take it forward. I repeat what I said about the FOI request. There is concern that not enough local authorities are aware of those who hold the relevant qualifications and where they are teaching. We could perhaps do a little bit more work with the General Teaching Council for Scotland to ensure that we have a good record of just who holds the relevant qualifications. Tavish Scott raised an important point—although I see that he is no longer in the chamber—about the fact that there are obviously some serious cost issues for those who come from rural communities. Very good progress has been made in some such areas, but we need to do more to ensure that those who come from a very rural background have good access to facilities and can take part in as much sport as is possible. I said in my response to the minister back in October that I thought that we could do more to help build bridges between the private sector and the state sector. There are some excellent initiatives in state schools and in private schools, many of which have excellent sporting facilities. It is important that we try to use those facilities as much as we possibly can, to the benefit of all children. We should consider the point that Patricia Ferguson just made about scholarships, whether in the name of Nelson Mandela or other international and sporting figures, because a person’s parents’ income or where they come from should not determine whether their options for school sport are available or closed off. I welcome the suggestion that was made. There is a need to ensure that there is a good coherent strategy between central Government and local government. This morning, the Education and Culture Committee heard loud and clear from a group of outdoor education specialists that they are concerned that there is not a coherent strategy and that there is a bit of a disconnect between central Government and local government. I noticed that that was mentioned in the strategy, but perhaps we need to think a bit more about how the Scottish Government can create a better system in that regard. As somebody who over time has held various sports coaching qualifications, I am acutely aware of the input that is provided by volunteers. If it were not for those volunteers, far fewer children would have the benefit of sport. We have done a lot to increase the number of volunteers, but we have to be mindful of the fact that there are still concerns, particularly in some sports, that people cannot volunteer because of the bureaucracy that goes with it. Volunteering has perhaps been hindered by the fact that bureaucracy gets in the way. I very much look forward to the publication of the final youth sport strategy; 2014 is shaping up to be a fantastic year for sport and it presents Scotland with a terrific opportunity, but only if we can take the very strong message back from the young people who are in the gallery and their peers and address a lot of the issues that have been raised. I move amendment S4M-08546.1, to insert at end: “, and urges the Scottish Government to place additional focus on ensuring that all primary school children will receive two hours of PE per week delivered by a qualified PE instructor”.

In an answer to our late colleague David McLetchie on 9 February 2012, the cabinet secretary said that he wanted to introduce a management fee for students from other EU countries to defray at least some of the cost of providing them with free higher education. There is no mention of that policy on pages 449 to 451 of the white paper. Has it been abandoned?

I put on record apologies from my colleague Mary Scanlon, who was due to participate in the debate. As a result of the travel situation she has had to head back to the Highlands for a constituency event rather earlier than she was anticipating, so I pass on her apologies to the Presiding Officer and to members in the chamber. The extent of the challenge that faces the Parliament—and most especially the Education and Culture Committee—has never really been in doubt. In the past few years, during the most recent inquiry and the previous one, it has been patently clear that the Scottish care system is letting down far too many young people. In preparing the report we heard time and again from charities and third sector organisations and, most important, from young people in the care system, that most—though by no means all—of the concern centres on the decision-making process. Before I turn to the report and to the Government’s response, I acknowledge the very real frustration, which stretches well beyond Holyrood, at the length of time that it is taking to meaningfully address the issue of looked-after children. All parties in the chamber have shared a common commitment to making the Scottish care system as effective as possible, and yet for all the goodwill and endeavour we seem to find ourselves back at first principles time and again. We have been very good at the diagnostic process, but much less good at finding a cure. For instance, when the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration published its 2011 report there was real hope that progress would follow very soon after. However, two-and-a-half years on, we are still very much stuck with the same problems. Indeed, the minister indicated in her response to the committee’s report that the Scottish Government is aware of that situation and intends to review the care and permanence plan, with a revised strategy due early in the new year, which is good to hear. We all recognise the huge sensitivities that are involved in the issue, but we need to ensure that changes are well-balanced and properly implemented. Likewise, I think that we all feel a little guilty that the pace of reform has been too slow. During our deliberations we have all been considering why we have made so little progress, given the extent of the good will that I mentioned. There has been considerable cross-party support, and the issue has been placed further up the political agenda, for which I give the Scottish Government credit. Have we been missing some key points, or failing to listen to the right people? Perhaps the most uncomfortable question of all is whether we are relatively powerless when it comes to dealing with some situations. There might be a little bit of that—certainly that is what we were bluntly told by two of the witness panels—but the lack of progress is also due to the weaknesses inherent in some of the data that has been essential in uncovering the problems in the decision-making process. It has also resulted from poor transparency, although that was not intentional. That said, there is no weakness or lack of transparency when it comes to the blunt statistics that define the problem. Some of them are truly shocking. Although 56 per cent of school leavers overall gain five or more qualifications, only 4.7 per cent of children who are looked after away from home and 0.5 per cent of children who are looked after at home can expect the same degree of attainment. That is not a small disparity but a gaping chasm that reflects very poorly on us all. Moreover, while 87.5 per cent of school leavers are engaged in work, education or training, only half of those who are looked after at home are doing the same. We are really not doing them any justice whatsoever by not enabling them to acquire the relevant skills to participate in a modern workforce, and that has lifelong implications. During our most recent inquiry we heard troubling evidence from the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children that, in Glasgow, two thirds of children who have left care to return home end up back in the system within a year. Oscillating between pillar and post, those youngsters are at serious risk of being left behind completely. We have been good at the diagnosis, but what is the cure? There is no doubt that much of it will have to focus on the decision-making process, because it is clear that, as many of the witnesses told us, too many barriers remain in the way of good decision making. Those barriers mean that too many children are being left in unsuitable home environments. Decision making is inconsistent and variable across the country; the system does not use resources sufficiently well; and some groups find it far too difficult to have the courage of their convictions and remove a child—I can well understand why. In response, perhaps the key recommendation is on early permanence: the idea that, by intervening earlier, children are removed from an unstable home environment and given the foundation that they need to grow and prosper. A consensus is emerging that, together, early intervention and early permanence can deliver much better outcomes for children, families and communities. The whole package, if I can call it that, is important.

I absolutely share that concern—I do not think that we could doubt the evidence that was given to the committee on that point. However, we have had other careful evidence that, at the earliest stages, where the first signs of difficulties often arise, we have to do much more. We need a combination of early intervention and early permanence, as the minister has flagged up. The Scottish Conservatives are largely supportive of the measures that the Scottish Government is taking. Later, in my closing remarks, I will mention a few issues on which we will request more detail from the Scottish Government. Above all, we must all ask ourselves why we are debating again many issues that we debated not that long ago and that we have not managed to resolve.

Clare Adamson has pointed to the frustration that I feel, and I do not deny that we have come some way towards addressing the problem. However, one of the most stark pieces of evidence provided to us was when somebody told us in fairly blunt terms that we were right back where we had been several years ago. For those who were around the previous time, the frustration arises from the fact that the progress that we have made is rather piecemeal and is not going fast enough to address the real problems that Ken Macintosh has just been speaking about, and that we do not have the courage of our convictions in some circumstances. Does she acknowledge that that is part of the frustration?

The debate has been interesting, despite one or two scraps about contentious issues. The subject is interesting because it deals with a complex and difficult situation. As I said in my opening speech, it is incumbent on all of us to accept the complexities, and to accept that we have not got everything right in the past. I was just thinking that, if we look back to the Orkney inquiry in 1992, it dealt with some of the complex issues in terms of when it is right to remove children from their parents and take them into care. In an eloquent speech, Ken Macintosh raised a central dilemma that we all face—I am not talking about the named person, which involves a political argument that we will have fairly soon in Parliament. The dilemma is challenging because, as he said, although we know in some circumstances that the categorical answer is that we should remove the child from the parents, it is sometimes difficult to do. I absolutely agree with the convener’s comment that, when a sibling might be involved in the situation that Mr Macintosh described, it is not appropriate for that other child to be left. Given the grave difficulty that faces the parents or family concerned and those who look after such children, we cannot easily put ourselves in the places of the people who must take such decisions.

The convener is absolutely right. There is probably no question but that this is the most complex issue that we have come up against. It has been one of the reasons why people have held back from decisions to take the child in to care—that did not happen just because of the past mistakes that he mentioned—although the decision was intrinsically correct, as Mr Macintosh said. I do not think that the minister in any way underestimates the task in hand, but I understand what Mr McArthur was getting at; we need to deal with a few issues in the report in more detail. I will flag them up to the minister. We say clearly in paragraph 34 that terminology could “be used more clearly and consistently.” Perhaps we need to address that. People who gave evidence were slightly troubled by some of the wording that has been used, so it would be helpful for the terminology to be more consistent. It would help if the minister would reply to that point. In paragraph 39, the committee raised reasonable concerns about children falling through the gaps. The committee seeks clarity on the adequacy of current resources, which a couple of members have mentioned. The minister’s response was that “We take our role in helping service providers to set the policy and resource framework very seriously”, but we would expect that. If she will forgive me, we want her to give a little more detail on how that will be done and not just to make the point. At paragraph 51 the committee asked the Government “to explain how it will work with local authorities to help child social work carry out its role more effectively.” The Government response states that “It is a matter of public record that the Scottish Government’s approach to improving the quality of children’s social services centres on the needs of the child”. We know that, but it would be enormously helpful if the minister could expand on it.

Perhaps the minister can give us a bit more detail in her reply. If we are to convince some of the doubters—

I think that I was pretty constructive and positive in my earlier speech, and I think that I am being positive now. I am not saying that there is anything wrong with the Government’s responses; I am simply indicating that we need to go a bit further in order to give clarity and direction to those who—we must be honest—have been quite critical on some issues in the past. Stewart Maxwell spoke earlier about the issues that have stayed with him over the course of the committee’s deliberations. One thing that struck me and which has stayed with me throughout the process is the very strong criticism that we heard in evidence from one of our witnesses, who was clear that we had not moved on sufficiently quickly because there has not been enough detail from the Scottish Government—not just the current Scottish Government—over a period of time. I go back to that sense of frustration; I do not think that we are doing enough to allay fears because we are finding it difficult to go into sufficient detail. The committee’s deliberations have been enjoyable, but challenging. The report has certainly thrown up some interesting issues that we still have to resolve but—in a spirit of relative consensus—I think that we have dealt with that. I thank the convener for his guidance throughout the committee’s inquiry. We have a lot to think about. I welcome much in the Scottish Government’s responses, but there is still a great deal to do if we are finally to resolve what must be one of the most challenging social issues in this country.

I am grateful to the minister for that. The example that I was referring to, which came through in evidence on the bill, is the fact that we use the term “service providers” in very different categories throughout the bill. That causes a bit of confusion about who the service providers are and the duties that are put on them. If we can tighten that up, it would be helpful.

It is very clear indeed that these days, in a world in which global competition among universities is intensifying by the day, individual institutions are increasingly judged—not just by their students and staff, but by the outside world—on the quality of their research facilities and on how well advanced they are in promoting collaborative thinking and in being able to develop knowledge exchange. That is a slightly different issue from funding. We are rightly celebrating the centenary of the Medical Research Council, which has made such extraordinary provision throughout the UK, including in Scotland’s universities and teaching hospitals. Over its life, the Medical Research Council has supported no fewer than 29 Nobel prize winners and has ensured that many of our Scottish institutions have been at the cutting edge of scientific and technological developments. The Haldane principle, which has underpinned the funding arrangements since 1918, has ensured that while remaining a publicly funded body the council can operates at arm’s length from the Government, so that scientific decisions can be made on an independent basis and according to criteria that will reap the biggest returns from medical research that is directed at improving health outcomes. That principle has formed the basis for the council’s current strategic direction, which comprises four aspects: identifying the research that delivers the best return; ensuring that more people can access the benefits of research; helping the UK to compete globally; and providing the best support to individual scientists. What happens in medical research not only has major implications for the ability of our universities, hospitals and related centres to attract top-class students and staff. It also has direct effects on the local economy—and on the national economy—and the creation of jobs. Universities in all their guises contribute £6.3 billion to the economy and somewhere in the region of 142,000 jobs. A very high percentage of that relates to medicine and related sciences—probably somewhere in the region of £96 million. The fact that Scotland has been able to punch so well above her weight in receiving funding from the research councils tells its own story. Over the past few years, on average Scotland has received around 13 per cent of research funding, despite the fact that it has around 8.5 per cent of the UK’s population. For medical research funding, the figure has been closer to 17 per cent. That represents a significant sum of money, but it is also a sign of the distinguished reputation that Scotland enjoys, especially for medical research. For 100 years, Scotland has been richly rewarded for pioneering research that has been done in the name of outstanding medical scientists, including Professor Sir David Lane, and for being in the forefront of institutional developments, such as the £10 million new facility at Glasgow’s Southern general hospital, where we are leading the fight against diabetes, rheumatology and cardiovascular disease. That strength comes from the large and highly integrated UK research base, which has afforded sizeable economies of scale and the opportunity for collaboration across international boundaries. Following today’s publication of the Scottish Government’s white paper, the people of Scotland will need to study the facts on both sides of the debate on a host of issues, of which university research funding is just one. Will an independent Scotland or the UK better safeguard the future of Scotland’s university research investment and provide the greatest success for bodies such as the MRC? Last week, Professor Wolf, the director of medical research at the University of Dundee, threw doubt on an independent Scotland, but other academics say that perhaps things would be better in an independent Scotland. The public have to make a judgment on that—that is what the debate is all about. I urge the Government to think carefully about the implications for the actual source of funding. The issue is not just about collaboration and scientific investigation; it is also about funding. We have to listen carefully to what academics are saying about where the money will come from. It is important that we celebrate 100 years of the Medical Research Council, which has done a fantastic job. It has a distinguished 100-year history, and it will continue to be one of the strongest building blocks for the future.

Will the member take an intervention?

The minister is absolutely right—the debate is not about whether there would or would not be research funding but about how much there would be. In the context of independence, we must debate whether we get a bigger share by being part of the UK and whether an independent Scotland would have difficulty in securing such an amount. That is confusing in the white paper.

12. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the Scottish Qualifications Authority regarding the roll-out of the new national exams. (S4O-02603)

In a previous answer to Hugh Henry, the minister acknowledged concerns among teachers about the workload that has been involved in that. I notice that in the discussions in Glasgow, Edinburgh and West Lothian councils, that has had something of a knock-on effect in respect of concerns about the new higher exams and whether they should be delayed for a year. Can the minister comment on that?

I am grateful to the minister for giving way and for the additional spending on that front. How will the Scottish Government respond to the criticisms that Reform Scotland has levelled about the difficulties to do with when a child’s birthday falls?

The Scottish Government has made it clear in its introduction to the bill that its primary function is to ensure that there is a much more collaborative and integrated approach to the provision of children’s services, so that all young people can access the opportunities and support that they need. Given the better outcomes for young people that have been achieved by those service providers that have engaged in that greater collaboration and integrated approach, that is a reasoned approach for the bill, and it is an approach for which there is clear cross-party support. Too many young people are losing out—whether they are children with foster families or kinship families, young carers, children with long-term illnesses who are unable to go to school, or children who cannot access the full entitlement for nursery provision. On that last subject, I welcome the opening that the Minister for Children and Young People gave us to discuss the matter further. The issue about when the child’s birthday falls is different from the issue about the monetary provision. We will wish to pursue that matter at stage 2. The Parliament knows that we have serious concerns about certain parts of the bill. In some cases, those concerns are substantive. In others, they are administrative and resourcing issues. Sometimes, it is a matter of drafting. The legal profession rightly asks politicians to be mindful of what constitutes good law: whether proposals are clear, coherent, effective and accessible and therefore easily understood. Throughout the bill’s early progress, we have examined the proposals against those criteria and questioned whether new legislation or a change in culture and attitude is required, or perhaps a mixture of both. For the most part, the Scottish Government has decided on a legislative route, so I will deal first with some substantive concerns in that respect. First, there has been a move to legislate with primary regard to the child’s wellbeing rather than to their welfare, which is a term that underpins most of the existing legislation. I well understand why there is a certain attraction in that, as it is generally assumed that wellbeing has a deeper and much more holistic meaning that might bring some added qualitative value. However, it has exposed the tension between the theory and the practice. Although I think we can all agree that wellbeing is a good thing, it is exceedingly difficult to define, notwithstanding the SHANARRI—safe, healthy, achieving, nurtured, active, respected, responsible and included—indicators and their subdivisions, which have been operating in some local authorities. The bill is not entirely clear about the definition of wellbeing and it is too often conflated with welfare. The more the Scottish Government has tried to make legislative provision for improved children’s services, the more it has encountered difficulties with those definitions.

They do, but the point is that the terms “wellbeing” and “welfare” are sometimes conflated in the bill, which causes difficulties in how the rest of the bill hangs together. We have to consider that carefully. Secondly, there is the issue of inconclusive legal advice, foremost with regard to whether to incorporate the UNCRC into Scots law. There is a wide divergence of opinion on that, as the minister indicated in her speech. Opinions include the one that the minister quoted, which suggests that incorporation would be bad policy, bad practice and bad law.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 3 September 2013; c 2682.] However, Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People and some of the children’s charities say that incorporation is essential if we are to embed clear and robust means of accountability. The divergence in legal opinion is nothing new, but what has made life difficult for the committee is the relative lack of detailed evidence to support the contrary views, and the fact that the evidence that we took on this crucial issue is rather incomplete. The Parliament already knows that the Scottish Conservatives oppose the section of the bill that includes the universal provision of a named person for all young people up to age 18. We have done so for several reasons, and I will not go over them again, as we have already held a debate on the issue. We have been very persuaded by some of the evidence that was presented to the committee by the Scottish Parent Teacher Council, the Faculty of Advocates, the Law Society of Scotland, the Govan Law Centre, churches and experienced practitioners such as Maggie Mellon. They have all made the point that a universal provision for a named person clearly undermines the role of some parents, and the family and communities, and instead places professionals in the front line of responsibility for the child. When that is taken together with the proposed extent of data sharing and the extension of powers to the children’s commissioner—and, in some cases, to Scottish Government ministers—in a way that Kenneth Norrie described as “open ended”, it makes the bill a bit too statist in its approach for our liking. We will abstain from the vote this afternoon because we are not yet satisfied that the bill is dealing with those issues in a way that would suit. I have heard SNP ministers and back benchers claim that local authorities are facing incredibly difficult—and differing—challenges in their respective areas. That is absolutely true, and we must be careful to acknowledge that in the bill and ensure that we are not putting on large structures that take that away. We have been very careful and we have thought about the bill and the vast number of submissions that have come in. The rights of children do not stand in isolation; they should be seen in the context of the rights of parents and families and all the communities that they represent. We are looking to develop the area when the bill reaches stage 2. We have a lot of sympathy with many of the bill’s principles, but there are still some fundamental issues that we want to tease out at stage 2, so we will abstain in the vote at decision time.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his remarks just now. Our concern—as Gavin Brown mentioned in his speech—is that, if we are to develop those resources, we might detract from the issues that are facing some of our most vulnerable children. We have a lot of evidence before us from a variety of stakeholders who say that we will indeed have to spend a lot more on the named person provision.

The Scottish Conservatives are very pleased to put on record their strong support for Dundee in its bid to become the UK’s city of culture in 2017, and we compliment the work of the Dundee Partnership, which put together the “Tipping Point” document, which is an impressive appeal, not just because of the quality of the submission, but because it has successfully brought together so many people in the city and the community, as the cabinet secretary said. Local media teams and The Courier newspaper are to be warmly congratulated on the positive coverage that they have given the campaign, and on helping to generate public support, including by supporting the ambassadors who represent Dundee’s many faces and who share a passion for, and pride in, the city. There can be no doubting the extraordinary transformation that is taking place in the city of Dundee. I remember, from when I was a very young child, visits to my parents by one of my mother’s best friends, who was an international opera singer. She was Dundee born and bred, and I remember the occasion on which she told my mother, with great sadness, that she would—very reluctantly—be moving away from Dundee. That was the advice that her musical colleagues had given her because, in those days, Dundee did not do culture. How different she would find things today, in a Dundee that is vibrant with cultural development in theatre, art, dance and music, and in which there is extensive regeneration of industry and commerce. She would see the huge success stories of the universities of Dundee, Abertay and St Andrews, and the hinterland of the Tayside college sector, which have allowed the area to build such a strong international reputation and to play a leading role in the education of young people and in raising their aspirations. It was, of course, in the 1970s—as has been mentioned—that tough times hit the city very hard, especially with the decline of the jute industry. Dundee struggled to compete with the other Scottish cities and became only too well known for its social and economic problems, rather than for anything else. It was at that time that the RRS Discovery—which Jenny Marra mentioned—was very nearly sent to the breaker’s yard, but for the intervention of the Maritime Trust. Just like the city, the ship had enjoyed a glorious past, especially when it was the focal point for the British expeditions to Antarctica, including the first successful expedition of Robert Falcon Scott and Ernest Shackleton. It had been used by the Hudson Bay Company and in the 1914 to 1918 war effort, and it carried supplies to the White Russians in 1917. However, as the ship became increasingly outclassed by other merchant ships, her future—and that of the city—became very uncertain. Now, of course, there has been a complete transformation, and Discovery has won numerous awards for its museum and visitor centre, and is very much on the international map. The phrase, “One city, many discoveries” is very well chosen and will, I hope, act as a good-luck charm next week when the all-important decision is made. What have been the reasons for Dundee’s resurgence? On top of the significant developments that took place some 30 to 40 years ago, such as the building of Ninewells hospital and the Wellgate shopping centre, and the return of the RRS Discovery, there has been the inspiration that has allowed Dundee to lead the international field in biomedical research and in the gaming industry, and in constructing the extraordinary £45 million V&amp;A waterfront development that the cabinet secretary mentioned. There are many who say that Dundee’s resurgence is down to the sheer resilience of its people and its ability to rise to new challenges, which make a difference. Undoubtedly, its recent economic diversity, rather than its depending on a few industries, has been a large part of Dundee’s success. If we look to cities such as Liverpool, which was the 2009 European city of culture, we see that diversity is one of the necessary ingredients for development. With that development and economic regeneration comes a new-found confidence and the inspiration for bringing about social regeneration through the celebration of our culture. We should not underestimate the effect that that can have. The bid team has decided to combine the celebration of the river and the Dundee environment with a celebration of the rich diversity of its people, and it is focusing on how that unique combination can shed light on the pathway for future generations. I find that to be one of the most powerful aspects of the bid, and I am pleased to see that within that celebration there are commitments to young people, to raising attainment across the city, and to the people in underrepresented communities who so often lose out. As the bid team has said clearly, it is “Your City, Your Culture, Your Year”, whoever you may be. Success in such competitions depends so much on good preparation, as we found out when Perth was seeking city status. I am sure that the bids from Leicester, Swansea and Hull will make for a very tough opposition, but I think that we can be confident that the Dundee bid is well prepared and makes a passionate claim for Dundee’s recognition as the 2017 UK city of culture. I wish everyone the very best of luck.

I doubt that anybody will quibble with the central ethos of the play strategy that we are debating this afternoon, as it goes without saying that play is part of the general wellbeing of each child and is essential to the social, economic and environmental wellbeing of the nation at large—as it has been throughout time. On that basis, we are happy to support the Scottish Government’s motion. In doing so, however, we want to dig a little deeper into the main reasons behind the publication of what is becoming a national play strategy, and the issues that arise from them. First, there is a sizeable number of people—whether they speak as individuals or as groups—who consider that the existing situation does not provide adequately for children’s needs. Secondly, there is concern that the play strategies in local councils—or in most of them, at least—are not working well enough when it comes to providing for all those children. It is important that we consider those contexts, as well as the central mantra of the Scottish Government, which dictates that Scotland must be the best place in the world in which to grow up. I said that I thought there were two main reasons behind the calls for change: too many individuals and groups have anxieties about existing practice; and there are concerns over the ability of councils to make effective provision. As a result, there are demands for greater statutory provision. I can understand that, but, as ever, when there are demands for greater statutory provision, there is the threat of an accompanying cost and potential bureaucracy. Perhaps even more challenging, there is a need to be crystal clear when it comes to the definitions. I raise that point because there is an interesting and complex debate taking place just now with regard to the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill on whether the all-important issue is the child’s “wellbeing” as opposed to their “welfare”. That debate has thrown up philosophical tensions between theory and practice. I think that all of us would view “wellbeing” as having a deeper and more holistic meaning, and yet its definition—most especially in law—is much less clear than the definition of “welfare” in existing legislation. Following on from that, there is a concern that the more one tries to make statutory provision for an outcome where the meaning is open to several interpretations, the more difficult the territory becomes for those who are providing the service. In his intervention, Ken Macintosh made a very good point about the use of words and how we interpret legislation. The minister herself said that the strategy attaches a very wide definition to the term “play”. She said that play can be “active, passive, solitary, independent, assisted, social, exploratory, educational or just fun.” That view is absolutely right, and I have no problem with it. However, if we are going to encounter difficulties regarding that very broad definition, we must be a little cautious about taking things a bit too far down the road of statutory requirements. There is a balance to be sought to ensure that no-one’s rights are undermined while allowing the necessary—indeed, the traditional—notion of freedom of expression in play. The legal technicalities of the debate, which at times threaten to tax the minds of all the members of the Education and Culture Committee, are serious, and—almost ironically—they are not simple child’s play. The issue is partly about understanding why the Scottish Government has decided to adopt a national play strategy as opposed to concentrating on encouraging better guidelines to be implemented in local authorities. I know that the minister will say that they are complementary—of course they are—but I am interested to know why the balance has to be more on the strategy side rather than on feeding the local authorities with better opportunities. I do not think that there can be any argument at all that this comes back to the fact that too many people are uncomfortable with the status quo. I presume that that is why the Government decided on a national strategy That point has been made by the substantial number of groups that have lobbied heavily in this area and, obviously, it is important that we listen to their views. The concerns of parents are absolutely paramount. It is hard to deny that those concerns have been growing in recent years, especially when it comes to the pressures on play areas in many local communities and the pressures on local authorities, which may not always see play as a priority when it comes to the very tough budget decisions that they have to take. A sizeable number of communities are concerned about the lack of suitable play facilities and, in some cases, the lack of facilities that are fully safe. The Scottish Government has gone to great lengths to set out a list of the main objectives and has provided us with some guidance as to the likely timeframe for each, which is helpful. I note that £90,000 has been set aside; an awful lot of working groups have been suggested, and I will watch with interest how they all come together. However, some of the work that the Scottish Government says still needs to be done is already partly established. I provide just one example of that in relation to recommendation 7.5, which says that there should be an audit of “current levels of community access to school grounds” and community campuses and how well used they are. Such an audit is absolutely the right thing to do. I flag up the fact that at the meeting earlier this week of the cross-party group on sport, Patricia Horton of sportscotland gave us a pretty comprehensive presentation—a copy of which I have with me—on just how far sportscotland has got already in undertaking that audit. Sportscotland has provided very useful information about the inventory of the school estate as it is now—the inventory has been updated—and how the school estate is currently being used. The priority is to ensure that when local councils review the matter, they turn their attention to the qualitative impact of the use of those facilities. That important study is well under way, and the Government needs to pay some attention to it. On the same theme, given that the Scottish Government’s commitment is to a strategy that goes up to the age of 18, we need to be much more focused about how we can cater better for the sports and leisure interests of our older children, especially those whose school is in the older part of the school estate, where playing fields or leisure facilities may be slightly further removed and off site. At the meeting of the cross-party group on sport, we also had an interesting presentation from the Scottish Futures Trust about better planning—the minister referred to this in her speech—for community schools, playgroups, nurseries, open spaces for young children and so on. We were provided with a very interesting set of slides on community campuses where a much more attractive environment has been laid out and which now work better. The responses from parents and from people who work on those campuses have generally been very positive. However, in my opinion, there is a very substantial issue about the accessibility of some of the bigger sports complexes. That issue is especially pertinent when it comes to older children. It was reported to us that some facilities seek fees that are well beyond affordability for some groups, which is having a detrimental effect. I know dealing with that is not the Scottish Government’s responsibility, but we have to be mindful of the issue when it comes to planning.

I thank the minister. I do not disagree with that. There are some deep-seated issues, and I heard the minister say earlier that she believes that in some situations risk has perhaps been overstated. As somebody who is very much involved in the same debate in relation to outdoor education, I fundamentally agree with that, but we should not underestimate the fear of many parents, staff and people in the voluntary sector, who are deeply concerned about that risk and where, given their responsibilities, it places them. In my last minute, I turn to our amendment. I was struck by an article in The Courier earlier in the month that looked at the difficulties that are faced by disabled children when they engage in play. There were comments about the lack of ramped access to parks and about the fact that picnic benches do not always have space to allow children in wheelchairs to access them. Furthermore, in some cases, the see-saw or the swings were not properly available to those children. I take those points on board, because it is very important to ensure that children who have disabilities or additional support needs—and their parents—do not in any way feel excluded. I gently advise that we need to discuss just a little bit more some of the effects that the action plan might have on other aspects of legislation. I move amendment S4M-08099.1, to insert at end: “but recognises the concerns being expressed by KIDS and Capability Scotland that there should be additional focus on the needs of disabled children so that they ‘have the same play opportunities as their non-disabled friends’.”

Ken Macintosh has made an exceptionally valid point. Does he agree that we should be concerned when what I would call common sense is thrown out the window about some children’s play activities? I heard about an egg and spoon race being cancelled because it was seen to be too dangerous. Does he agree that some of the issues are very difficult?

I am grateful to the minister for acknowledging that. As I mentioned in my speech, a lot of good work has already been done. Can she confirm that the Scottish Government is in a position to make that coherent and bring it all together? A lot of cross-party groups have done significant work on this.

6. To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with the organisers of the 2014 Commonwealth Games regarding ticket allocations. (S4F-01623)

I thank the First Minister for that reply and I agree that it is good news about the size of the demand. During the London Olympics and Paralympics, 125,000 tickets were made available for young people to see different sports events completely free. Judging by today’s excitement as the Queen’s baton route in Scotland has been unveiled, a large number of Scottish youngsters would greatly appreciate the same opportunity for the Commonwealth Games. Is it the First Minister’s understanding that such an opportunity will be provided by the games’ organisers and that it will include allocations for Scotland’s most vulnerable children?

First, I thank the Presiding Officer for allowing me the parliamentary time to debate this important matter. I say at the outset that the Scottish Conservatives are very conscious indeed of the likely financial and construction implications of such a project. They are significant, but so too are the substantial costs of not upgrading one of the main rail arteries in the United Kingdom, never mind in Scotland. The direct rail route from Edinburgh to Perth via Dunfermline, Kinross and Glenfarg was closed in 1970 to make way for the M90 motorway. At the time, many saw that as a short-sighted decision because it meant that inter-city rail travellers would face journey times that were significantly longer than the road alternative, and longer than comparable inter-city routes elsewhere. Originally, most of the Edinburgh to Perth and Inverness trains were diverted via Stirling, but now most run via Ladybank. That situation has seen rail travel become increasingly uncompetitive with road, and left the rail journey from Edinburgh to Perth slower than it was 100 years ago. The AA’s route planner estimates a car journey time of just 59 minutes, compared to a 2013 rail average of 1 hour 22 minutes. It does not compare favourably with similar routes. For example, Swansea to Cardiff by rail, which is an identical distance, takes less than one hour and a similar journey on the continent, such as that between Ghent and Brussels, takes just 30 minutes. It has been estimated that the reinstatement of a direct link would reduce journey times from Edinburgh to Perth and onward journeys to Inverness and Aberdeen by up to 35 minutes. The re-opening of a direct line would not only allow the creation of a key hub on the inter-city network at Perth and its iconic station, it would also provide the opportunity for the creation of new stations to better serve the kingdom of Fife and Perthshire and Kinross-shire, where there is to be very considerable population growth. Indeed, it was partly for that reason that Transport Scotland in 2009 included the possible construction of a railway link between Inverkeithing and Halbeath as one of the 29 transport projects and programmes identified in its strategic transport projects review. The history surrounding the closure of the line is well documented. However, like the recent success of re-opened lines such as the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine rail link and the soon to be reopened Borders rail link, a direct link to Perth would provide many benefits for modern Scottish infrastructure. Since I was elected as an MSP for Mid Scotland and Fife in 2007, the reopening of a direct line has been raised with me many times. On the back of a number of local surveys—the most recent one has attracted hundreds of supporters—I approached Transform Scotland and the Scottish Government to ask for a new feasibility study to weigh up the costs and benefits. I am conscious that I lack the technical and engineering expertise that is required to examine in detail what might be built and where, but I am extremely grateful to the Transform Scotland consultants who have advised on certain key issues. Their deliberations were based upon the very detailed discussions that they had with Transport Scotland civil servants, and the pressing need, they believe, to develop more scope and ambition within the strategic transport review. It is not as though the Scottish Government has not considered the issue. When the Minister for Transport and Veterans was the Scottish National Party candidate in Ochil, he was a keen supporter of the reopening of Kinross station. Within the 2009 strategic transport projects review, the Scottish Government undertook to look at the possibility of building a new railway between Inverkeithing and Bridge of Earn. At the time, the Government concluded that the cost was too great, but clearly the demographic, social and economic profile of the region has continued to change, and Transform Scotland points out that the 2009 review did not properly analyse the benefits of an electrified railway, assess the merits of a new railway from Halbeath to Bridge of Earn, which would allow Dunfermline to benefit from the project, evaluate the full benefits of the park-and-ride station at Kinross, which now serves a much wider catchment, or undertake sufficient analysis of the benefits to Dundee, Aberdeen and the north-east, as well as the potential better connectivity to Inverness. I mentioned that there has been very considerable public support for this project for a number of years, including from many businesses who are firm in their belief in the potential economic boost from improved connectivity. Perthshire Chamber of Commerce has consistently put on the record its support for the proposal, arguing that it could be one of the single biggest benefits to the local economy. The areas of Scotland that will have the fastest-growing populations over the next three decades include Perthshire, Kinross-shire and Fife. Indeed, the population in Perthshire is predicted to increase by 27 per cent over the next 20 years. Meanwhile, the commuter influence on Edinburgh continues to grow at a fast rate, especially among those who work on the western edges around the Gyle and who are very likely indeed to make maximum use of train transport. Notwithstanding that there will be a new Forth crossing, there are already pressures on roads from increasing car and HGV traffic, and some major businesses in central Scotland have raised concerns that a relatively weak inter-city rail network hampers on-going freight journeys. That is not good and it goes against the commitment that the First Minister gave in The Herald in August 2008 when he said, rightly, that “railways must at least compete with roads.” He was adamant then that top-quality rail transport links were essential to a modern Scotland that will also deliver on its green credentials. As Scotland’s newest city, Perth is very much looking to the future to secure new investment and re-establish its historic place at the centre of Scottish trading routes. I understand that the minister might, indeed, be considering the possibility of a new feasibility study to establish the true costs and benefits of a new route. I hope that such a study can be as comprehensive as possible when it comes to overall strategic transport planning and that it would specifically examine the possible effects of the electrification of a new direct line from Inverkeithing to Perth, the benefits of shorter journey times and the possible economic and social benefits to the north-east and the Highlands. The Scottish Government has a good record of looking at new rail developments in the central belt, but I would argue strongly, particularly given the very strong public support that we have received and the technical expertise provided by Transform Scotland, that a new feasibility study is the best way forward to establish what I believe would be a very strong outcome that would prove that the benefits would considerably outweigh the costs, for not just Mid Scotland and Fife, but the rest of Scotland. I thank members for their support in signing the motion and I thank you again, Presiding Officer, for affording me the time to address the motion. I look forward to hearing what members have to say.

I thank Annabelle Ewing for her comments. She is quite right to point to the issue. What I am asking for is a feasibility study, which would weigh up the respective costs and benefits. I am not specifying exactly where the line should be.

I congratulate Jenny Marra on her new post. Following an education debate in 2002, the Parliament voted overwhelmingly to allow much greater flexibility in the senior school and college curriculum. We also voted—overwhelmingly—to back a Scottish Conservative amendment that said that we should allow pupils from the age of 14 to have new opportunities in our colleges and businesses, so that they could develop a vocational or technical skill or learn a trade. The Conservatives argued then and will argue again today that Scottish education has been stuck in too much of a structural straitjacket to allow it to respond to the needs of the widest diversity of pupils in fostering their ambition. The Conservatives have long argued that part of the equation is greater diversity of educational institution, which allows for greater choice and flexibility. For that reason, we have been greatly encouraged by the interim report that the Wood commission has produced, which contains a coherent vision for the future because it draws its evidence from what works best. That is not to say that lots of good things have not happened in recent years. The modern apprenticeship programme, the opportunities for all programme, the projects that various chambers of commerce have set up, Jim McColl’s initiative at Newlands junior college, and skills academies such as Queen Margaret University hospitality and tourism academy have all played a valuable part in extending opportunities. However, the vast majority of young people continue to be faced with an outdated comprehensive system of schooling that, in our view, denies them the diversity and choice that are required. Scotland has been rather stuck with the educational myth that, to provide everyone with equality of opportunity, educational institutions must all be run with a similar structure. That is a dangerous misconception.

I am very happy to square that. Inherent in some of the cabinet secretary’s other suggestions is the point that changing—[Interruption.] If the cabinet secretary will forgive me, I think that there are aspects of the suggestions that he is making that require a change of culture. Along with that change of culture come some other changes. That is very clear from—[Interruption.]

The cabinet secretary keeps pointing to various bits of the Wood commission’s report, but I could point to other parts of the report where important suggestions are made about that. One reason why Ruth Davidson focused on the issue at the Conservative Party conference is our determination to tackle the poverty of choice—which is something that Sir Ian Wood focuses on—that affects too many of our schoolchildren as they enter the middle and senior years of secondary school. We cannot get away from the statistics that are flagged up by Sir Ian Wood. One in six pupils leaves school without being properly literate; almost half of young people in Scotland leave school without a higher qualification; one in four Scottish businesses finds it difficult to hire people straight from education; and, as Jenny Marra said, about 20 per cent of 16 to 24-year-olds are unemployed.

I am not talking about streaming—I will come to that in a minute. Sir Ian Wood is saying clearly that there is a need to raise the bar. He is talking about a different kind of thinking and a different culture, which is something that we entirely agree with. For us, there has been a significant movement towards change, a lot of the credit for which goes to people whom the cabinet secretary has asked to produce reports, including Keir Bloomer, Graham Donaldson and David Cameron. They have been very thought provoking about the need for subtle changes in Scottish education, and I understand that COSLA is also looking to embrace some of that change. I remember distinctly SNP Councillor David Berry in East Lothian saying in 2009 that the Scottish Government ought to do “some pretty unconventional things” when it comes to changing the structure of school education. Those are ideas in which we are very interested. The minister mentioned the interest that we can arouse among other countries. The systems that attract the Scottish Conservatives are those in Denmark, Germany, Switzerland and New Zealand, not just because of the statistics but because of some of the differences that they have managed to make. In Germany, 8.1 per cent of economically active 15 to 24-year-olds are currently unemployed, which is the lowest level in the European Union; in Denmark the figure is 14 per cent; and in Switzerland it is 9.2 per cent. In Germany, 85 per cent of the population aged between 25 and 64 have at least an upper secondary qualification; in Switzerland the figure is 86 per cent; and in Denmark it is 77 per cent. Inherent in those systems is greater pupil career choice—not just subject or course choice, but choice about what kind of school is best for them as they develop their specialist talents, which need not depend on their academic credentials. We are very attracted to what Sir Ian Wood says about that change. There is an underlying desire within the commission to make us think outside the box and consider different kinds of institutions. I restate that the Scottish Conservatives are committed to the basic principles of the Wood commission, but we also want to have a look at an overhaul of some of the key institutions in this country, which will raise our game and provide all our young people with much better opportunities than they receive just now from a Scottish Government that is, frankly, obsessed with state control. I move amendment S4M-07939.2, to insert at end: “, but believes that these objectives can only be achieved in full if there is greater diversity in schools and a reversal of the recent damaging cuts to the college budget”.

Does the member agree that Sir Ian Wood has also recognised the need for businesses, particularly small and medium-sized businesses, to take more of a lead and responsibility on taking on young people?

One of the clear messages from Sir Ian Wood relates to the example and, indeed, successes of some of the systems abroad. He pointed to Germany, Denmark and various other countries that have a dual system of schooling that is very different from ours. Perhaps that is one reason why we are interested in what his recommendations say.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with local authorities about teacher employment issues. (S4O-02446)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer. Notwithstanding the SNCT offer that is on the table, which is obviously designed to improve the attractiveness of supply teaching, can the cabinet secretary tell us what measures he believes are being put in place by the local authorities to ensure that it is qualified supply teachers who are employed, rather than other employees in local authorities, who may be seen as lower cost?

2. To ask the Scottish Government how preparations for the 2014 Commonwealth games are progressing. (S4O-02433)

The level of demand for tickets is exceptionally good news. During the London Olympic and Paralympic games, 125,000 tickets were made available for young people to take advantage of the events. Will the same be true of the Commonwealth games?

6. To ask the First Minister what recent discussions the Scottish Government has had with providers of mobile phone services to improve coverage in rural areas. (S4F-01574)

The Scottish Government’s report has made it very clear that in something like 60 per cent of Perth and Kinross and 53 per cent of Stirlingshire there is no 3G coverage, which obviously has an impact on individuals and businesses, particularly if somebody has to contact the emergency services. What discussions is the Scottish Government having with local authorities to bring forward plans to use the £150 million of investment that is available from the United Kingdom Government to help this process?

I welcome the minister’s remarks and her announcement. I also thank Patricia Ferguson for her kind remarks about our late colleague, David McLetchie. The last time that I saw David before his death, we talked a great deal about 2014, and it was clear to me that the most important event of that year for him was the Ryder cup. I was only on the golf course once with him, and it was obvious not only that he was a very fine golfer but that he played with the same commitment, enthusiasm and good humour that he had always shown in politics. I am sure that David McLetchie would have been keen on this debate, and I know for a fact that he would have probably been there for the whole week of the Ryder cup next summer. I am one of few members of this Parliament who live just 7 or 8 miles from the 18th hole at Gleneagles. Along with those colleagues, I have witnessed the growing excitement at the fact that Strathearn and Perthshire will be holding such a world-class golf tournament—indeed, it is one of the world’s most elite sporting events and draws attention from all around the world. It is the first time in more than 40 years that this prestigious tournament will be in Scotland. Given the intense competition that there is among many other nations to host the event, it is likely that it will be some time before it happens again in Scotland, so, for most of us, it is quite simply a once-in-a-lifetime experience. I want to touch on three aspects of our holding the Ryder cup, all of which, obviously, have particular relevance to people in Perth and Kinross. The first concerns the logistics of the event. I was one of the people who attended a local community briefing on Thursday in Auchterarder—in the same community centre that the minister was in on Tuesday. That meeting was with the Ryder cup management team, and I have to say that I was very impressed by the work that is already under way to plan for the event—safety being paramount, as the minister rightly says. Obviously, Strathearn is used to hosting such high-profile events, whether on the grander scale, such as the G8 conference, or on the scale of the Johnnie Walker golf tournament. However, even with that experience behind it, there are significant challenges. The forward planning has been extremely impressive, and I welcome the steps that are being taken to communicate fully with local residents about what is happening. Nevertheless, there are some tricky issues with regard to changes to things such as the local road network. In some cases, the arrangements will be different from the arrangements that were in place for previous events, and there are therefore challenges with regard to access to businesses and vital services, as well as the usual challenges around crowd control. As the Ryder cup management team said, we should never underestimate the logistical challenges of such an event. We must be mindful of the fact that a large section of the population will not be particularly keen on having the Ryder cup. I happen to disagree with them, but there is a group in the population who do not see it as the most important thing that could happen in their area. It is, therefore, important to keep all local residents at the heart of the planning. The second issue is the economic benefit of hosting the tournament. The primary reason for golf tourists to come here is that Scotland is the home of golf, but we should not underestimate the number who come as a result of business and related sporting interests, many of whom will go much further afield than Strathearn. There is an excellent opportunity to increase the £220 million a year that comes from the sport. A few weeks ago, the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism launched the first national strategy for golf tourism, “Driving Forward Together”, which aims to capitalise on the staging of the Ryder cup and the open championship to confirm Scotland as the world’s leading golf destination. That strategy, like other growth strategies, has been developed to build on the strong foundations of activity by the industry’s governing bodies and the public sector. The hope is that, as a result of the strategy’s implementation, the £220 million that currently comes to the Scottish economy will rise to somewhere in the region of £300 million by 2020. Scotland is already competing well internationally according to the league tables, if I can call them that, of golf tourism hotspots for the future. There is reason to believe that the strategy can make a big difference to the tourism industry but, alongside that, concrete steps need to be taken. As we see from other Government strategies—I put no political colours on this—it is often difficult to live up to the targets that are set, particularly over a longer period of time. We know that 2012 was a challenging year for Scotland’s tourism, and not just because of the appalling summer weather that we had. However, 2013 has produced much more optimism, which can only be good. People are in a more optimistic mood about what we can deliver, and that will be relevant when it comes to attracting a wider group of people to the Ryder cup. I was intrigued by the statistics that show that groups such as the Germans and the French are starting to return to Scotland, as those tourist groups had previously been in a bit of a decline. That is healthy news for the Ryder cup. The opportunity to host the Ryder cup, which will be viewed by millions of people around the world, provides one of the best advertising opportunities that we could hope to have—far better than anything else—but, as the minister said, that needs to be articulated with the Commonwealth games strategy and strategies that are designed to assist business development for small and medium-sized businesses, which have had a much more difficult time of it. Some of the initiatives are first class, but we must ensure that that assistance is delivered in the longer term. The third issue, which is important although much less well defined, is the potential sporting legacy of the Ryder cup. That is hinted at by Patricia Ferguson in the Labour amendment, which we are happy to support alongside the Government’s motion. Two years ago, the First Minister said: “Encouraging the next generation of golfers is crucial. Club golf gives thousands of children in Scotland the chance to play golf, putting a club in the hands of every nine-year-old in the country and creating the possibility of golfing success at the highest levels.” The First Minister was absolutely right about that, but let us not be in any doubt about the fact that golf is an expensive sport and is not the easiest sport to attract youngsters to play. We should take a lesson from the “Scottish Golf Strategy”, which was put together by the Scottish Golf Union and the Scottish Ladies’ Golfing Association. Their analysis makes it clear that golf has suffered a lot from declining club membership. Lots of golf clubs around Scotland are not doing particularly well. When we talk about bringing youngsters into golf, we must be conscious of the fact that although they can be supported by club golf, they can face substantial fees when they go into adult golf. I entirely agree with Patricia Ferguson that this is about people not just tasting different sports, but trying to have a longer affiliation with a sport that can provide a longer-lasting benefit. As the minister mentioned, she attended the launch of the Auchterarder primary school Ryder cup initiative earlier in the week. I entirely agree with her that the school and the children there have been absolutely superb in what they have achieved, and Perth and Kinross Council has done much to help with that. The Scottish Conservatives warmly welcomed the £2 million of investment in Scotland’s junior golf programme, so it was good to see on Tuesday—and in the press since then—that children can become involved in golf in different ways beyond just playing the game. In trying to attract more youngsters to the sport and increase the percentage involved in school golf, we need to accept that not many schools actually have a golf section, so it will be up to the clubs to make this work. There is a message there about the numbers who can be involved and about the potential cost.

The Ryder cup is a very special tournament and a very special opportunity for the whole of Scotland. We are delighted to support the Government’s motion and the amendment in Patricia Ferguson’s name.

I thank members for their kind words about our colleague David McLetchie, which he would have been touched by. I also think that he would have been faintly amused by some of the comments, not least by members’ frank admissions—and, in some cases, boasts—about their golfing prowess. Members were absolutely right about David’s passion for golf. He also had a passion for cricket, which members will know is the game that is my primary passion. I once took David to a cricket dinner at which the famous Gary Sobers was the main speaker. The latter—rather unbelievably, I have to say—spent at least 20 minutes describing the six balls that he hit for six runs in the same over. On that occasion, he took some questions from members of the audience, one of whom was a certain David McLetchie. I was struck then by the extraordinarily encyclopaedic knowledge that David had of sport. I thought that Tavish Scott was going to share his encyclopaedic knowledge of all the golf holes round which he followed Tom Watson in 2009. At that dinner, David McLetchie showed a great knowledge not only of sport but of the spirit that Graeme Dey talked about in what I thought was an extremely well-prepared speech about the values that emanate from the game. I compliment him on that speech, because I think that he said something very special about the intrinsic value of the Ryder cup. It has been an extremely wide-ranging debate, which is a good thing. By that, I mean that, as well as providing facts, it has had entertainment value. That is good, because it tells us what it is about Scotland hosting the Ryder cup that captures the imagination—although I have to say, from reading the newspapers, that the issue that is most likely to capture the public’s imagination is who is picked for the European team. Speculation is intense about who those people will be. We have heard a lot about the potential for economic and tourism development. We all hope that the hosting of the tournament will bring about a significant increase in the number of golf tourists who visit Scotland, not just in 2014 but in the years to come. The figure of 250,000, which is the number of visitors who are expected to attend the week-long event, has caused quite a sharp intake of breath in many parts of Strathearn, Perthshire and Kinross-shire, and I know for a fact that the hotels, bed and breakfasts and holiday rentals there are already very close to capacity for that week. Some extremely imaginative projects are being discussed with the business community in and around the area, and the schools and community groups have joined in that discussion. That is all good news. As has been mentioned, over the years many Governments have announced strategies with great expectations of increasing visitor numbers, only to be a little disappointed by the growth years later. However, I commend the Scottish Government and the minister for all the work that is being done, because this is no easy challenge. We all have a part to play in ensuring that the Ryder cup is one of the best things that Scotland has ever hosted. Members have mentioned what a magnificent venue Gleneagles will be. It already has a first-class reputation for hosting major golfing events and many world conferences, and I am sure that the Ryder cup will be another feather in its cap as such a venue. The Ryder cup management team says that it is taking additional steps to ensure that the transport that is laid on from the park and rides takes routes that show visitors some of the best scenery in Scotland. There could hardly be a better invitation to come to Gleneagles. Annabelle Ewing said that the new website that Perth and Kinross Council has launched to provide in-depth information to residents, visitors and local businesses is an important part of the information process. I am glad that the council is looking to refine that website as it gets feedback from the community. The way in which the Ryder cup management team has interacted with that is a strongly optimistic point. Such information will be crucial in the coming months because, whether we like it or not, some residents and businesses in the surrounding area will still feel a little anxious about what the Ryder cup will mean for them on a daily basis. Every effort is being made to reassure them. The legacy that is hardest to define is the sporting legacy. I mentioned that it is difficult to ensure that that legacy stays for a longer period. We should not just bring in youngsters to experience golf for a few days; we must have something that has lasting permanence. It might be interesting for the minister to look at initiatives that colleges, universities and private schools in Scotland have taken; they have done a lot to offer new golf scholarships in their communities. We talk about philanthropists and the private sector, and it would be nice for such scholarships to be offered to state schools, because it is inevitable that there will be far more children in state schools who would want to take advantage of them. If we thought about building golf scholarships, we might have more success in providing a legacy that lasts for years to come. There is no getting away from the fact that it is difficult for some golf clubs just now to afford to have a high membership of young people, who are not in a position to pay high fees. It would therefore be good if we looked at other areas for the extra-curricular commitment. Positive work is being undertaken by the Scottish Government and—I hope—by all of us through the part that we have to play. It is great for golf fans, Scotland and Perthshire that Scotland is hosting the Ryder cup and it is great for the Parliament to be part of that exciting challenge, which I hope will bring us everything that we want and which the nation deserves.

The issue that was being raised by the Scottish Golf Union and others is that if we get youngsters in who pay virtually nothing, they are put off when they are suddenly asked to pay very heavy fees. It is about trying to bridge that gap, looking to the future.

I do not think that anyone who followed the Daniel Pelka case this summer could be anything other than repulsed by the depths of the depravity that confronted that little boy as he struggled against the daily litany of abuse, starvation and isolation. His case was perhaps one of the most brutal examples of how society can fail our most vulnerable children. Some will argue that the case was at the most extreme end of the scale, but it is by no means the only one in which our youngest and most vulnerable children have been exposed to appalling neglect. Quite properly, there should be a national debate about how to protect our most vulnerable children. For some time, the Scottish Conservatives have thought long and hard about what our reaction should be to that challenge. More recently, we have been reflecting on those issues in the context of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. As we made clear in an earlier debate, we agree with some of the stated intentions of the bill and some of its proposals. In particular, we agree that we should do more to increase a collaborative approach towards the care of children to ensure that children’s services are delivered more effectively and with much better qualitative outcomes. We whole-heartedly agree with plans to extend childcare, making it easier for parents to get back into work and easing the financial pressures on hard-pressed families. We also whole-heartedly agree with providing greater backing for young carers and kinship carers, many of whom do tremendous work with very little support. Very specifically, however, we have examined the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill against the criteria that define good law. Is this piece of legislation necessary, is it clear, coherent and effective, and is it accessible and therefore clearly understood? We contend that, in its current form, the bill fails on several counts. As well as that, though, the minister knows that we have fundamental concerns about the unmistakably statist philosophy that underpins the named person policy—a view that we believe is shared by some important stakeholders, including the Scottish Parent Teacher Council, which says in its latest newsletter: “Our worry is that giving every child a named person is at best a waste of time and money and at worst could lead to unwelcome interference in family life.” That view is shared by CARE and several key figures in the legal community. It is on that basis that we have chosen to debate the named person policy this afternoon, after which we hope that the Scottish Government will undertake an urgent review of its proposal. I shall deal first with our substantive objections to a named person for every child aged zero to 18. The rights of children do not stand in isolation. They should be seen in the context of the rights of parents and families and the responsibilities of those families, which must articulate with the needs of all the individuals within those families. In our view, those are basic principles; indeed they are the principles that are meant to underpin so much of the thinking that is behind policies for children and young people, and they are the principles that underpin European legislation in this sphere. In the interpretation of the bill, though, there is a danger that the balance could swing heavily behind the state rather than behind the parent. The Faculty of Advocates says that section 19(5) “dilutes the legal role of parents, whether or not there is any difficulty in the way that parents are fulfilling their statutory responsibilities.” We share that concern. Also in a legal context, Professor Norrie has made clear that the bill in its current state allows ministers to have more powers which, he says, are open-ended and, in his view, not well defined. While he acknowledged that some of those concerns might be a matter of semantics for the bill team, other aspects were not and they opened up the prospect of more state intervention. Again, that is something that the Conservative Party is not comfortable with. For example, the bill defines a child as a young person up to the age of 18, which is not only contrary to other pieces of Scottish and United Kingdom legislation but involves complications. If young people can marry at 16 or fight for their country from 16, that surely raises questions about the appropriateness of a named person in that context. Indeed, we heard yesterday at the Education and Culture Committee from Bill Alexander of Highland Council, who, incidentally, is a strong supporter of the principle of the named person, that it is totally impractical in some of the older age groups and is not wanted. In our view, implicit in the proposal for a named person for every child is the insistence that it is the state rather than parents and families that has the primary obligation to look after the child. That is entirely the wrong way round. If there are thousands of parents across Scotland doing a thoroughly good job—and there are—what right does the Scottish Government have to put in place an intervention measure that tells them that the state knows better than parents and families?

If the minister cares to read much of the evidence on this, she will see that, among the legal community in particular, there are deep-seated concerns, some of which I have read out this afternoon, about interpretation and that the balance is tipping towards the state rather than towards parents and families. However, there is another concern. All political parties in the chamber rightly worry about how we reach the most vulnerable children and provide additional resources where they are most needed. If, through the named person policy, we are insisting on state intervention for all children, even those in families who do not require any help, we are by definition going to end up spreading resources for our most vulnerable children far too thinly. On 3 September, Mr John Stevenson of Unison told the Education and Culture Committee that the bill “will bring into the net a whole lot of people who in the past had no connection with agencies at all.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 3 September 2013; c 2698.] He is right and his view is supported by the wealth of evidence that has been submitted to the Education and Culture Committee and the Finance Committee. Some tell us that there is nothing to worry about, that the policy is merely a formalisation of what is already happening and that it is just a means of expanding the successful getting it right for every child project in the Highlands. I do not accept that. Indeed, it could be argued that Highland Council’s success—and it is fair to say that its approach has been successful—has come about without legislation and because the authority’s culture of care has allowed the various departments to collaborate so well. If this is just a formalisation of existing practice, why are so many stakeholders, even those who approve of the named person principle, so anxious about its costs and the additional workload?

I do not accept that. The fact is that the approach taken to GIRFEC in the Highlands has been hugely successful and, as many witnesses who have given evidence have told us—and Mr Maxwell will know this because he was at the same evidence sessions—it is all about changing a culture rather than introducing top-heavy legislation. My colleague Gavin Brown will explain our concerns about the proposal’s costs, which is an issue that has been discussed in great depth by the Finance Committee and the Education and Culture Committee, but I must point out a number of other problems. We have frequently been asked about how the named person will be chosen, and specifically whether the parents or child or both would have any input into that; what happens when relations break down between the named person and the family; what will be the relationship between the named person and a lead professional; and whether there really will be a single point of contact. There are also concerns about data sharing, particularly what is meant by the stipulation that information should be shared if it “might be relevant” to a child’s wellbeing and if it “ought to be provided”. What do those phrases mean? The law officers have made it very clear that such wording is open-ended, and it is simply not acceptable. The Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill contains some excellent policy commitments, including those that seek to address pressing issues with regard to childcare, care leavers and kinship carers but, taken in its entirety, it is designed to take an unacceptable degree of responsibility away from many parents and families. We fundamentally disagree with that, as, indeed, do some powerful voices to which I have referred in my opening remarks. We therefore want the Scottish Government to review its approach to the bill, specifically to ensure that the limited resources are targeted at the most vulnerable and that responsibility is placed in the right hands. In particular, we want the Scottish Government to review the policy on named persons, which is the issue that has already aroused the greatest controversy and concern. Expecting all children to have a named person in the terms stated in the bill is an assault on the responsibility of families and parents for whose children there are no real problems. It is unnecessary and an undesirable intrusion of the state and, just as important, it threatens to take away resources from the most vulnerable. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern the Scottish Government’s proposals to introduce a named person for all children and young people up to age 18; agrees with those groups that believe that, for many families, the named person would undermine the role of parents, and agrees with the many stakeholders who have expressed concerns about the extensive costs and bureaucracy of the policy and the likely implications of diverting limited resources away from the most vulnerable children.

Is not it the case that those parents were parents of children who required additional support rather than parents whose families did not have problems?

Will the minister give way?

As was said earlier this afternoon, is it not helpful to have a parliamentary debate to flesh out some of the concerns that have already been raised? We have already had 127 representations. I do not see any problem with having a debate about that.

Will George Adam give way?

The debate has generally been helpful, although I am disappointed—and rather surprised—by the comments from some members that we should not be debating the named person approach. What is a Parliament for if it is not for debating the issues of the day? The many good contributions that we have heard from members on various sides of the chamber have proved that the debate was worth while, as it has helped to flesh out many of the points that have been raised in evidence—indeed, many members have referred to those points in their contributions. I am entirely comfortable—just as I was in this afternoon’s debate on corroboration—that debating the issue is the right thing to do, because it is our duty to scrutinise what is going on. I am grateful to the other parties for spelling out their position on this important topic, which has clearly sparked a great deal of controversy—not surprisingly, in our view. In debating issues that affect children and young people, many members have said that what is really required is a change in the culture of thinking rather than the introduction of a piece of heavy and costly legislation. As was mentioned earlier—[Interruption.]

I think that I will have to give way to something else at the minute.

No, I do not accept that. As I said in my earlier speech, GIRFEC has been a huge success in Highland, but that happened without the legislation. I do not often find myself agreeing with Ken Macintosh but on this occasion I do, because he eloquently echoed the concerns that people have about the bill. No SNP member has answered those questions this afternoon. The Faculty of Advocates is very clear that section 19(5) of the bill “dilutes the legal role of parents, whether or not there is any difficulty in the way that parents are fulfilling their statutory responsibilities.” That is a clear comment from the legal experts. We share that concern. On the substantive points, we believe that a fundamental issue at stake is the idea that the state should have primary importance over the parent. The rights of children do not stand in isolation but must be seen in the context of the rights of parents and families and in the context of the responsibilities that each family has to articulate the needs of all the individuals within that family. Those absolutely basic principles underpin so much of the law. Gavin Brown explained very clearly how the concerns about the costs came through loud and clear at the Finance Committee last week. Without exception, when the committee members questioned the bill team about the financial memorandum, the bill team provided virtually no evidence to substantiate the financial memorandum’s claims about the costs. John Mason, Michael McMahon, Gavin Brown and Malcolm Chisholm all asked about the financial memorandum, but it was quite clear that the Scottish Government has not thought through exactly what the costs will be. Regarding the health visitor strategy, for some time now the Scottish Conservatives have advocated a universal GP-led health visitor system for all zero to five-year-olds. We are very persuaded indeed by the arguments that have been made by both the Royal College of Nursing and the Royal College of Midwives that a national system of health visitors would do more—

According to the evidence that the Royal College of Nursing and the Royal College of Midwives have submitted, a national system of health visitors would do more than anything else to tackle some of Scotland’s worst health problems and to look out for our most vulnerable children at the earliest stage. The Ipsos MORI poll of 2010 made it very clear that such a policy would be enormously popular because of the high level of trust that parents put in those key professionals, who are able to provide parents with the essential advice and information that parents require. According to that survey, nine out of 10 parents said that they were very assured by the health visitor and the services that he or she provides. If further proof were needed of the value of such a policy, it was surely provided by the results of the 2012 Scottish health survey that were published yesterday, which show clearly that the key messages about health in Scotland are still not being acted on under this Government.

If I may, I will just finish. Trying to deal with these severe problems in later ages is simply not working. That is why we are clear that there needs to be a national universal health visitor policy attached to GP services. Indeed, Alex Neil himself has said that failure to intervene effectively to address the complex needs in the early years can result in a ninefold increase in direct public costs over the long term. Those are stark statistics, on which we need to act. The system that we have proposed would be far superior to the named person policy.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to ensure that all families with children up to two years old have regular access to a health visitor. (S4O-02383)

At yesterday’s Education and Culture Committee, and also today at the Finance Committee, the Royal College of Nursing put on record its belief that the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill is a wonderful opportunity to expand health visiting. It claims that in the region of 450 new health visitors are needed. Does the Government agree with that, and what costs will that incur?

I thank the cabinet secretary for her good wishes—and Patricia Ferguson for hers, just prior to the debate. Culture is very close to my heart—not least because, after having been on education and culture committees for the best part of seven years, I feel reasonably well-informed about a lot of the very important cultural aspects of policy and because I have many personal interests in culture. In the week when we commemorate the 500th anniversary of the battle of Flodden, it is perhaps worth considering some of the lessons of that bloody battle, not least the fact that it brought to an abrupt end a period when Scottish culture was flourishing. With the death of the king came also the death of several other aspects of the Scottish nation and, as Magnus Linklater noted in his excellent piece in The Times at the weekend, it shattered Scotland’s self-confidence and her political and economic standing—something that was not to be rebuilt for the best part of 300 years. No doubt there will be some who will choose to be overtly political about the battle of Flodden because of the current debate on our constitutional future—[Interruption.] Can members just wait for a minute? I want to focus on one aspect of James IV that is particularly relevant as we debate the overall strategy for our historic environment. James IV was immensely proud—and rightly so—of Scotland’s heritage, its diversity and its growing influence. I am sure that he would have been the first to welcome today’s announcement from the cabinet secretary about new money for historic buildings. He was outward looking, he wanted to develop strong links with Europe and he wanted Scotland to be noticed for all the right reasons. Irrespective of our party differences, that is also true of all the political parties in the Parliament. James IV was a polyglot who spoke several European languages and he had an inquiring mind. To him we owe much of the splendour of several Scottish monuments, including Edinburgh and Stirling castles and Falkland palace—just three of the sites that are part of the national inventory for which Historic Scotland has just reported higher than ever visitor numbers.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that intervention. Clearly, we could go on listing the other sites for which fantastic numbers have been announced recently. Those figures show just how much we are punching well above our weight when it comes to the historic environment, and I warmly welcome that. King James IV was keen on tapestries, so he would have been fascinated by the great tapestry of Scotland—currently on display in the Parliament’s visitor entrance—not just because of its artistic excellence, but because its panels remind us of who we are and where we are going. He would surely have approved of the historic environment strategy for Scotland, but he would have wanted a strategy that not only reflects the collaborative work of the cultural organisations mentioned in the motion but reached out to the international community, too. There is no doubt about the general welcome for the importance of the strategy, although we note the disquiet in some quarters about what is the appropriate definition of the historic environment. That is a point well made. If the strategy is to be wholly clear and to avoid the ambiguity that sometimes comes with having too general a definition, and if we are to agree an effective strategy, we need to know exactly what it is that we are talking about. Likewise, concerns have been expressed in local government quarters about how to ensure that there is a synergy between the overall Government policy and its interpretation at a local level, particularly when the local historic environments are so diverse. It is clear from a number of submissions that it will be a challenge for Scotland’s cultural sector to work under a tight regime of budget cuts. There needs to be a better relationship between local government—particularly some planning departments—and any new body. In turn, that raises questions about how we ensure that planning authorities have access to the appropriate expertise—a point that has been made already—so that any planning decisions are made with the fullest knowledge of the relevant facts. We know only too well from other aspects of Government policy, whether in this country or elsewhere, that fierce debates can arise when planners are at odds with conservationists. Therefore, I can well understand why there might be some scope for difficulty if such matters are not carefully thought through. Patricia Ferguson rightly raised some concerns about the merger, which I know my predecessor Annabel Goldie shared. Clearly, there is a need to discuss issues such as rebranding. The traditional tribalism or deep-seated rivalry between the two existing bodies has been mentioned and needs to be addressed. That difficult political and financial matter will require sensitive handling.

The cabinet secretary makes a fair point. There has been some support for the merger in various quarters, but Patricia Ferguson made some good points about the need to ensure that all the duties on the two existing bodies can be maintained in a way that is entirely in line with the cultural aspects of modern Scotland. We also need to be mindful of the impact that the merger will have on the third sector, especially if the new body is to enjoy charitable status. Third sector bodies often have an excellent record of engaging best with local communities, and we must be careful not to undermine that relationship, because the third sector is a key player in the area. I hope that the cabinet secretary will listen carefully to the points about how that sector’s resources and expertise can be best used. I whole-heartedly agree with the cabinet secretary’s comments in her recent Talbot Rice lecture, in which she said: “we do not need to choose between culture for its own sake, or for wider benefits.” She is right. We can and should do both. She also said that she wants Scotland to be understood not just by what she does but by how she does it. That must be central to any decision about the strategy and the impending merger. Whatever is decided must reflect how we can encourage a wider understanding of what is required from the roles of the two bodies and how, through those roles, we can attract a wider interest in and appreciation of all that is precious in the historic environment. That understanding and appreciation must be just as accessible to the international community as it is to those in Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. I urge the Government to think carefully about that. We can learn a lot from the approach that some countries have taken on the issue. James IV was seen as one of the most imaginative and adventurous Scottish kings. He was fiercely protective of all things Scottish but outward looking in wanting to adopt the best practice from Europe. As a result, it has been said that he was the most successful of the Stuart kings, something that he threw away by allowing his ambitions to run riot, unaccompanied by the resources and the expertise that were required to fulfil them. That is something of which cultural Scotland must take careful heed. I move amendment S4M-07622.2, to insert at end: “, and further recognises the importance of an international dimension to the strategy so as to attract the widest interest in Scotland as a destination for visitors from abroad”.

I put on record our welcome for the new funding that is to be made available to refugees. None of us who has seen the harrowing pictures on television could think anything other than that we bear some responsibility to take action. Besides the 13 new bills that were announced yesterday, a core plank of the Scottish Government’s programme for business this year is the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. It is a substantial bill, which has implications for several policy areas and other pieces of legislation. Scottish Conservatives agree with some of the bill’s stated intentions and with some of its actual proposals. In particular, we agree that we should do much more to increase a collaborative approach and ensure that children’s services are delivered more effectively, with better qualitative measures. We whole-heartedly agree with the plans to extend childcare, which will make it easier for parents to get back into work and will ease the financial pressures on hard-working families. We also whole-heartedly agree with the plans to provide greater backing for young carers and kinship carers, many of whom do tremendous work, at times with very little support. The Parliament has made clear many times, on a cross-party basis, that it recognises the focus that needs to be put on such key areas, and compelling evidence on the need for additional focus on the early years has been submitted to several committees of the Parliament. That said, there is much in the bill about which we have fundamental concerns. We are concerned about substantive as well as procedural and drafting matters. Most notable, we are against the unmistakeable statist and centralising philosophy that permeates so much of the bill. As Professor Kenneth Norrie said during yesterday’s meeting of the Education and Culture Committee, the bill in its current state gives the Scottish minister powers that are open ended and not well defined. As we know from submissions to the committee, there are concerns about the proposed extent of data sharing, the extension to the powers of Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People and ministers’ ability to meddle in family life. If we consider the bill in its entirety, we can see that, although it contains welcome provisions on childcare and kinship care, it is designed to take an unacceptable degree of responsibility away from many parents and professionals and hand over that responsibility to ministers and bureaucrats. That is something with which we fundamentally disagree, as do some very powerful voices, who expressed concern during the summer recess and who have submitted responses to the committee. We therefore want the Scottish Government to review its approach to the bill and specifically to ensure that limited resources are targeted at the most vulnerable children and that responsibility is placed in the right hands, in families and among professionals, and not in the hands of Government. In particular, we want the Scottish Government to review its policy on named persons, which has aroused the greatest controversy and concern. For some people it is a matter of detail; for others it is a matter of basic philosophy—the Scottish Conservatives are concerned about both.

A rich choice. I will give way to the cabinet secretary.

The cabinet secretary makes a good point in relation to some children. However, I have read most of the evidence in recent weeks, and I think that we must pay great heed to the concerns that organisations are expressing, in particular about the universality of the named person approach, which is many people’s fundamental concern. For example, at yesterday’s meeting of the Education and Culture Committee, Unison representative John Stevenson told us that because of the universal approach, far more children will by definition be involved in the named person issue. That will create pressure on local authorities’ costs; it also raises a fundamental question about whether it is the right thing to do for all families, even when there are no specific problems in a family.

I thank the minister for her intervention. We are meeting next week to discuss these issues. I do not deny that there are huge benefits to be gained from the GIRFEC principles. All parties in the Parliament support that. My point is that the universality of having a named person for every child between birth and 18 is a major change of focus. In my view, and in the view of the Conservative Party in the Parliament, that is something that we cannot accept because of its statism and its transgression of many of the rights and responsibilities that are held by families and parents. I ask the Government to take careful recognition of the strong feelings about the bill that have emanated, as the cabinet secretary knows, from the wealth of evidence that has been submitted. There are some really important points that we must think about not just because of their substantive nature but also partly because of the drafting of the bill and the implications that it will have on so many other aspects of legislation.

I congratulate Alex Fergusson on securing the debate, and I congratulate the staff and pupils of Dalbeattie high school, who are off on an exciting adventure. Good luck to you all. I had heard of the da Vinci decathlon from a former pupil of mine who is out in Australia on a gap year, but I did not know much of the detail until I was prompted by the debate and the initiative that the school has shown to find out more. Leonardo da Vinci said that the “Principles for the Development of a Complete Mind” are to “Study the science of art. Study the art of science. Develop your senses ... learn how to see. Realise that everything connects to everything else.” He was, of course, one of the world’s great polymaths: a painter, sculptor, architect, musician, engineer, inventor, writer, cartographer—the list goes on. He was an all-round genius because he understood the world’s interconnections in their most complex detail. He was a true renaissance man. He might even have been the first proponent of the curriculum for excellence. Who knows? Probably the most attractive aspect of Leonardo da Vinci’s life was his ever-present quest for knowledge and for a deeper understanding of the human behaviours and emotions that go with it. Learning would never end and would constantly be enriched. Not for him was contentment with teaching according to the principles of orthodoxy; closed minds were not inquiring minds. When the young people from Dalbeattie high school fly off to Italy in October they will face an unusual and rigorous challenge, which will test their skills to the limit. The da Vinci decathlon began in 2005 as an exciting offshoot of the successful da Vinci programme for gifted and talented students at Knox grammar school in Sydney. The challenge, which is designed to test and celebrate the higher-level academic gifts in a competitive environment, is of course run in the true spirit of the Olympic decathlon—the competition that is the ultimate test for athletes across many disciplines. It is a test of skill, resilience, mental and physical stamina and, of course, character. The success of the da Vinci decathlon in Australia has been hugely impressive and it has clearly caught the imagination of the young people in Australia, as well as their parents and, I understand, many businesses. For them, the competition has proved to be such a success because of the rounded approach to learning that it brings to challenge young people. As a member of the Education and Culture Committee of this Parliament, I am acutely aware of the constant refrain from employers in this country that we must do more to equip young people with the skills that cross several boundaries and disciplines, most especially in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, which have become known as the STEM subjects. We need many more Scottish pupils to look to future careers in engineering and the sciences. The da Vinci challenge promotes exactly the sort of subjects that we need to encourage more enthusiastically. One of the strong characteristics of the tradition of Scottish inventors is the appreciation that to understand engineering, one needs to understand how many other subjects interconnect with it. That is something that da Vinci would have appreciated very much. Some would argue that there are very good reasons for making engineering a compulsory subject; I can see the logic in that. In the past few years there has been a very pleasing increase in the number of schools that are making a determined effort to develop slightly different extracurricular activities. I know from my time as a teacher the benefits that such activities bring, especially if they are that little bit different and most especially if they involve a trip abroad. The Dalbeattie high school pupils and teachers are to be very warmly congratulated on their initiative and on their fundraising efforts, which Alex Fergusson has described. They have clearly put in a power of work on that and it is a great honour for them to be not just the only Scottish school but the only one from Europe taking part. I wish them every success and hope that this might be the start of a much wider uptake of the da Vinci challenge among Scottish schools.

There is clearly a need to ensure an effective balance between the accountability of public money and the autonomy that is enjoyed by colleges and universities to be responsible for the running of their institutions. In our view, one of the reasons that the bill has been fraught with so many difficulties has been the sharp division of opinion on that issue between the Scottish Government and the college and university sectors, which have seen the balance shift too much in favour of the Government and too much away from them. The college and university sectors have rightly questioned which structures of governance and academic accountability can best deliver the very high standards of further and higher education across Scotland and how they can maintain their competitive edge when measured against the rest of the world. That competitive edge is directly linked to the abilities of colleges and universities to be innovative, diverse and flexible, and therefore they expect Government to respond to policies that will enhance those characteristics. They do not expect the Government to be interventionist, which is very much against international trends in further and higher education. The sectors do not understand—neither do the Scottish Conservatives—why there needs to be extensive legislation to change governance structures, when they can find no evidence that existing governance structures undermine or in some way hold back education outcomes for our students. They are puzzled when the main architect of the reform of governance tells them that the existing structures are largely working very well indeed, yet they are told that there must be wholesale changes. That does not make sense. In particular, they worry deeply about the excessively prescriptive parts of the bill, which would see many governing bodies restrained in political straitjackets, without the ability to respond well to the educational needs of what is a very diverse and competitive set-up. The sectors’ fears about the extent of that intervention have led the Scottish Conservatives to oppose a great deal in this section of the bill, and we will do so again by opposing amendments 5, 100, 16 and 76.

I record Scottish Conservatives’ support for the principle of widening access, which we believe is valuable not just for intrinsic educational reasons but for social and economic ones. I think that our parliamentary record over a long period substantiates that claim. We do, however, differ markedly from the Scottish Government on where the policy focus should be, and we remain very concerned about some of the unintended consequences of forcing universities to adopt prescriptive targets that are enshrined in legislation, rather than to be bound by what are successful outcome agreements. Indeed, we do not believe that we have ever been provided with an answer as to what additional benefits will accrue to universities from having prescriptive legislation rather than outcome agreements. Our belief is that the policy focus should be on schools far more than on tertiary education. We are conscious of the unanimous support for the widening access principle, but we have had great difficulty with the sections of the bill that are overly prescriptive. We are also very conscious of the universities’ lobbying of the cabinet secretary to ensure that ministers will not be able to intervene in admissions policy. On that basis, we will support amendments 7, 8, 10, 11 and 15.

Two of the great advantages of our college system, particularly since 1992, are its diversity and flexibility, which give it the ability to respond to local needs. Since those features are clearly those that bring success to the college sector, it makes sense to ensure that the management of our colleges reflects that diversity and flexibility. That is why the Scottish Conservatives have been reluctant to see overly prescriptive changes to management structures and especially to board membership. For example, we would not wish to put in place any structures that, while allowing trade unions to be eligible for board membership, would exclude other staff who are not members of trade unions. Likewise, we believe that there has to be maximum consultation on board appointments and an appointments process that has full transparency and the appropriate lines of accountability. For example, we prefer to see other member appointments to assigned college boards to be approved by the regional strategic body. Board membership is crucial to the good workings of our colleges, but we strongly believe that it must reflect the diversity of the college sector, bringing to it a variety of experience and skills rather than being too prescriptive. On amendment 36, we are of the strong opinion that colleges work best when there is clear collaboration between the different institutions and when there is similar collaboration between the different institutions, the Scottish funding council and the Scottish Government. That collaboration can be effective only if there is mutual trust between the different partners—I use the word “partner” advisedly—and when the professional relationships are built on consultation. Too often in this bill, the Scottish Government has sought to impose its will on colleges in a way that undermines that mutual trust. Amendment 36 therefore requires the Scottish ministers to consult the existing board fully, prior to making any transfer or new appointment of board members—which will obviously be part of the transitional arrangements for new boards. In that way, there will be a process based on agreement rather than on the whim of the Government.

Obviously, college mismanagement occurs in relatively few situations, but when it occurs it is essential that definitions are clear and due process ensues. That is why at stage 2 the Scottish Conservatives lodged amendments to introduce a code of governance that is similar to the enhanced one that will operate in the university sector. We believe that exactly the same principles are relevant and that if the code operates well, it should reduce further the incidence of mismanagement. However, we are concerned about the lack of clarity over what constitutes mismanagement and we have lodged some amendments to try to tighten up the definition. There must be consistency with the code of governance and its principles when all alleged instances of mismanagement are evaluated—something that is not entirely clear in the bill as it stands. In that respect, we feel strongly that any attempt to remove board members should be set against that code of good governance. Amendment 37 would ensure that serious or repeated breaches of the code would provide grounds for removal, but would not confuse that with other instances of possible mismanagement. We are concerned about the line in section 7 that talks about board members “failing ... to discharge ... their duties”. That is too open-ended, and it is open to different interpretations. Amendment 38 seeks to remove that line. We also believe that any orders made by Scottish ministers to remove board members should be subject to consultation with the Scottish funding council, since that reflects a more open process of discussing whether a college has not been able to fulfil the conditions set by the council. Amendment 39 is specifically designed to ensure that such consultation takes place and that there is the safeguard of allowing for careful and independent scrutiny of any situations involving alleged serious or repeated breaches of the code. Currently, the bill will allow ministers to argue that repeated or serious breaches of any condition of grant are grounds for removal. That could include, for example, outcome agreement targets not being met. If a college breaches its targets in that way, financial penalties will result. Given that the code of governance is being introduced as a condition of grant, it will fall within that provision as well. Amendment 73 would ensure that the only condition of grant for which serious or repeated breaches could result in removal from the board would be those that relate to the code of governance. Amendment 74 would remove the line that refers to regional boards “failing to discharge” their “duties properly”, which we consider too vague and open to interpretation, if not abuse. Amendment 75 would secure the important safeguard of requiring ministers to consult the Scottish funding council before appointing another board member. I move amendment 37.

I am grateful for the support that has been given to some of the amendments, particularly amendment 39, which I consider to be very important. There is a concern about the definition of mismanagement, and the cabinet secretary will be conscious of the concerns that have been raised throughout the evidence-taking process about what “discharging duties” means. On that basis, I press amendment 37.

I add our support, in principle, for the amendments in this group. UHI is a unique institution, and we have been very conscious of the concerns that the individual colleges have raised. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary and the other members who have worked hard to try to resolve the issue. Given that UHI is such a unique institution, it is perhaps not surprising that that has been difficult, but I think that we are making progress. Therefore, we are happy to support the Government’s amendments.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the comment regarding the affirmative procedure, because I think that that kind of accountability is essential. As the cabinet secretary said in his remarks, there is concern within the sector that some aspects of the transfer issue are not entirely straightforward or transparent. I am willing to listen on the basis that the minister suggested, so I will not move amendments 57 and 58.

There has been a great deal of discussion of late, especially in the college sector, about the possible ramifications of the decision by the UK Office for National Statistics to reclassify institutions as public bodies. Under the status quo, colleges are private bodies and can therefore keep their private income, which is approximately £200 million, as reserves or as investment potential. The reclassification means that such private funding would be treated as public money, which could have major implications for how colleges work, including the independence test for their charitable status and how they work with other institutions such as businesses—John Henderson of Colleges Scotland raised that point earlier in the week. Reclassification would further extend the Government’s ability to control colleges, particularly in terms of their borrowing powers. That would be detrimental to the creative and innovative practices of colleges and their ability to be fully competitive. Those are the essential features of the college sector, which allow it to rank alongside rather than be the so-called inferior relative of universities. Likewise, there is further concern that reclassification might impact on some of the mergers that are in progress, since some of them will rely on the release of reserves that have been built up over several years and might also depend on colleges’ ability to generate additional commercial income. In turn, that has clear implications for the competitive advantage of Scotland’s colleges. South of the border, the Government has relaxed controls on governance and borrowing, but we in Scotland seem to be moving in the opposite direction. Amendment 71 would give colleges the power to borrow money to help them to exercise their functions by allowing the regional board to grant such security and indemnity as it sees fit. Amendment 72 would remove the provisions that forbid the actions that I have just outlined. Amendments 81 to 83 would give all other college boards the same powers by amending the 1992 act. I move amendment 71.

It is extraordinary that the cabinet secretary says that we are being irresponsible, when the situation in Scotland is one of reversing the autonomy of colleges. The colleges are very clear about the danger of the situation. In fact, a substantial amount of money comes from private funding. There are extraordinary dangers in completely reclassifying colleges as public bodies. That is why I will press my amendments.

I do not doubt for a minute that this is an important time in further and higher education—particularly given the significant challenges that our colleges and universities face—or that the Scottish Government has a duty to consider whether Government has a legislative role to play in assisting them with meeting those challenges. That said, the scope of the bill should have been clear. The Scottish Government’s intentions, the reasons behind the bill and—more important—the evidence for why it was necessary should have been clear. Parliamentarians should have been left in no doubt at all about what the bill was designed to do, and there ought to have been a very clear signal from colleges and universities that they were receptive to the proposed changes. There ought also to have been a very clear message that the Scottish Government, the colleges and universities and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council were largely in agreement that the bill was capable of delivering the policies that will best deliver excellence in our institutions, maintain and increase their international reputation, and respond to the economic and social needs of local economies. From day 1, none of that has been clear. Despite the Scottish Government’s protestations that new legislation is essential, many people in the sector did not share that view; indeed, colleges and universities struggled to see the powerful evidence that would prove that case. What was it that they were not doing properly in respect of their current structures, that could not be achieved by outcome agreements or, fundamentally, that was holding back education? I repeat what I said at stage 1. The Scottish Conservatives had some sympathy with the principles of the bill, especially the desire to widen access, but as time passed and after lengthy and tortuous committee examinations of a large amount of evidence, we increasingly came to the view that the bill was both unnecessary and open to all kinds of unintended consequences that could be detrimental to both sectors. Apart from the presentational problems that created the need for unnecessarily complex deliberations at stage 2, major policy issues are involved. I want to look at those issues in the context of the increasingly competitive international situation for our universities and the need for an increasingly diverse and competitive college sector that is best able to serve the needs of local economies. The good governance that exists is not in doubt; I do not believe that it ever was. If there had been compelling evidence that there were serious examples of bad governance and that they were harming education and holding back our institutions, a case might have been made for legislation. The policy memorandum did not explain any problems, and Professor von Prondzynski was at pains to say that he thought that the existing structures were “largely excellent”. That rather begged the question why the Scottish Government was so intent on such an unnecessary overhaul. I fully respect the views of NUS Scotland and the University and College Union, and I looked carefully at the claims that they made, many of which were in the context of social justice, but I could find little in their arguments that suggested that the operations of our colleges and universities were, in fact, damaging education. The focus on widening access should not be in our colleges and universities, although they are important; the fundamental focus should be in our schools, because if we were doing things a little bit better in them, we would not need to have any kind of positive discrimination in favour of any groups of students. On autonomy in the sector, we should look around the world—it does not really matter where. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the World Bank and the Shanghai university tables make it plain that success is greatest in the nations in which Governments are less rather than more involved. In Finland in 2010, the state was removed from universities because it was stifling autonomy and holding back research and development, innovation and knowledge exchange. To sum up—I will return to this issue at the end of the debate—I cannot see compelling evidence that makes the bill necessary. I ask the Government to come back yet again to explain why we should have to go through radical reform when that compelling evidence is not visible.

Throughout the bill process, from the very early days, I have listened carefully to the Scottish Government, to my colleagues in the Opposition parties and to the witnesses from the colleges and universities. I hope that I have been assiduous in considering each aspect of the bill. At the start of the stage 1 process, the Scottish Government asked us to judge the bill and examine its context on the basis of three specific criteria: whether it would provide better support for jobs and economic growth; whether it would improve the life chances of students; and whether it would fundamentally change the provision of skills so as to link learning to demand. The Scottish Conservatives took the Scottish Government at its word, and throughout the process we have listened carefully to a wide range of stakeholders—across the university and college sectors and in the wider economy—to find out how they view the bill with regard to those principles. I commend the convener of the Education and Culture Committee on being very good and fair in convening meetings during what has been a tortuous bill process. As he has said, there has been no particular objection to many of the general policy objectives, but there has been a great deal of concern about the detail. I share the concern of the Labour and Liberal parties about whether legislation is in fact required, particularly on various aspects of widening access and governance. It is very clear that we all want to see the same ambitions, but I have never been persuaded—and neither has the Conservative Party at large—that the evidence points to legislation being essential. We heard the cabinet secretary argue time and again that there has been far too much duplication of courses in our colleges and that the 1992 legislation, which the Conservatives brought in, has prevented the college sector from moving forward. However, that legislation allowed colleges to increase their flexibility and respond better to the needs of their local area. I find it difficult to see why the cabinet secretary thinks that the 1992 legislation has been so detrimental. Indeed, it is often thrown up by many of the colleges as something that has given them extra autonomy and flexibility. I repeat that the Scottish Conservatives are firmly in favour of widening access, but we have a grave difference of opinion with the Scottish Government about where that focus should be. We believe that the focus should be on schools. I noticed two weeks ago that Ferdinand von Prondzynski said that we should be starting in nursery schools when it comes to widening access, and I entirely agree with that. We would not be in this situation if we were able to ensure that everyone in schools had a much fairer choice in terms of success. Raising aspirations is crucial, particularly in schools in which there has not been a tradition of going to college or university, and that is where the policy focus should be. It is, in many respects, far too late by the time we come to tertiary education. The fact that the Opposition parties oppose various elements of the bill is one thing, but the fact that the further and higher education sectors have raised significant concerns about its drafting and the way in which it has progressed is quite another. The points that have been put to us by the colleges and universities have formed our opinion. This has been a difficult process. I hope that we cannot be accused of taking it lightly. I hope that we have been serious about looking at the aims of the bill but, as far as I can see, there is no compelling evidence for why the bill is necessary. On that basis, the Scottish Conservatives will not support it at decision time.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what rail infrastructure investments it plans for the Perth to Edinburgh route. (S4O-02262)

The minister will be aware that, as a candidate in the Ochil constituency in 2007, he was a keen supporter of calls to reopen Kinross station. He will also know that Transform Scotland has spoken of the considerable benefits that a new line could bring to the local economies of Perthshire, Kinross-shire and Fife and by reducing journey times between the north and the central belt. What proposals, if any, can residents expect to see on improving the rail network between Perth and Edinburgh? Will they include a commitment from the Scottish Government to look again at a feasibility study into reopening a Kinross link?

I thank the cabinet secretary for prior sight of the statement. I am pleased to hear that emphasis will be placed on the primary importance of educational improvement. The current situation seems open to considerable question because it requires only that the educational benefit should be neutral. I am also pleased to hear that greater clarity of purpose will be demanded. That will be in our minds when we talk about the relevant criteria by which the improvement will be measured. That is helpful and will be warmly welcomed by parents. I also welcome the proposal to set up an arm’s-length independent adjudicator, who will be responsible for decisions after the ministerial call-in. That will help to put public trust back in the system. What involvement of parents does the cabinet secretary envisage in the process of deciding which criteria should be used to determine educational improvement? How will he consult on the process of deciding who will be represented on the adjudicator panel?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the opinions expressed in the briefing paper, “The funding of higher education in Scotland, the UK and internationally”. (S4F-01414)

In light of the legal advice that Universities Scotland published this morning, will the First Minister confirm exactly which groups of students would and would not pay fees in an independent Scotland? Will he say whether the Scottish Government has received legal advice that confirms that the European Parliament would agree to any exemptions from current EU law on the matter?

Can the minister tell us how many Gaelic-medium teacher training places will be available for session 2013-14?

I apologise to the Presiding Officer and other members in the chamber for the fact that both I and Nanette Milne were late for the debate. Part of the explanation is that no Business Bulletin was available when we left for committee meetings this morning and, when we checked again at lunch time, none was available, so we were unaware that the debate had an earlier start time. I regret that an amendment to the debate was not selected. On Thursday last week, several members were privileged to listen to a group of pupils from Perth high school who had come to Parliament to press their case for a higher in geology—one of the subjects that is under threat of being discontinued by the Scottish Qualifications Authority in 2015. They argued strongly that geology is a subject that brings together so many different aspects of scientific inquiry, and one which could hardly be more important when it comes to the future of earth sciences and the Scottish economy. Indeed, I felt that their case was persuasive. Despite the fact that I am firmly wedded to the social sciences, I cannot stress enough the intrinsic educational value that the study of science brings to our students throughout our schools, colleges and universities. Science—as opposed to the arts and social sciences—provides a distinctive discipline of positive inquiry that is quite different from that in other subject areas. It is abundantly clear that Scotland is at the cutting edge of many research projects in science. However, it is also abundantly clear that we need to do much more to encourage a greater uptake of the STEM subjects—particularly by women, as members on the Labour benches have pointed out—and to ensure that there is a greater understanding of how those subjects can be applied in modern industry and commerce. Science encapsulates what is around us as human beings as well as what is around the planet. The growing breadth of its inquiry, thanks largely to the application of increasingly sophisticated technology, is in great demand and is both exciting and creative. With greater diversity required in the energy industries, the debates about climate change, rapid changes in communications and transport and the significant challenges within the health industry, there is no end to the need for well-trained scientists and engineers. Dr Robin Wallace, head of the institute for energy systems at the University of Edinburgh, has spoken about collaboration and about how it is so crucial. He says: “in addition to advances made in wave and tidal energy at Edinburgh, Heriot-Watt and Robert Gordon Universities, researchers at the University of St Andrews have made exciting new breakthroughs in energy storage”. He talks about the collaboration when it comes to “developing new types of lithium batteries”, which he is of the opinion will “have a major impact on the future ... of scientific application.” There is similar success at the University of Dundee. According to the latest Thomson scientific rankings, it has achieved the greatest impact in molecular biology and genetics and in biology and biochemistry of all UK universities. That is a significant achievement. Those are just two areas that will significantly enhance Scotland’s prospects for the future and we must do everything that we can to ensure that those institutions can recruit top-quality science students and staff. Our colleges and universities, as well as our industries, play a crucial part in developing the groundbreaking ideas that are so essential to Scotland’s economic growth. Likewise, we all know that the future success of an increasing number of companies in Scotland is underpinned by scientific knowledge and its practical application. Electronics has become a vibrant and dynamic industry, significantly contributing to meeting the changing needs of other industries such as automobiles and defence. Seventy per cent of Scotland’s exports come from the science, engineering and technology-related sectors and yet the oil and gas industries have expressed their concerns about skills shortages, and a recent OPITO survey of companies in Aberdeen identified finding talent and skills shortages as the number one challenge to their future competitiveness. That is an important warning. Scotland’s science centres and festivals play a crucial role in making science more accessible to all age groups and for that reason we are happy to support the Government’s motion. Nonetheless, we believe that we need to enhance that attraction and do more to ensure that there is a stronger and more diverse science qualifications network that will meet the academic needs of pupils and students right across Scotland. It is about not just boosting the profile of science within the curriculum but ensuring that we make it as easy as possible for students to gain qualifications and work experience in the related industries. To return to the question of geology, it is a subject that ought to lead to a wide variety of degree options and professional training for graduates for a range of industries, many of which are critical to Scotland’s long-term plans—particularly in the fields of oil and gas, mining and renewables. Job prospects and graduate employment for those students are high, with above-average salaries, yet very disappointingly SQA is looking to discontinue the geology higher in 2015. That decision is based—probably not surprisingly—on the very low numbers of SQA candidates in 2011 and 2012. The argument is that attention should be focused elsewhere, on the subjects where there is much greater demand. However, we should be very careful about how we make such assessments—a point that was put to us by Ruth Robinson of the University of St Andrews last Thursday. She has made plain her view that the low uptake is driven by the very low numbers of teachers supporting the subject. Remarkably, no new teachers have been trained since 1985. That statistic is deeply worrying, particularly given the growing scope for earth sciences within the curriculum for excellence and the number of pupils who would like to do the subject if only they could be given the chance. If we dig a bit deeper, we find that 13,000 from just over 100 schools have been involved in the geobus outreach programme that is run by St Andrews university. That is much more akin to the ratios that we would expect if we look at Wales, Northern Ireland and England, or at some European countries, such as Norway. One pupil made the interesting point that there is hardly a more interesting and exciting country for geology than Scotland, so he rightly posed the question of why our uptake is so poor. If there are latent reserves in our mineral ores, there is also latent talent in our pupils, and it would be a great pity if they could not be allowed to develop those talents just because there is insufficient support for staff who want to teach the subject. I hope that the SQA might be persuaded to review its decision. I conclude by noting that science is hugely important to us all. It is encouraging to see a growth in the number of conferences and festivals showcasing the best in Scottish scientific achievement, but that in itself will not be enough to deliver for pupils whose futures will be in the science industries. Those pupils and their teachers need to know that the curriculum for excellence will provide opportunities that are supported in the same way as other subjects are. Everything possible must be done to provide the relevant qualifications so that we have both the number and the quality of science graduates that Scotland needs for the years ahead.

Sandra White has made a good point, but this month’s advice paper from the Royal Society of Edinburgh makes the strong point that there is a happy balance to be struck, and it refers in particular—Mr Gray is not in the chamber just now, but he will like this—to mathematics being the language of science. The RSE makes an important point when it asks for primary school staff in Scotland to have a balance of qualifications across the disciplines of science, the arts and social sciences.

I thank Nigel Don for his insightful comments. Some people argue that engineering ought to be a compulsory subject in the curriculum. Does he agree?

I appreciate the concern that the minister has shown over the issue, and I thank the members who turned up at the event last Thursday. People do not deny that there is a demand-led scenario and that geology numbers have been rather low. The point that they make is that, with the development of earth sciences and the curriculum for excellence, it is a problem that insufficient teachers are trained in some of those areas, given the latent demand that exists. I ask the Government to address that.

I apologise to the Presiding Officer and other members in the chamber for the fact that both I and Nanette Milne were late for the debate. Part of the explanation is that no Business Bulletin was available when we left for committee meetings this morning and, when we checked again at lunch time, none was available, so we were unaware that the debate had an earlier start time. I regret that an amendment to the debate was not selected. On Thursday last week, several members were privileged to listen to a group of pupils from Perth high school who had come to Parliament to press their case for a higher in geology—one of the subjects that is under threat of being discontinued by the Scottish Qualifications Authority in 2015. They argued strongly that geology is a subject that brings together so many different aspects of scientific inquiry, and one which could hardly be more important when it comes to the future of earth sciences and the Scottish economy. Indeed, I felt that their case was persuasive. Despite the fact that I am firmly wedded to the social sciences, I cannot stress enough the intrinsic educational value that the study of science brings to our students throughout our schools, colleges and universities. Science—as opposed to the arts and social sciences—provides a distinctive discipline of positive inquiry that is quite different from that in other subject areas. It is abundantly clear that Scotland is at the cutting edge of many research projects in science. However, it is also abundantly clear that we need to do much more to encourage a greater uptake of the STEM subjects—particularly by women, as members on the Labour benches have pointed out—and to ensure that there is a greater understanding of how those subjects can be applied in modern industry and commerce. Science encapsulates what is around us as human beings as well as what is around the planet. The growing breadth of its inquiry, thanks largely to the application of increasingly sophisticated technology, is in great demand and is both exciting and creative. With greater diversity required in the energy industries, the debates about climate change, rapid changes in communications and transport and the significant challenges within the health industry, there is no end to the need for well-trained scientists and engineers. Dr Robin Wallace, head of the institute for energy systems at the University of Edinburgh, has spoken about collaboration and about how it is so crucial. He says: “in addition to advances made in wave and tidal energy at Edinburgh, Heriot-Watt and Robert Gordon Universities, researchers at the University of St Andrews have made exciting new breakthroughs in energy storage”. He talks about the collaboration when it comes to “developing new types of lithium batteries”, which he is of the opinion will “have a major impact on the future ... of scientific application.” There is similar success at the University of Dundee. According to the latest Thomson scientific rankings, it has achieved the greatest impact in molecular biology and genetics and in biology and biochemistry of all UK universities. That is a significant achievement. Those are just two areas that will significantly enhance Scotland’s prospects for the future and we must do everything that we can to ensure that those institutions can recruit top-quality science students and staff. Our colleges and universities, as well as our industries, play a crucial part in developing the groundbreaking ideas that are so essential to Scotland’s economic growth. Likewise, we all know that the future success of an increasing number of companies in Scotland is underpinned by scientific knowledge and its practical application. Electronics has become a vibrant and dynamic industry, significantly contributing to meeting the changing needs of other industries such as automobiles and defence. Seventy per cent of Scotland’s exports come from the science, engineering and technology-related sectors and yet the oil and gas industries have expressed their concerns about skills shortages, and a recent OPITO survey of companies in Aberdeen identified finding talent and skills shortages as the number 1 challenge to their future competitiveness. That is an important warning. Scotland’s science centres and festivals play a crucial role in making science more accessible to all age groups and for that reason we are happy to support the Government’s motion. Nonetheless, we believe that we need to enhance that attraction and do more to ensure that there is a stronger and more diverse science qualifications network that will meet the academic needs of pupils and students right across Scotland. It is about not just boosting the profile of science within the curriculum but ensuring that we make it as easy as possible for students to gain qualifications and work experience in the related industries. To return to the question of geology, it is a subject that ought to lead to a wide variety of degree options and professional training for graduates for a range of industries, many of which are critical to Scotland’s long-term plans—particularly in the fields of oil and gas, mining and renewables. Job prospects and graduate employment for those students are high, with above-average salaries, yet very disappointingly the SQA is looking to discontinue the geology higher in 2015. That decision is based—probably not surprisingly—on the very low numbers of the SQA candidates in 2011 and 2012. The argument is that attention should be focused elsewhere, on the subjects where there is much greater demand. However, we should be very careful about how we make such assessments—a point that was put to us by Ruth Robinson of the University of St Andrews last Thursday. She has made plain her view that the low uptake is driven by the very low numbers of teachers supporting the subject. Remarkably, no new teachers have been trained since 1985. That statistic is deeply worrying, particularly given the growing scope for earth sciences within the curriculum for excellence and the number of pupils who would like to do the subject if only they could be given the chance. If we dig a bit deeper, we find that 13,000 from just over 100 schools have been involved in the geobus outreach programme that is run by St Andrews university. That is much more akin to the ratios that we would expect if we look at Wales, Northern Ireland and England, or at some European countries, such as Norway. One pupil made the interesting point that there is hardly a more interesting and exciting country for geology than Scotland, so he rightly posed the question of why our uptake is so poor. If there are latent reserves in our mineral ores, there is also latent talent in our pupils, and it would be a great pity if they could not be allowed to develop those talents just because there is insufficient support for staff who want to teach the subject. I hope that the SQA might be persuaded to review its decision. I conclude by noting that science is hugely important to us all. It is encouraging to see a growth in the number of conferences and festivals showcasing the best in Scottish scientific achievement, but that in itself will not be enough to deliver for pupils whose futures will be in the science industries. Those pupils and their teachers need to know that the curriculum for excellence will provide opportunities that are supported in the same way as other subjects are. Everything possible must be done to provide the relevant qualifications so that we have both the number and the quality of science graduates that Scotland needs for the years ahead.

Sandra White has made a good point, but this month’s advice paper from the Royal Society of Edinburgh makes the strong point that there is a happy balance to be struck, and it refers in particular—Mr Gray is not in the chamber just now, but he will like this—to mathematics being the language of science. The RSE makes an important point when it asks for primary school staff in Scotland to have a balance of qualifications across the disciplines of science, the arts and social sciences.

I thank Nigel Don for his insightful comments. Some people argue that engineering ought to be a compulsory subject in the curriculum. Does he agree?

I appreciate the concern that the minister has shown over the issue, and I thank the members who turned up at the event last Thursday. People do not deny that there is a demand-led scenario and that geology numbers have been rather low. The point that they make is that, with the development of earth sciences and the curriculum for excellence, it is a problem that insufficient teachers are trained in some of those areas, given the latent demand that exists. I ask the Government to address that.

6. To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government is having with local authorities regarding access to Gaelic-medium schools. (S4F-01381)

Does the First Minister agree with the many members of the Gaelic community who feel strongly that the urgent priority should be to address the concerns to do with teacher training that relate to the employment and retention of teachers in Gaelic-medium education in areas where there is the highest demand, rather than to insist that local authorities spend a lot of their resources in areas where there is no demand?

I put it on record that we are happy to agree with the Scottish Government’s motion and the Labour amendment. I think that there is universal acceptance on all sides of the political divide that the economic problems, both domestic and international, of recent years have had a profound effect on the whole country, but perhaps the greatest impact has been felt by our young people. Although the youth unemployment rates in Scotland and in the UK as a whole have not reached the exceptionally high levels reached in some parts of Europe, they remain too high. Notwithstanding what I think we should see as encouraging signs in the most recent statistics, the unemployment level for young people aged 16 to 25 is twice as high as that for the rest of the working population. If we are to ensure that Scotland’s economy is stronger in the future, there is an onus on us all not only to help boost the jobs market, but to better equip our young people with the skills and training that they and their employers need. We need to ensure that those skills are more flexible, and to tackle the problem of large numbers of our young people not being in any form of employment or training because they became disengaged from education. Mr Macintosh gave us a sharp reminder of the fact that we have the highest proportion of disengaged groups of any of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries—the figure has increased significantly in the past decade. Figures from the Scottish Government’s own youth unemployment strategy show that failing to move our young people into stable employment can cost the economy up to £2 billion, so we welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to creating 25,000 apprenticeship places. We also welcome the discussions with the UK Government and the European initiative. I think that we must complement such work rather than work against it, and in that respect we need to bring together all Governments, whether in Scotland, Westminster or Brussels. If our young people are to gain employment, they must first be employable. That still presents significant challenges, not least because the skills that the workforce of tomorrow will need are hard to predict with any certainty. We need to accept that the job market is much more fluid these days and that applicants require a host of transferable skills if they are to be wholly successful. We know that employers too often express considerable concern about the significant numbers of our school leavers and, indeed, graduates who do not possess the right skills to adapt to the workplace. Therefore, last week it was encouraging to see that problem being confronted by Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish Qualifications Authority, which will soon offer a work-ready qualification. Although I am sure that some will argue, with some justification, that that should not be necessary, anything that can help to place more focus on the problem is to be warmly welcomed. We need only listen to the policy executive of the Confederation of British Industry or to the Scottish Chambers of Commerce to understand how prevalent the problem is.

I thank the minister for making that point because I am just about to come to it. Members in the chamber who attended the meeting today of the parliamentary cross-party group on colleges and universities will know that that exact point was made at the meeting. The cross-party group considered work that is being done at Robert Gordon University, Edinburgh Napier University and Queen Margaret University, and college representatives made the point that there is improvement on the whole, although there remains a very significant number of employers who do not feel that young people or graduates have the right skills for the workplace. We have to treat that issue very seriously. Also raised at today’s cross-party group meeting was the issue that the onus of finding a work placement very much falls on the individual, rather than provision being made by schools, colleges and universities. Some wonderful initiatives were discussed at the cross-party group. If there are models that breed success, with youngsters not only finding a suitable placement but being able to find a regular job after it, we must consider them seriously. Unquestionably, schools are the institutions that lay the foundations for work experience. Foremost is the need for good standards of literacy and numeracy, which are too often absent in too many youngsters. By no means does that apply to all—far from it—but, for too many, there is a problem. Scotland is not performing nearly well enough, and I make the case again that the curriculum for excellence—for which there is firm support—can only be part of the process. We need to ensure that curriculum for excellence is complemented by greater rigour in the basic skills, particularly in primary school. Those two things do not work against each other—they are complementary. There is a strong message for us all, which has increasingly been coming through from colleges and universities: in too many cases, the basic skills are lacking, and we need to do something about that. It is incumbent on us all to ensure that we put forward positive policy suggestions as to how we make things work. The Scottish Conservatives put that point firmly on record. Colleges and universities are playing their role, but they will be constrained if we cannot send them more articulate pupils. Those institutions clearly recognise the need to collaborate effectively. According to a CBI report, those with the strongest links are delivering the best opportunities. We have seen a lot about modern languages in the press recently. Modern languages are crucial to our youngsters’ success. The trading statistics make it very clear why our youngsters need modern languages. At the moment, we have a problem, which we rehearsed last week and which comes down to what is on offer in our core subjects and the support that we can give through colleges and universities. I repeat that we are happy to support the Government’s motion and the Labour amendment.

The Scottish Conservatives are very happy to support the Labour motion. I thank Hugh Henry for spelling out in a little bit more detail just what he envisages in his call for the creation of a childcare commission. He certainly made a very good point about older year groups. Notwithstanding that, time after time, there has been proof of consensus in the chamber around the fact that a child’s earliest years have the most profound effect on their life chances. The logic, therefore, is that policy must focus on the earliest years—which incidentally is a point increasingly being made in the policy calls from the college and university sectors—and that greater attention must be paid to improving outcomes at that stage. It makes sense that one important means of doing just that is to improve the provision of pre-school care for our youngest children. I use the word “improve” advisedly, because there is an important debate to be had about the qualitative aspects of care as well as its availability. It is not good enough just to increase the numbers of children receiving that care; we must ensure that certain standards are upheld, which is why I think that there are benefits to having a childcare commission that can draw on many professionals’ expertise. There has also been consensus in the Parliament that, in recent years, parents have often struggled to get access to sufficiently flexible and affordable childcare, with Scottish families paying some of the highest costs in the country. Indeed, the price of childcare has soared by an average of £600 since 2005. I think that we are all aware of significant disparities across the country, with some local authorities in Scotland charging twice as much as others for care. It is also quite clear that many parents feel that the current system of childcare provision is too inflexible and often fails to take into consideration parents’ busy work schedules. Of course, that point applies in particular to older children, but I stress that we must be very careful indeed to balance that with the child’s social and educational interests. We must ensure that an extended system is able to combine both interests without compromising either. For example, although allowing them to take up their entitlement during times outwith those presently on offer might be convenient for working parents, it might be less beneficial to the child’s educational and social development. That is a significant problem for families throughout Scotland. A report from Children in Scotland entitled “The Scottish Childcare Lottery” showed that a fifth of local authorities say that they do not have enough childcare available for working parents and that only one in 10 councils has enough provision for those who work outside normal hours. We need to balance that with listening to teachers’ concerns about how best to plan the curriculum for the youngest children if we are truly to ensure that childcare gives the positive benefit that we know that it can bring. It is not enough merely to have more of the same; we must have significant reform of how it is structured and delivered.

I accept that up to a point, but the qualitative focus has to entail a more structured focus on childcare, because that is one of the most significant concerns. I do not think that they are mutually exclusive. That is why we are intent on supporting Labour’s motion. The benefits of affordable and flexible childcare are measurable far beyond those for the children who receive it. Assuming that we can reform childcare in line with the best interests of the child, childcare is also essential in helping to regenerate the economy and getting more people back into work. Claire Telfer from Save the Children has said: “Lack of affordable, suitable childcare is a significant issue that determines parents’, particularly mothers’, ability to participate in the labour market”. For too long, parents have been in the unenviable position of having to choose between entering the workforce and looking after their children—and those from more disadvantaged backgrounds are much more acutely affected by that. We welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to increase the number of childcare hours to 600 a year by 2014, but we look rather enviously at what is happening south of the border, from where there are lessons to be learned, particularly about making the provision of childcare much more widespread and trying to change the focus of policy. We are particularly interested in childcare perhaps being available more on the basis of a hourly system rather than just in the traditional blocks. We are very happy to support Labour’s motion.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I do not think that any of us would argue that this debate is anything other than hugely complex. Whether we look at the Leveson report or the evidence that was taken by the Education and Culture Committee in this Parliament, or listen to the Westminster and Scottish Governments or the press industry itself, it is clear that it has been hard to find a majority opinion on several of the key issues, especially those that relate to where we should go from here. In some ways that is not surprising, since the central issue at stake is how we balance the principle of a free press—which is rightly seen as a fundamental requirement of a democratic country—with the rights of individuals and the protection of victims. That is never an easy balance, but it is exactly the challenge that we face, and we have an obligation to all interested parties to get it right. It is helpful to start where there is some general agreement. First, the public at large want something to happen to improve the responsibility of journalists on some—but by no means all—aspects of press reporting and to increase the transparency of decision making. The public clearly feel that in some circumstances there are significant problems: that the press is not sufficiently accountable; that, when breaches of the ethics code are uncovered, the apologies are often half-hearted and not given sufficient prominence in the paper; and that it is too easy for clandestine deals to be done. Some—including Lord McCluskey himself—feel that the press even believes that it is above the law, which is not a view that others share. Secondly, there is general agreement on the need for balance and a workable solution—as the cabinet secretary has outlined—that supports the integrity of the vast majority of journalists but punishes those who do not respect the privacy of individuals in a responsible manner or who flout the law. There is an understanding that whatever we decide on must respect the subtle but nonetheless important distinction between a breach of law and a breach of ethics, which is a distinction that has been debated for thousands of years. A virtuous person is someone who is naturally disposed to behave in the right way, for the right reasons, and who can do that by voluntary action rather than by force. I think that we would all much prefer that, but the key question in this debate—whether the major players believe that an improved voluntary code of ethics is sufficient—remains. So far, the debate is firmly trapped between those who say yes and those who say no, but it is further complicated by the differences between two legal systems and by the mixed messages from politicians. Finally, in setting out the main direction of the debate, the key issue of accountability arises. That is linked closely with the independence of the process, hence the desire in the press industry—and indeed in other quarters—for politicians to be removed from the process. That was a concern of the Scottish Conservatives with regard to the McCluskey report’s recommendation that the appointment of the chair of the Scottish recognition panel should be left to ministers. Likewise, when it comes to the royal charter, we can well understand why there is concern about the lack of consultation with the Westminster and Holyrood Parliaments, which has meant that the result is too hasty and is perceived to be too close to the interests of a small band of senior politicians rather than being open to the scrutiny of the parliamentary process. The last thing that we want is a royal charter, albeit adapted for Scotland, that is seen to be based on vested interests. Those are the key issues that the Scottish Conservatives believe must be answered, but the million dollar question, of course, is what do we do? As everyone knows, the press is already subject to many other laws—the Contempt of Court Act 1981, the Human Rights Act 1998, the Data Protection Act 1998, the Bribery Act 2010, and so on—and we all need to ask ourselves whether we need another law, some other form of regulation, or a beefed-up code of ethics. For example, we now know that the Surrey police knew that Milly Dowler’s phone had been hacked but they did not do the right thing. If action has to be taken, we need to be wholly sure that it will do something that is not already covered by the law. Several key witnesses who came before the Education and Culture Committee said that the existing laws had not been used effectively, and that that is part of the problem. Obviously, that has implications for discussion of the Scottish dimension. Several witnesses pointed to the fact that many of the problems that brought about the Leveson inquiry in the first place were very much London based. That does not deal satisfactorily with the Watson case in Scotland, in which wrongs were clearly committed; Patricia Ferguson spoke very movingly about that. It is good to hear the cabinet secretary make her case that we need to recognise what happened with the Watson case in any measures that we undertake in Scotland. We can understand the difficulties when we are talking about a previous case for which evidence is incomplete but, nevertheless, something must be done. We must be sure that we are not creating a huge and expensive bureaucratic burden. Not long ago the Education and Culture Committee heard at great length about the problems of the smaller regional press in Scotland, especially how some regional newspapers are facing huge financial constraints and, in some cases, finding it difficult to operate at all. As Patricia Ferguson said, those newspapers are an important part of journalism and local democracy and we need to ensure that we do not do anything to further jeopardise their future. Leveson had some good things to say about the local and regional press, and for the Scottish Conservatives it is significant that the recent publication from the press speaks with one voice on behalf of the whole industry. At the weekend, I noticed that that caught the attention of John Whittingdale, who is chair of the House of Commons Culture, Media and Sport Committee, and who said that the UK Government would be well advised to accept the offer of a tough new watchdog as recommended by the industry. I see today that more MPs south of the border are saying exactly the same thing. The timescale within which the Education and Culture Committee was forced to operate was regrettable, especially when it came to a lack of evidence from the regional and local press. We suggest that that is an important omission and, when we have further discussions, it should be taken further.

I entirely agree, but the press is speaking with one voice and we can build some kind of consensus around that. At the end of the day, the key test of what follows from all this debate is transparency and whether the problems that surrounded the phone-hacking scandal and other criminal offences could ever be repeated. I am not sure that we are much closer to resolving the problem, but we are closer to defining the debate’s parameters and that is welcome. However, the Scottish Conservatives are sure that we have not had nearly enough time to consider the issue and the worst thing that we could do is rush legislation through and make bad law as a result. We welcome what the cabinet secretary has said and what is in the motion about further consultations. We are happy to support the motion.

It is a real pleasure for me to participate in the debate, and not just because cricket is my hobby. I praise the efforts of my colleague Alex Johnstone and the work that he has done in recent months to boost the cricketing links between Scotland and Japan—and in honing his skills in the Japanese language. Next week—weather permitting, as Nigel Don says—it will be a huge honour for me to umpire one of the matches that the Japanese women will play on their Scottish tour. In my playing days, I was privileged to play in some internationals but, until now, I have never had the honour of umpiring an international fixture. I am greatly looking forward to it. That aside, it has been even more of an honour to be part of the Scottish effort that has been supporting the Japan Cricket Association in its quest to provide lots of new equipment and wide-ranging coaching support for the hundreds of children—many of them orphans—who lost everything in the 2011 tsunami. I think that we all remember the appalling scenes and the complete and utter devastation of so many areas around Kesennuma. The buildings of 1,500 schools were either completely swept away or so seriously damaged that children lost their educational opportunities. They also lost any opportunity that they had to take part in sport or any other pastimes. As Alex Johnstone said, that is where the combined efforts of Alex Miyaji and Shyam Bhatia came into play in providing the financial support to help to turn all that around. Cricket for Smiles is the most amazing charity and although I have not been to Japan to see it in action, I have seen the video footage and the photos of how much it has meant to so many children and the communities that are in the process of being rebuilt. That footage has inspired the girls whom I coach to become extremely enthusiastic in their fundraising efforts to try to help more children to take part, and they look forward to meeting the Japanese teams next Friday to hear more about the developments. On St Andrew’s day past, I was privileged to be a guest at a dinner in the long room in Lord’s, at which Henry Blofeld of “Test Match Special” was the guest speaker. He had just arrived back from India that morning, following his commentaries on the England versus India test series and he told us, in his usual entertaining style, about the visits that he had made, along with Alastair Cook, the captain of England, and his team, to an Indian charity in Mumbai that was doing similar work to that of Cricket for Smiles. He spoke movingly about the effect that relatively modest sums of money could have in turning around the lives of children who have so little, and I hope that this debate will inspire others to help the cricketing charities around the world that enable others to enjoy what we do in this country. Prior to that dinner, we were permitted a special tour of the Lord’s pavilion, its museum and library. While being shown some of the most precious memorabilia, we were also shown photographs of some of the most extraordinary places and circumstances in which cricket has been played around the world, which include the Arctic, an Everest base camp and a disused world war 2 airfield in Malta. Little did I know at the time that in that collection are the photographs of the match in 1863 that Alex Johnstone described in his opening speech. The idea of revolvers being part of the kit does much to challenge the descriptions of the 19th century pastoral village green that was so beloved of authors such as Neville Cardus, R C Robertson-Glasgow and Mary Russell Mitford. It conjures up all kinds of images of how the naval players managed to accommodate bat and weapon at the same time, and what might have happened when the naval captain roared out instructions to point. What I am sure was true then and is certainly true now is that cricket has a role to play in bringing communities together. For those of us who are long-serving and passionate observers of the game, there is something about its spirit—as described by the late much-loved Christopher Martin-Jenkins—that inspires the very best in human nature, and that has certainly been true of the philanthropists who have chosen Japan cricket as the focus of their charities. It is sometimes said that cricket is an elitist game that was born out of a quintessential Englishness, perfectly in tune with the sounds of leather on willow on long, hazy summer days on a village green, where the only rules were those of Corinthians and gentlemanly conduct. That may be so, in terms of the origins, but nothing could be further from the truth in the coastal areas of Kesennuma. However, when we see the smiles on the children's faces there, we can see exactly what cricket has brought to them. That is why I have great pleasure in supporting the debate.

6. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take to address the delay in implementing the third sector early intervention fund. (S4F-01301)

I am glad that the First Minister knows that I will try to take the credit for it. Notwithstanding today’s very welcome announcement, the Scottish Government will be aware that more than 400 children’s charities and groups, such as the Boys Brigade, the scouts and the guides, have submitted bids that total £73 million and that that large, oversubscribed demand has forced a delay in the allocation of funding. Does the First Minister acknowledge that the delay causes unacceptable uncertainty for those bodies’ financial and strategic planning and, indeed, may jeopardise the future of some of the smaller charities?

Does the member advocate that we should return to the economies of the 1970s?

One of Mrs Thatcher’s principles was always to spend within one’s means. The Scottish Government has said clearly that there is to be a widespread universalism when it comes to public services. How will that be paid for?

I congratulate Malcolm Chisholm on making what I think is a very eloquent speech. One reason behind the change from Keynesian to monetarist economics was to try to stimulate the supply side, which had suffered very badly in the 1970s. Does he acknowledge that Mrs Thatcher tried to address that concern?

The minister just quoted figures for some of the regionalisation process. When does the Scottish Government estimate that the whole process will be complete and therefore when the full costs will be known?

The member makes a very important point. Pensioners contribute strongly to society. However, does she accept that, as the Christie commission and the Beveridge report said, it is the size of the percentage increase in the dependent population that is the problem?

It is good that to have a debate on universal services. I understand that the debate has added impetus because of the referendum debate, but I think that it is an important debate in any context, because it ought to be about long-term thinking, with no hint of political opportunism. It is a debate about which services the state should and should not be responsible for and the extent of the burden that we expect our taxpayers to bear. The cabinet secretary mentioned the importance of the Christie commission in making him think about the longer term. That is absolutely true. Christie, along with the Beveridge report and the business and civic communities across Scotland, in all their utterances, warned persistently that the current universal benefit payments are not sustainable unless we increase the overall tax receipts in Scotland or significantly reduce other areas of public spending. Of course, all that comes at a time when there is debate about the size of Scotland’s public sector. It would be very nice to live in—and all of us would sign up to—a utopia where everything was free. I am sure that we would all love to be part of a Government whose beneficence stretched ahead indefinitely to provide us all with free bus passes, free prescriptions, free university education or whatever. However, under the current circumstances that is simply not responsible government and the debate needs to take on a moral and philosophical dimension that pays heed to the meaning of social justice, equality of opportunity and public responsibility.

I absolutely would. That is all part of the balance that is required. There is a moral perspective to the issue because although it is about the welfare state’s founding principles, those principles have to be set against what provides an incentive for individuals and families and the incentive to work. Such matters are controversial. Indeed, we know as much from the current controversy, which is by no means the first controversy on the issue. In that regard, the speeches made by Malcolm Chisholm and Willie Rennie are very important. The debate is all about choices and the value judgments that we have to make. Our responses to such matters will be different, but it is not right to say that those choices do not exist—they definitely do. The economic challenge is one of allocative efficiency; in other words, is the economy getting the best out of very scarce resources set against the usual arguments about Pareto optimality and the goods that we ought to have? These issues trouble politicians as much as they fascinate economists, but there is no doubt that they come more into play when the percentage share of the dependent population is rising. I totally accept Christine Grahame’s comments about the very positive contribution that older people can make, but that contribution must be set against the statistics that Gavin Brown highlighted in his speech, and a major decision has to be made on that basis. As far as Conservatives are concerned, a balance has to be struck. In our book, universal benefits can be argued for only if there is overriding and definitive proof that, by making them universal, all individuals, society and the economy in general are better off. For example, we believe the provision of health visitors to be a universal benefit. We made that clear in our budget recommendations, and our arguments in that respect were accepted by Parliament just a few months ago. I think that Parliament voted that way because of the overriding and definitive proof that spending at that level provides youngsters, irrespective of who they are, with a universal benefit.

Yes—for some. However, as I think Willie Rennie made clear, the debate about universal payments should not be a yes-or-no matter. I go back to my point that we need to take the best possible line on our economic resources. I believe that there are choices to be made. We differ from other parties in the chamber—for example, on higher education—because we believe that there are private as well as public benefits to be gained. In the debate about free school meals, most of which I believe took place in 2008, our position was that although somewhere in the region of 118,000 extra children were going to benefit from that policy, many of them would have benefited from it in any case and the money would have been better spent in other areas. As a result, we have to be careful about saying that universal payments are a case of either/or. There is a measured debate to be had on the matter. In this very important debate, it is, as Mr Brown suggested, incumbent on all of us to set out not only our policies but how we would cost them and, more important, where the money would come from. I support Mr Brown’s amendment.

I take your point about various aspects of the issue and that we have to weigh up other things in the balance. Could you be specific? College regionalisation is on-going in any case. What specifically in the bill will widen access?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

We can all agree that this is a very important time in further and higher education. There are a huge number of challenges involved in facing up to a fast-changing world and in ensuring that our colleges and universities are fit for the future as regards their competitive edge, their flexibility and their ability to adapt to the needs of an ever-increasing diversity of students. We should not underestimate the scale of that challenge. It was quite right that the Scottish Government was mindful of whether government had a legislative role to play in assisting with meeting that challenge. The Scottish Government, in conjunction with colleges, universities and the Scottish funding council, needed to decide which policies would best deliver excellence in our institutions, would maintain and enhance their international reputations and would respond to the economic and social needs of local economies. I hope that that decision is based on building on the current successes of our institutions. If a legislative route was seen to be desirable, it would be clear in its intentions, practical and acceptable to the institutions involved. It was against those criteria that the Scottish Conservatives set out to examine the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill. At the start of the process we were genuinely open-minded, largely on the basis that we had sympathy with some—albeit certainly not all—of the main policy intentions. As time has gone on, and following lengthy committee meetings examining a large amount of evidence—meetings that were ably and objectively chaired by Stewart Maxwell—we have increasingly come to the view that this is a bad bill. It is a bad bill not just because of its poor drafting; it is a bad bill because of the complete lack of clarity about the relationships between the new structures, which is particularly the case with regard to colleges. The bill has botched the balance between public accountability and autonomy, and it is a bad bill because there is so little evidence that it is needed and is able to deliver on the intentions behind it. Alastair Sim of Universities Scotland summed it up well when he said: “the bill has come adrift from the policy intentions.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 19 February 2013; c 1977.] I agree. Apart from those presentational problems, which formed a substantial part of the evidence, there are, for the Scottish Conservatives, some major policy issues with the bill, and I will consider those in the context of an increasingly competitive international situation for our universities. Good governance is not in doubt—indeed, I do not believe that it ever was. If there was compelling evidence and serious examples of bad governance harming education and holding back our institutions, there might be a case for new legislation. However, the policy memorandum did not identify any such problems, and Professor von Prondzynski was at pains to say that he thought that the existing structures were “excellent”. That begs the question why the Scottish Government is so intent on such an unnecessary overhaul.

I acknowledge that, but the whole point is that Professor von Prondzynski was saying that there is no need for a radical overhaul, particularly—

Forgive me, cabinet secretary, but an overhaul is not needed, particularly not on the governance of universities. The Government’s proposals are also intent on interfering in the management of universities and the sector has asked the Government to remove that key provision. Although I respect the views of those with a slightly different perspective, who have argued fairly on the point of social justice, I cannot find the hard evidence, regarding some of the situations to which they have referred, that the bill will deliver better education than what we have now. We are very nervous about legislating to insist on statutory requirements to have specific quotas on university courts or college boards. Apart from the complications involved, such as ensuring private sector representation on the boards of colleges that have significant links to businesses, that proposal removes the flexibility of governing bodies and their ability to reflect the diversity of our institutions, which is so important. I will turn to the more deep-rooted concerns, specifically about the Scottish Government’s desire to have more powers over our colleges and universities, for example in extending the circumstances in which ministers could remove board members or oversee the management as well as the governance of universities. Apart from our fundamental opposition to that measure, because it threatens to undermine the autonomy of our tertiary education sector, I can see no logical evidence to move in that direction. If the cabinet secretary cared to look around the world, he would see that those nations that are faring best in higher education in terms of academic success rates and retention rates, as measured by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the World Bank and the Shanghai ranking, are those whose Governments are less involved rather than more involved. Indeed, in Finland—a country whose ideas on education the cabinet secretary is always keen to promote—in 2010, state influence was specifically removed from universities because it was stifling autonomy. We will not accept that aspect of the bill, which goes too far when it comes to Government meddling in our institutions. We cannot accept that, which is why we will not support the bill at stage 1.

We all want progress on this issue and the cabinet secretary was quite correct when he said in his opening remarks that there are different ways of doing that. Does the member accept the point that was made by the university principals that the criteria for widening access need to be as broad as possible and that a lot more progress has been made that has not been represented in some of the statistics that we have to hand?

Mr Biagi should be under no illusions: we are not against widening access. Mr Biagi makes a good point on the advances made by the University of Edinburgh. However, it and many other universities have achieved that without legislation. Why is the legislative process so important? Why can that access not be delivered through other means?

This has been a very good debate. In her speech, Clare Adamson asked us to assess the stage 1 process against the criteria that the Government initially set out. If I remember correctly, she said that those criteria are whether the bill provides better support for jobs and economic growth, whether it improves students’ life chances and whether it fundamentally changes the provision of skills to link with demands in local communities. Those are important questions for the chamber. The Scottish Conservatives have taken the process seriously and have listened very carefully to the views of a range of stakeholders right across the college and university sectors on how they see the bill in relation to those specific objectives. As the committee convener and Liam McArthur have both rightly pointed out—and as the committee report makes clear—there is no particular objection to the overall policy direction, with the very considerable exception of the increase in ministerial powers, about which there is genuine concern. The greatest difficulty with the bill lies in the detail and, on that basis, people have come to doubt whether it is the most effective way of achieving the objectives that have been set out. Indeed, that feeling has been heightened by the Government, which almost every time it talks about colleges and universities says that they are already delivering the valuable skills training our young people and mature students need and are already beginning to take substantial steps to widen access and tackle youth unemployment. Given that the policy memorandum and financial memorandum do not provide sufficient evidence on why the bill, as opposed to other measures, will improve education in our colleges and universities, it is important that all of us, including the cabinet secretary, reflect on that point as we move towards stage 2. The Scottish Government has argued that the bill is necessary because of the technical and administrative underpinning that it will give to the reforms of colleges and universities. That may be correct up to a point, but I certainly do not think that we need a bill of such ungainly size, whose considerable lack of clarity has muddled matters. On the question of college structures, which is the main focus of the bill, the committee received a substantial degree of evidence that the regional boards are a new layer of governance and that there is still some doubt as to how the funding mechanism will work or what the lines of accountability will be for meeting the financial requirements of the assigned colleges.

I entirely agree with what the member said about the need for diversity, but we can have that diversity only if we are absolutely clear about the lines of accountability. On that basis, the bill falls seriously short. Even the Scottish funding council seems a little unclear as to how, within a regional plan, it will appropriately apportion funds to the assigned colleges. In that context, I ask the cabinet secretary to consider carefully the small doubt that exists about one aspect of charitable status, which relates to situations in which the trustees of a college—which, obviously, would be defined as a charity in this context—do not agree with the direction of travel being implemented by the Scottish Government and the Scottish funding council. The Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator has given a ruling that seems encouraging, but there is still a small area of doubt. Secondly, universities and colleges have raised concerns about the powers that are to be vested in the Scottish funding council to review the number of post-16 institutions and the learning and teaching that they provide. Those concerns are very much at the centre of the wider perspective about excessive Government involvement in the further education sector, just as there were concerns expressed about Government meddling in the management and governance of universities. I was pleased by the cabinet secretary’s response to Mary Scanlon’s question about UHI. In the case of UHI, which is obviously an exceedingly important institution given the local dimension of its delivery in many rural and remote communities, we need some clarification. In addition to those points, there is the problem of timescales. The Scottish Government is asking us to weigh up whether the legislation is needed to improve university governance, and yet the code for that new governance, which is being drawn up by the steering committee that was appointed by the university chairs, will not be available until—if I am not mistaken—9 April. Until that time, we are left without the substantial information on which we are being asked to decide whether we need the legislation. We need that information to know whether what is currently in place would be better than what might be provided under the bill. Let me finish on the issue of widening access, on which Marco Biagi made a very thoughtful contribution. In fact, I thought that Marco Biagi made the case for not legislating on widening access. He correctly pointed out that the University of Edinburgh and several other institutions have made widening access a key issue without the need for legislation. We should accept that some of the focus is required in schools rather than in colleges and universities.

Otherwise, I would have taken Marco Biagi’s intervention. In closing, let me say that the bill lacks an awful lot of necessary clarity and we are not persuaded that it will actually deliver better education, which is the most important thing.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the member give way?

When the Education and Culture Committee was taking evidence on the college waiting list situation, the cabinet secretary said that definitions were extremely important. Will he put into the public domain the exact definitions that are being used to measure waiting lists for college places?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on whether whistleblowing arrangements for NHS staff are adequate. (S4F-01265)

The First Minister will be aware that, in January, senior surgeons and clinicians at Perth royal infirmary felt the need to state publicly, through the columns of newspapers, their concerns about management decisions in NHS Tayside. He will know that, last week, a group of nurses felt the need to do the same. Can the First Minister give an assurance that those concerns are being fully investigated? What further steps will be taken by the Scottish Government to ensure that there is a culture of trust and openness within NHS management?

In this age when a great deal of robust debate is taking place about the financing of tertiary education, we should not forget the fact that there is almost universal acceptance—not just in the UK—that the greatest focus for additional resources should be in the earliest years, just as there is universal acceptance that, if we can get policy making right for the earliest years, we can not only improve the lives of a great many children but address many other educational and social issues that tend to develop in later childhood and teenage years. On that basis, we warmly welcome the moves that have been made by the Scottish Government, which I think date back to Adam Ingram’s time as Minister for Children and Early Years, to ensure a greater focus in this area, and particularly the adoption of a much more coherent and collaborative approach, as the minister spelled out. At this stage, although we have a couple of reservations about some aspects of the proposed children and young people bill, we warmly welcome its underlying principles because of the collaborative approach that is being adopted, which is so important. It is a given assumption that children will fare very much better when they grow up if they have a loving, caring and well-balanced environment, as Aileen Campbell has said, in which family life is very much the centrepiece and where they can flourish, both socially and academically, in the company of their family, teachers and school friends. We are all very much aware of the fact that there is no ready mix of those factors, and that success can never be prescribed merely by the actions of any Government. The family matters very much, but so, too, does the community in which that family lives and works. Of course, Government has a role to play. I appreciate that a delicate balance must be struck between allowing parents and families to decide on their own responsibilities and providing intervention by Government. That is a very difficult issue, with which the Education and Culture Committee is grappling in its inquiry into decision making on when children should be taken into care. That is perhaps the most difficult issue that we face, as it is all about the balance between the individual and the state and whether the balance that we are working towards is correct. I distinctly remember that, when my colleague Annabel Goldie first put the issue of a drugs strategy at the top of the political agenda, some said that it was far too complex a problem. However, what we saw was a real determination within Parliament and the wider community to tackle the main issues head on. I suggest that we need to do exactly the same for the parenting strategy. In that respect, I think that the Scottish Government has made a positive start and we support that work very much. In particular, we want to see a political environment that encourages parental responsibility and choice but balances the rights of children with those of families. In an article in The Herald, Maggie Mellon made the important point that the children and young people bill must address that as a centre point. We should take on board that issue when we debate the bill. That is the reason for our amendment today and why we are so keen on a universal health visitor system, particularly for those aged zero to two. We need to have a much closer look, as Barnardo’s has argued, at how we secure the most effective involvement of the voluntary sector. Given that many charities and voluntary sector bodies are firmly rooted in their local communities, about which they have expert knowledge, they are often the best placed to provide the help that struggling families need. We all know of first-class examples of such groups and charities in our constituencies, but we also know only too well that they frequently complain that they are not always part of a joined-up policy-making approach. Therefore, it is good to hear that the Scottish Government will have that joined-up approach at the centre of the bill.

I entirely endorse that. However, many of the voluntary sector groups are arguing for a joined-up coherent approach. Many good things are happening across the country, but they do not always happen on a joined-up basis, which is what the third sector is pushing for. All our efforts will need to be put into that as we go on to the bill. Neil Bibby made a good point about the role of teachers. Obviously, there is a firm case to be made that all teachers and support staff should be given the training to enable them to recognise special needs at the earliest possible age. That is an important point.

The cabinet secretary is absolutely right that we need those sorts of pioneering works, but there is still more to be done. We still hear comments from teachers that they feel that we are not quite there yet. The more that we can do on that, the more that we will be on the best front. To sum up, this is an exceptionally important issue. We are very content to support the Government’s motion and the Labour and Liberal Democrat amendments. I move amendment S4M-05934.2, to insert at end: “, and agrees that one of the best ways to ensure that there is the earliest identification of problems is the introduction of a universal health visitor system, particularly for children aged from 0 to 2.”

Notwithstanding his comments, does Mr Coffey not accept that one aspect of the need for welfare reform that has been accepted across this Parliament is that the current system is far too weighted towards those who are out of work and that there is an incentive to be out of rather than in work, which is actually more damaging to children?

The policy memorandum to the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill states that education provision will be “more responsive to the needs of learners and employers.” Colleges and employers have made the point that there is increasing scope for part-time courses, particularly through local delivery. How does that square with the figures that were announced last week?

Murdo Fraser said in his introduction that this is a wide subject, and so it has turned out to be. The debate has been all the better for that. It is an interesting topic with many different dimensions to it. I congratulate Murdo Fraser on bringing it to the chamber. It is an important debate, especially in the year of natural Scotland. I declare an interest, in that I am a member of the John Muir Trust. As a national body, it is to be widely commended for all the work that it has been doing over many months to ensure that we are debating the facts rather than the myths. I am often told by my climbing friends from south of the border that Scotland is the most privileged nation thanks to the extraordinary beauty of her landscapes, particularly those that are in the most remote areas of the country. Mike MacKenzie made an important point about what wildness actually means. For those people, the landscapes are a powerful magnet that attracts many people from all over the world, in all seasons, in all weathers and in all kinds of outdoor adventures. The argument for the protection of that wild land—or, at least, some of it—is compelling, just as it is in places such as Northumberland’s national park, north-east England’s heritage coast or the north Pennines. However, some caveats have to be put in place, which I will speak about in a minute. As Tories, we are obviously not given to supporting additional legislation too easily, but we remain conscious of the tensions between the wilderness and economic development, specifically the creation of employment, which have been brought into the starkest focus by the march of wind farm development across our precious landscapes. Two summers ago, when, along with some others, Murdo Fraser and I were climbing in the Fisherfield area—accompanied by millions of midges—we had to accept that, even in one of our most treasured wilderness areas, large-scale wind farm developments could be seen on the skyline. That brought home to us just how significant that development is and why it is difficult for some people to accept it. Obviously, that is an issue that has been widely debated in many forums in this Parliament already. Apart from the overwhelming need to protect the ever-more fragile environment, there are growing social and health reasons for taking action, as is evidenced by some of the studies from other countries that have been set out in the briefings that we have had. On that point, I should say how important the role of groups such as the John Muir Trust has been in educating our young people about the responsibilities that they have when it comes to the protection of wild places. I remember vividly, when conducting my first school project with the John Muir Trust, the slightly indifferent reactions of pupils when they heard that we would be helping to do a major beach clear at Achmore on the south side of Loch Carron. I think that, perhaps not surprisingly, the pupils thought that they were there for a litter pick-up because their teachers fancied a bit of time off. Of course, nothing could have been further from the truth and, on that day, the John Muir Trust made a huge impact on the lives of 14 teenagers, none of whom had been in that kind of environment before and who knew nothing about the responsibilities that come with it. In 2002, only 35 schools were involved in the John Muir Trust award. Now, 259 are involved. That means that the number of pupils who are in receipt of the award has risen tenfold in that period. The trust deserves congratulations for that. Of course, that is very much in line with the basic principles of the curriculum for excellence. We have had a briefing from the Ramblers Association, too. It makes a good point that there has to be a much more coherent approach that includes other measures relating to the planning process and the design of the financial incentives. It is absolutely right to point out that there is a balance to be struck when it comes to the economy and the protection of wild land. I particularly note the association’s campaigning on the issue of what is happening just now in relation to the Cairngorm national park. We must be careful to ensure that all voices are heard. My colleague Jamie McGrigor would have made that point had he not been unwell today. Protection should not be considered on a blanket basis, lest we do not pay due attention to the needs of the traditional land uses, such as farming, angling, crofting, game shooting, deer stalking and so on, all of which are hugely important. We must hear the voices of those who speak for managed land, because they are just as important as those of us who like to enjoy the wilderness. Most land is managed, to a certain extent, but it is important that we take a structured view and try to consider all avenues because, at the end of the day, we have the most significant landscapes in the world.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the Scottish Qualifications Authority regarding contracts that the body has signed with foreign governments. (S4T-00264)

The Scottish Government makes the valid point that the contract that was signed between the SQA and the Bahrain Government is not something on which the Scottish Government would be briefed routinely. Notwithstanding that statement, will the minister confirm whether the Scottish Government had any concerns about the second contract that was signed between the SQA and the Bahrain Government in March 2012, which post-dated the University of Edinburgh’s withdrawal from a similar contract on 27 January 2012, and about the context of the briefings from Bahrain campaign groups that were provided to the Scottish Government in April 2012?

The issue is the transparency of the contract. Is the minister able to give the chamber confidence by expressing support for the SQA’s due diligence processes for the 2011 and 2012 contracts? Moreover, will he expand on the comment made by the Scottish Government at the weekend that it was in discussions with the agency “about how processes and arrangements might be improved”?

I am obviously aware of that. However, my point is about the process of questioning that was carried out with regard to the contracts. Concern has been expressed, particularly in view of the fact that the Scottish Government was aware of some of these issues at the time, and I want to get to the bottom of the process.

I add my congratulations to David Torrance on securing this worthwhile members’ business debate. Fife clearly owes the Gingerbread movement a huge amount for all that it does, so it is fitting to have this occasion in the Scottish Parliament to recognise the work, support and commitment of Gingerbread. It was good to see members of the Gingerbread movement attending committee meetings this morning. David Torrance highlighted many examples of the support that Fife Gingerbread provides to many lone-parent families. Some of that happens in challenging situations, which are part of the backdrop to the support. However, Annabelle Ewing made a sensible point about the difficulties that relate to stereotyping. We must bear it in mind that there is a wide variety of reasons why parents end up as lone parents, including divorce, separation, bereavement and a spouse being away in the armed forces. My mother was very grateful for the support that she had in our local community when my father died very early from an unexpected heart attack. We must be careful about the circumstances by which we judge anything. Fife Gingerbread is a genuine example of how charities throughout the United Kingdom and Scotland can work as a network. From the establishment of the Fife Federation of Gingerbread in 1987 to the Fife Gingerbread organisation today, the guiding purpose has been not just to provide information to lone parents, but to ensure that they have someone to turn to—as David Torrance described movingly in his speech when quoting a young person who had found someone to speak to who turned their life around. That is very much needed and valued. Notwithstanding what I have just said about categories of lone parents, the circumstances can be highly challenging, reflecting many of the difficulties of modern life, which has changed so much in the past 20 years. We must accept that many people who seek the support of Gingerbread’s services are in difficult circumstances, whether through poverty or a very low income base, or because of substance abuse. We must accept that that is a very real situation, which needs to be addressed. I note from the website that there are about 10,500 lone parents in Fife alone, so there is a clear need for Gingerbread’s support. When thinking about the debate, I was struck by a story that I was recently told in a constituency surgery about a couple who, sadly, had separated, and about the difficulties that the lone parent was having in paying the household bills, not because she was unable to do that, but because it was something that she had never had to do before. She very much appreciated the advice—albeit that it was basic advice—from somebody who had been through the same thing. The Gingerbread group has been highly successful in providing such support in Fife. As a regional MSP for Mid Scotland and Fife and a member of the Education and Culture Committee, I have been very aware of much of the other support that has been given in linking up with other groups—including the student support worker that Fife Gingerbread can offer—that offer childcare and assisted benefits. Fife Gingerbread is to be congratulated all round on the terrific effort that it has put in—not only in doing its own work, but in yielding that experience elsewhere.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how it will implement its working with China strategy. (S4O-01802)

I put on record my thanks to the cabinet secretary for showing interest in the area and our collective thanks to Judith McClure and the Scotland China education network. Will the cabinet secretary tell us a little bit more about how the Scottish Government intends to develop links with local authorities and local businesses to find more people who can help to teach Chinese and help young people to learn about China? More specifically, how will it engage with finding more teachers of Chinese?

What would the cabinet secretary say to students from the rest of the United Kingdom, and to Professor Gavin McCrone, who says that the Scottish Government’s current funding position is “impossible to defend on the basis of equity”?

I very much welcome the debate and hope that it is set against the backdrop of what is best for the future of Scottish universities, the Scottish economy and Scottish society in general. What is best for the universities is to ensure that they maintain and enhance their extraordinary standing in the world, continue to attract cutting-edge research and become fully competitive in the knowledge exchange economy. Although the debate has many diverse aspects to it, funding policy is a key component. I welcome this opportunity to set out why in autumn 2010 we made our commitment to a graduate contribution and why—two and a half years on—we remain more convinced than ever that it is the right way forward. We made that commitment after carefully analysing the facts, after examining comparative HE sectors abroad and after listening to senior figures in the HE sector and to those who, at the request of the Government, have produced significant studies in the field—people including Sir Stewart Sutherland, Professor Gavin McCrone and Sir Andrew Cubie. I notice that when Andrew Cubie produced his report jointly with the Goodison Group in Scotland three weeks ago, he talked even more forcefully about the challenges that HE in Scotland faces. Each of those individuals set out compelling evidence that Scotland’s universities will in the future require additional sources of income if they are to maintain their competitive advantage at the same time as they improve academic standards and widen access. Scotland is spending only 1 per cent of gross domestic product on higher education, which is less than many other countries, including England, so I hope that the need for that additional income is not doubted by any of the political parties in this chamber. As Hugh Henry rightly said, the key question is this: who pays for it? Clearly that is a matter of political choice. The Scottish Government has made its choice plain. It believes that the state should pay for tuition of students as long as they are Scotland domiciled or are non-UK EU students. It argues that on the basis that it believes that free higher education is someone’s right—I think the cabinet secretary used the phrase, “someone’s promise”—and that the taxpayer therefore has an obligation to pay for it. That is a rational argument and one that is, no doubt, very attractive in an ideal world. However, the reality is that there is no bottomless state pot for higher education without significant costs—especially if the Scottish Government, along with the rest of us, wants to continue to increase the proportion of students going into higher education, which is in the region of 50 per cent, and to widen access for students from more disadvantaged backgrounds. For very understandable reasons, those students cost more to support at university than do other students—31 per cent more on average, according to the paper that Universities Scotland recently submitted to Holyrood’s Finance Committee. Given what has happened to the funding of our colleges, we already know that the commitment to maintain free higher education comes at a very significant cost. Other spending gets hit or, of course, taxes could rise, although, as Hugh Henry said, we know that John Swinney has ruled that out. That is a political choice for the SNP, but it is one with which we profoundly disagree. Why? First, the international evidence that has been provided by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and various international governments routinely supports the view that the only way to secure long-term sustainable funding for higher education, at a time when there is an overwhelming commitment to increase numbers and widen access, is further injection of private funds. Secondly, there is a marginal social and marginal private benefit to university education, so it is not unreasonable to expect some sharing of that cost—even more so if it removes the current regressive situation. Thirdly, evidence that has been produced by the Russell group of universities in its submission to the Browne review showed that the additional income brought into those universities has had significant benefits, which it highlights, such as the ability to attract and retain high-quality staff and, crucially, the ability to adapt to the changing needs of the student population. I want to dwell on that point for a moment, given that it is the ability to add more resources to HE that is important. David Willetts said that he thought that the figure would be 10 per cent additional resources by 2014-15. We know from the latest Scottish Parliament information centre briefing to the Education and Culture Committee that that has facilitated more money for bursary support. The other point about the international evidence is that the countries that are performing best in HE are those whose Government is taking slightly less responsibility for the sector. Inevitably, that will be reflected in funding trends. What of the SNP’s case for higher education in practice? As I said when I intervened on the cabinet secretary, Gavin McCrone, who was critical of aspects of the balance in the Westminster Government’s analysis of higher education, said that the funding situation in Scotland is a mess and is “impossible to defend on the basis of equity”. That, cabinet secretary, is why I have used the word “discriminatory” in my amendment. The Government position is discriminatory. This morning we heard the University and College Union Scotland and the NUS say exactly the same thing. They said—I think the quotation is correct, although I have not checked the Official Report because I do not have it to hand—that the policy is “more damaging than the worst excesses of the Westminster Government's policy”. Knowing what UCU and NUS think of the Westminster Government’s policy, I say that they are pretty damning about what the Scottish Government is doing. The great mantra of the SNP is that university entrance should be “based on the ability to learn, and not the ability to pay.” Try telling that to the people who have to pay. That mantra does not stand up. It is on that basis—

I am about to close.

The cabinet secretary must admit that there is a problem with EU funding. He told us 18 months to two years ago that he would solve the anomaly, but he has not been able to do that. The reason why we have gone for a graduate contribution—which we will stick by—is that we fundamentally believe that there must be more money in HE. It must not come at the expense of excessive costs elsewhere or by increasing taxes. I move amendment S4M-05652.1, to leave out from access and insert at end: “the current Scottish Government policy on tuition fees is discriminatory and threatens to undermine the admissions policies of Scotland’s universities and further believes that, instead, a modest contribution by graduates toward the cost of higher education should be introduced in Scotland to provide the additional flow of income that is consistent with the future ability of Scotland’s universities to maintain and enhance their academic excellence and international standing and the need for a level playing field for all students in order to provide significant additional funds for bursary support for those from less well-off backgrounds.”

When the cabinet secretary set up the technical working group, he asked it to set out the possible ways of funding higher education. That was absolutely the right thing to do. If memory serves correctly, there were six different balances between Government and private funds. Obviously, the two extremes were complete Government funding and injecting far more from the private sector. The group worked out some arithmetic on the future funding. At that time, it worked out that the funding gap was £97 million if the average English fees were set at £7,000 and not indexed to inflation, and it gave the figure of £324 million if the average English fees were £8,500 and were indexed to inflation. The cabinet secretary accepted the lower estimate and set out his view that that particular funding gap would be closed by the Scottish Government finding more money and by universities’ philanthropy, greater efficiency and business. That was an interesting mix. However, what he did not do—I would be interested if the cabinet secretary could give us more information in his summing up—was spell out how the savings could be identified. Perhaps he may want to do so in the context of the fact that the average fees in England are a little different from the ones that he accepted at that time.

I thank the cabinet secretary for putting that on the record. However, the extent of the efficiency savings, particularly in comparison with those that are being made down south, is still an issue. The question of whether we envisage the same number of universities and the same number of four-year degree courses must be answered, too. The Scottish Government needs to come clean. If its choice is to be public funding built up by additional private funding and from efficiency savings, we must know what the balance will be. I must apologise to Joan McAlpine for knocking water all over her papers in this morning’s Education and Culture Committee. I hope that I did not spoil too much of the text that she was hoping to use this afternoon. She has raised an interesting issue for the cabinet secretary, too: should we expect the Scottish Government to introduce significant increases—of the Scandinavian level—when it comes to funding higher education?

Joan McAlpine hinted at that. Let me give the cabinet secretary the chance to put on record that that is not what he supports.

Indeed—who controls the Parliament? Obviously, the trend—[Interruption.] John Swinney said on record just last week that he did not envisage any increase in taxation. There is a fundamental issue. If it is to be the SNP’s choice for public funds to finance higher education—I do not agree with that, but the argument is perfectly rational and I respect that choice—it needs to explain to the Parliament, the public and people in universities how that will be paid for. That is a fair assumption.

We did so in our manifesto. We said clearly that the income-contingent loan would start to be repaid at a threshold of £21,000 and that the fees would be in the range of £3,500 to £4,000. That is in the paper that we produced. We had to make an adjustment on the fees, based on what happened in England and on inflationary pressure, just as the Scottish Government and Universities Scotland had to do. I stand by our record on the issue. We are clear about why we think that such fees are required. We based the figure on exactly what Universities Scotland said and on all the information that was given to us by the eminent people who wrote reports on the whole question of higher education. I think that members of all parties stand by bursary support as an important asset to higher education. As Murdo Fraser made exceptionally clear, despite challenges from elsewhere, in the context of statistical analysis of where additional funding is coming from, it is incumbent on the Scottish Government to consider how much additional bursary support can be provided in the system that it is promoting. It has been pointed out several times that the Office for Fair Access in England takes a different approach. Does the Scottish Government intend to legislate in that regard, or will we have to debate the issue in future? The debate must be considered in the context of what is in the best interests of our universities, the economy and Scotland at large. We have made different choices about how to fund higher education and it is incumbent on all parties to set out their stalls on exactly where the funding will come from. We have made our position clear and I hope that in summing up the debate the Scottish Government will do so too.

I benefited from that situation. I went through university at a time when there were far fewer students, as a percentage of the population, in the system. As the minister knows, we now have considerable ambitions to expand that number and ensure that, on a widening-access basis, far more people are attracted from difficult backgrounds. How can that be paid for?

Will the minister take an intervention?

12. To ask the Scottish Government what air ambulance provision there is across Scotland. (S4O-01780)

I am impressed by the cabinet secretary’s technical knowledge. I am sure that he will want to welcome the new air ambulance that is provided by Scotland’s Charity Air Ambulance, which is based at Perth airport and which has boosted the service by 50 per cent during daylight hours. Is it the Government’s intention to measure just how much additional service we require to ensure that all rural areas are fully covered?

Obviously, we have very different policy perspectives, but I do not disagree with some of the Deputy First Minister’s analysis. Will there be a commitment to reinstate universal child benefit when the Government outlines its policies for an independent Scotland?

I have listened extremely carefully to the debate and will endeavour to deal with the criticisms of the child benefit policy that have been made from around the chamber. Before I do so, I must say that I agree whole-heartedly with the Deputy First Minister and Willie Rennie that it is important to put this debate in context. It is a debate that is happening in this Parliament and in Westminster and it is familiar territory for many countries around the world. Kevin Stewart made that point, although perhaps for a slightly different reason. We know, from what has been said in previous welfare debates in Holyrood and from the robust exchanges this afternoon, that the parties have substantial differences on the policy way forward. However, looking at the parties’ statements on welfare policy, we can see that there is relative agreement on the starting position. The Deputy First Minister set out some examples of that. However, that starting position is also similar because we know that the welfare bill is huge—it grew by 45 per cent between 2000 and 2010—and because we know that it is likely to grow significantly in the years ahead. We all agree that the debate about what can and, more important, what should be available as a universal benefit is only just beginning. Malcolm Chisholm set out, very fairly, how he sees the Labour Party paying to maintain universal benefits. Over time, the Labour Party must spell out, in the context of the other universal benefits, whether it would drop universality for them. If the SNP is going to say that it will maintain those universal benefits—as the Deputy First Minister and other speakers did today—it is incumbent on it to explain how that will be paid for, in the context of this debate and the referendum debate. Those are important issues, and the various political parties in the chamber come at them from different angles. Willie Rennie made a good point when he said that we cannot have a situation in which it pays not to go to work. That is as immoral as some people are trying to say our policies are immoral in hammering the poor all the time. In a minute, I will deal with the allegation that our policies are hammering the poor, because that is simply not true. Underlying all that is the task that faces the Westminster Government, which is to make substantial savings to significantly reduce the budget deficit that was left by its predecessor.

I thank the member for his intervention, but there is an economic reality out there. It is there not just because of the size and the needs of that welfare budget; it is there because of the budget deficit. We all have to accept that. Any political party that tries to deny that is not living in the real world. We have to make justifiable savings, and the coalition Government intends that better-off families should take their share—a policy that it hopes will raise a significant amount of money and will also have a redistributive effect that is important in the context of the overall welfare changes. We have been strongly criticised this afternoon for the policy that has the effect that the position of a family with two parents who are each earning £49,000 would be very different from that of a family with one person who is earning £60,000, as the latter family would lose their benefits. If members look back through the record, they will see that I raised that issue with concern several months ago. It would be fair to say that the Westminster Government has had the greatest amount of criticism on that point. However, because of that, the Westminster Government has moved to a situation in which some of the loss of benefits will be tapered so that there will be no immediate cut-off, as there was in the original plan. It has listened to concerns about that. As Drew Smith said, means testing would have to take place if we were to adjust that system to a much more complex system with many more administrative calculations—if we were going to tax on the basis of households rather than individuals, that would lead to considerable means testing and complications. There have been criticisms of the methodology and the fact that the change is complex. Yes, of course the change is complex, but I come back to the fact that the change must be seen in the context of the overall adjustments that need to take place, including the other tax changes and the targeting of the groups that the coalition Government feels can bear the greater burden. To sum up, it is important that we have this debate because there is something more fundamental behind the philosophy in all our positions. I accept the SNP’s point that the debate is about the kind of Scotland that we want to live in—that is true. In these times of considerable pressure on welfare, all the political parties must set out how they will deal with that, and we will all come to very different conclusions. It is important that such a debate takes place in the context of the referendum debate, so that we can ensure that the public has a real choice.

Does the minister accept that the child benefit policy targets those who are most able to afford it to carry most of the burden?

I would be inclined to give the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning a little more time, because the more he goes on explaining the facts in that manner, the more confused he gets. At a time when the Scottish Government has embarked on a major process of tertiary educational reform, and when the provision of new educational opportunities is critical to address the unemployment situation, it would have been surprising indeed if colleges had not been one of the main features of Holyrood debate during recent months. However, the extraordinary frequency with which we have debated the issue, in full debates and at ministerial and First Minister’s question times, tells a rather different story. It is a story of a cabinet secretary who is having great difficulty in keeping the focus on colleges where it should be and allaying the fears of the college and university sectors—never mind those of the public and Opposition politicians—about some key issues. I understand very well that different colleges use different measures to assess the length of their waiting lists. That is not new. They do so not just because of the reasons that the cabinet secretary gave, which are to do with some students taking up other courses, getting a job or not getting the necessary qualifications. Those are all perfectly valid reasons, which is why we should be extremely careful about double counting. The use of different measures also reflects the flexibility of colleges and their ability to adapt courses quickly to the business and industry demands of their local communities, which is an issue that is fast taking centre stage in the current debate about college regionalisation. As Hugh Henry rightly said, the mistake that the cabinet secretary has made, yet again, is in the attitude that he has adopted. He has dismissed the perfectly legitimate questions of Opposition members, including me, and—more importantly—of the college sector. By stating that waiting lists are a false concept, he has given a highly misleading impression of the situation. Although we could undoubtedly spend a lot of time picking through all the semantic details, the implication from, in particular, the manner in which the cabinet secretary spoke was that waiting lists do not exist, when it is quite clear that they do. We now have a new definition—the cabinet secretary calls them “so-called waiting lists”. What is at issue, of course, is the definition, just as it was the definition that was at issue when the cabinet secretary got himself tied in knots—double knots, in fact—when he pontificated about college spending. At the time, he tried to pretend that nothing was wrong and that it was just that the Opposition parties were ganging up on him. Well, we are ganging up on him. The cabinet secretary has made the comment: “I know how desperate members are to weigh in on this matter because they think that, somehow, they are going to get a political advantage”.—[Official Report, 16 January 2013; c 15509.] That is not the case. We want to raise the issue because there is genuine concern—most importantly within the sector—that the Scottish Government finds it extremely difficult to adopt the right approach to what is clearly a complex problem. Instead of saying that waiting lists are a false concept, would it not have been much more sensible to say, “Yes, they exist,” and to explain why there are so many complexities and what the Government is doing to address them? Exactly the same thing happened over college budgets: we heard persistent denial and a dismissive approach, which I understand became a feature of a Christmas YouTube video at Edinburgh College. That is not helpful to the promotion of a clear understanding of what the main issues are and what needs to be done to address them. Notwithstanding the fact that colleges use different measures to identify waiting lists, are we really saying that it is not possible to come up with an agreed definition that tells us the aggregate total of students across Scotland who, during any one period, have made an application for a course or courses and who have the right credentials, but who cannot find a college place? I do not think that any of us knows whether that figure is 21,000 students or fewer, but I know that it is extremely unhelpful when the cabinet secretary tries to dismiss the issue as though no one else has any understanding of the true situation.

The debate on waiting lists follows hard on the heels of the debate about college budgets. They are not unconnected. That is the Scottish Government’s problem, and it is why we will support the Labour motion.

The cabinet secretary was clear that he wanted facts in the debate, so I will try my best to ensure that we produce the right ones. First, colleges use different measures for their waiting lists. That is not new and it is perfectly legitimate. They do it for many different reasons. Secondly, several members—myself included—asked legitimate questions. Thirdly, instead of receiving explanations as to why it is difficult to answer those questions about the nature of the waiting lists, we were told that those waiting lists are a “false concept”. The implication of what we were told was that the rest of us do not know anything about what we are talking about. I tell the cabinet secretary that that is simply not true. Those facts speak for themselves. The debate is not about the numbers—no member is in a position to come up with the relevant numbers, because we do not know what they are. It is about the language and the manner in which the matter has been debated. Yet again, the Scottish Government claims that there is a false concept out there. It is dismissive and acts as though the rest of us, and the college sector, do not know what we are talking about. That is plainly untrue and does not help to ensure that the focus in the debate is in the right place. I will be brief, as I did quite a lot to sum up in writing other things. We would like one question to be answered by the cabinet secretary this afternoon: what is the definition of the waiting lists to which he has referred in the audit that has taken place? I repeat that we will support the Labour Party’s motion. I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary gave us an answer to the question that I asked.

I do not think that anybody in the chamber denies that reform should take place in tertiary education—that is an on-going process in any case. We are asking for an honest debate that focuses on the right things. That is difficult because of the complications and the muddle that the Scottish Government is getting into about the numbers that it claims are on waiting lists. That is the problem.

6. To ask the First Minister what recent discussions the Scottish Government has had with national health service boards about appointment procedures for senior health managers. (S4F-01111)

When Nicola Sturgeon was the health minister, she rightly put in place procedures to ensure that the appointment process for senior doctors and consultants in health boards was based on full transparency and public accountability. Does the First Minister agree with his colleague John Wilson, who at the weekend made clear his concerns that the process that one Scottish health board adopted recently for the appointment of a senior manager lacked that transparency and accountability? Does he agree that the Scottish Government has a responsibility to address that?

As a supporter of the college sector, I ask the cabinet secretary when it will be possible for him to announce the full costs of the college regionalisation process.

Last week, NHS Tayside made a reduction in the provision of emergency cover for surgery at Perth royal infirmary, which comes on top of reductions that have taken place in paediatrics and maternity services in the past few years. Does the Scottish Government support those reductions in an area that includes many rural communities and is set to see substantial population growth in the years ahead?

Some very interesting points have been raised in this debate, which I think has struck a very interesting tone. After all, tone is as important as the context in which we are discussing many of these issues, and several members have mentioned the fact that the debate comes on top of other debates that have a coherence with it. That is important because we all have a responsibility for tackling youth unemployment. We also have a responsibility to focus on employability because, as Mary Scanlon made clear in setting out the statistical facts as proof, it is essentially the main issue in this debate. Mary Scanlon is absolutely right to say that there are some signs of progress that it would be churlish to diminish in looking at the overall picture. However, what remains clear is the considerable gap between demand and supply in different aspects of the labour market, not just with regard to the total numbers but in the qualitative adjustments required. I was struck by comments made from all parts of the political spectrum by Chic Brodie, Liam McArthur, Ken Macintosh and Siobhan McMahon about the need to drill down into some of this. After all, we cannot simply come out with blanket statements. Apart from the underemployment issue, which Ken Macintosh rightly raised, there are three main problems. First, there are those who are willing and able to work but who are unable to find work in an economy that is obviously demand-deficient at the moment and prone to some very serious cyclical downturns. Secondly, there are those who are willing and able to work but who cannot find a job because they do not possess the relevant skills and qualifications that would make them sufficiently attractive to employers who have jobs available. Then there are those who are able to work but who are, for one reason or another, unwilling to do so. Each situation encompasses different problems in the labour market and, by definition, requires a different approach from Government. When we examine why just under half of 16 to 24-year-olds in Scotland are currently unemployed and why the youth unemployment rate here continues to be far too high, it is important that we look at the underlying trends and that policy focus distinguishes between different types of unemployment. Several members said that many factors are at work, which is right. A concern that has been raised consistently, and which I think has emerged in almost every committee in the Parliament, given the consistent theme that employers take up when they make representations to parliamentarians, is the lack of employability skills among by no means all but too many of our young people. Employers say that too many school leavers have poor communication skills and a lack of understanding of the ethos that is expected and required in the workplace. Although employers acknowledge that there are outstanding programmes to address that issue, including many in the voluntary sector—we talked about the Prince’s Trust—time and again they make the point that policy is not sufficiently coherent across the country. There is a wealth of evidence on the topic, and whether we consider the sophisticated economic analysis that the Confederation of British Industry produced or the sophisticated social analysis that Barnardo’s produced, we can see seriously worrying signs of personal barriers in the way of too many young people. Barriers can include poor literacy and numeracy skills, a lack of confidence and motivation, issues to do with housing and money management and, just as important, an inability to understand what is required in the workplace. It is clear that an increasing number of commentators think that schools and colleges have the most significant part to play in tackling the problem. The Scottish Chambers of Commerce told the Finance Committee recently that a great deal more needs to be done to improve links between employers and schools and colleges and to address young people’s expectations. In that context, I congratulate Jayne Baxter on her thoughtful maiden speech. She made the point strongly that the transition between school life and working life is the most important one. Members who attended the meeting of the cross-party group on colleges and universities just before Christmas, when we considered articulation, were struck by the contribution of Chantelle Robson, who is a classic example of the importance of successful articulation. The young lady is in her first job and made it clear that if she had not been lucky enough to get beneficial advice, she probably would not have succeeded. She argued strongly that careers guidance at school, particularly in secondary 3, should be much better.

The member has asked important questions. What the young lady said was that there must be a mixture of things. She argued that teachers should have additional qualifications, to help them to understand some of the problems that young people face. However, nothing beats work experience. As the member said quite rightly in his speech, it is important that people like us offer valuable work experience. A combination of approaches is needed and I do not underestimate their importance—I think that the Smith group made the same point to the Parliament. I have great sympathy with the Labour amendment, because colleges are crucial and are central to the issue. I ask the Scottish Government again to reflect on how it can possibly justify the extent of the cuts that have been imposed on college budgets. The cuts are punishing the very institutions that have had the greatest impact on providing better and more flexible employment opportunities. Why on earth, at this time of such high youth unemployment, do colleges have to be punished?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what provisions it is making with local authorities for the allocation of the additional £1 million for musical instrument tuition in schools. (S4T-00172)

I welcome the Scottish Government’s announcement. It is clear that one of the most important commitments that the Scottish Government has made with that announcement is on the removal of fees for pupils who are studying for SQA exams in music. Will the cabinet secretary clarify whether that removal will be brought into force straight away?

It is good to hear that discussions are under way. Has the cabinet secretary considered the opportunity to set up music trusts on a similar basis to leisure trusts? I know that his colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs has shown interest in that. Is that a possibility for at least paying some of the fees that are due?

Last month, the importance of careers guidance was put into sharp focus for the cross-party group on colleges and universities. Bill Porterfield of Burn Stewart Distillers, who was providing a report about the ambitions that he and some other local businesses have for helping young people into successful careers, began his contribution with the following observation: “When exam time comes, the education system tells you to put away your calculators, your mobiles and your textbooks, and try to remember everything you have learnt for the last two years for a two hour exam. Don’t copy anyone … and don’t ask anyone for help. This must be all your own work”. What happens on day 1 in the workplace? You are handed a calculator, a mobile and a set of instructions. You are told not to rely on anything that you have learned up till now and, whatever you do, to ask for help. It is the absolute opposite of the academic experience that finished only a few weeks before. That is a bit of satire, perhaps, but it nonetheless serves to set out the culture shock that many young people face when they enter the world of work. At stake is somebody’s future career and their ability to know what to expect, understand the appropriate ethos, take instruction and know their rights and responsibilities. In short, it is as much about having good communication skills and how the person adds value to the workplace as it is about their qualifications. The earliest discussions in a pupil’s school life about possible career paths can have the most significant impact. They by no means determine exactly what the pupil will do post school, but they certainly sow the seeds for possible paths. It is, therefore, vital that those initial discussions are well informed and properly followed up, rather than involving mandatory chats from a teacher to the whole class or in some cases the whole year group. In the past, and even at a few schools today, the latter approach has been all too familiar and has done little more than advise pupils which prospectuses to read or which websites to use. If the philosophy of earliest identification is true in looking after the social and educational needs of our youngest children, it is also true for careers guidance. In my book, that means starting out with better careers guidance in the early years of secondary school, prior to subject choice for external qualifications. I would argue strongly that effective guidance is needed on why there are different approaches to the disciplines of science, arts and social sciences. Members may be surprised to learn that although pupils often know which subjects fall into those categories, they are not always aware of how one learns in the different disciplines. Knowledge must be complemented by an early understanding of the world of work and the skills that are required in any occupation. We should be clear about schools’ obligations. First, there is—not least because of the principles that underpin the curriculum for excellence document “Building the Curriculum 4”—an obligation to ensure that the guidance that is provided at school is personal and no longer shaped by a-one-size-fits-all approach. Such an approach may be fine for the initial session, but it is certainly not appropriate as pupils begin to discuss their individual programmes. I commend those schools throughout Scotland that take time to interview their pupils on a regular one-to-one basis and which, in the later years of school, ask pupils to select one member of the school staff to act as a personal tutor. The fact that the pupil has a choice has the huge advantage of ensuring that the system has a high chance of success and that the pupil sees that member of staff on a regular basis. Secondly, schools have an obligation to ensure that they fully involve parents in the process, given that parents remain the biggest influence on young people’s choices in the early stages. It makes things much better if school and home are working together, and it is beneficial when local businesses or recruitment agencies can be involved too. As was said at the cross-party group, it is never too early to start work on what expectations are in the workplace and which skills are required in any professional working environment. School are also obliged to ensure that they track pupils once they have left school so that they become much better informed about how well the careers guidance has worked and where it might be falling short. Universities and colleges are doing that exceptionally well just now, and such an approach should be done at school level. This afternoon, the Scottish Government has set out the key elements of the strategy to modernise careers services across Scotland. That is welcome, but only as far as it goes. There is no doubt that some of the new approaches that have been highlighted will be enormously beneficial in providing youngsters with a much better awareness of what options are available. However, the strategy must be expanded considerably. I have concerns on two fronts, one of which echoes the concerns that Labour set out this afternoon. First, what matters most is the quality of the information that is available and the ability of the youngster to understand and use information appropriately. New technology—especially new collaborative websites—can be important, but success will be determined by the qualitative judgments that the youngster makes. That requires human as well as technical input, and we should be in no doubt about the need for a fully co-ordinated approach in providing that. I whole-heartedly agree with Labour’s view that there is grave cause for concern about some of the evidence that was provided to the Education and Culture Committee, from which it was clear that by no means all the stakeholders involved agree on the best way forward. Specifically, as Labour has said, there is concern that there is still scope for too many people to fall through the net. Labour has pointed to the registration issue, which is a serious concern. While I understand the principles of the system that the Government is trying to put into operation, I think that we must look carefully at expanding the whole process so that we not only have more youngsters involved, critically, at an earlier stage, but are satisfied that the process has the confidence of the main stakeholders. As a politician and a former schoolteacher, I cannot overemphasise how important careers guidance is. We must get our approach to it right and we must be a bit broader in our outlook than the Scottish Government currently is. I move amendment S4M-05109.1, to insert at end: “, and recommends that the most significant progress is likely to be made if there is more personalised careers guidance available to all pupils in the early years of secondary school that is in line with the main principles of the curriculum for excellence and actively involves other partners such as local businesses, colleges and universities.”

Notwithstanding what Jamie Hepburn just said, does he accept that significant concerns were expressed to the Education and Culture Committee about the extent of the service that is being provided?

Will the minister give way?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what financial support will be available in 2013-14 for higher and further education students from the most deprived backgrounds. (S4O-01528)

As I understand it, the Scottish Government’s intention is to increase the overall budget for the Student Awards Agency for Scotland over the whole of the spending review period. Can the cabinet secretary outline why there has been a change in policy focus from bursaries to the loans system and why, in the next year, we will have a 9.5 per cent real-terms cut in student support and tuition fee payments?

Iain Gray has selected one of the most important topics in our schools today and I commend him for the powerful speech with which he introduced the debate. As he said, music—in whatever capacity—should be at the heart of any curriculum, not just because of the educational and social benefits that it brings but because of its power to transform lives, which he described. We have seen that on a grand scale with El Sistema, which is thankfully to be expanded across Scotland. However, another important factor is that music provides an important self-discipline and, often, the ambition for pupils to do well in other subjects. Music is definitely not to be treated as an optional extra. As Nicola Benedetti has said, that would do untold damage to the cultural fabric of Scotland. We know that music is, in principle, firmly embedded in curriculum for excellence, but we also know that its provision is patchy, particularly when it comes to instrumental tuition, and that that situation relates largely to costs, as both Clare Adamson and Jenny Marra said. In particular, our concerns relate to the wide variations between local authorities. Just a few months ago, the Education and Culture Committee was presented with the stark reality of the statistics. Three quarters of the 32 local authorities in Scotland are charging for instrumental music tuition, and the annual charge varies from £95 to £340. In many cases, the costs have continued to rise over the past two or three years, and in the past year 11 local authorities have announced increases that are well above the rate of inflation. It is just as important to note that five councils—it was six, so it is good to hear that one has changed its mind—are still charging students for entering SQA exams. Notwithstanding the fact that we know that budgets are tight—again, the Education and Culture Committee was told about the effect of that—it is simply unacceptable that some councils see music as an easy target when it comes to budget cuts, and there is sometimes a hint that they see it as a means of generating additional income. That is a situation about which we should all feel distinctly uncomfortable. There is also variation between primary schools and secondary schools. We should accept that that needs to be dealt with quickly. If music is to be treated as an important part of curriculum for excellence—I am sure that we have a unanimous view on that—it is difficult to square that with the fact that families are having to pay high fees, and parents will rightly be confused and angry if they have to face more increases in that regard. Given that parents are already paying taxes to local authorities, they find the additional charges reprehensible. We have been told that it might not be possible to avoid additional charges altogether. I can accept that up to a point, given the nature of some of the tuition that is required. However, if there have to be some charges, I suggest that local authorities be more imaginative about possible sources of additional income. Some of them have been interested in the concept of trusts when it comes to sport, and I wonder whether something can be done on the same basis for music. It might also be possible to involve local businesses if we have to find some additional funds. I finish by commending Iain Gray again, because this is an important debate and he spoke with considerable passion on the subject. It is something for all of us to take on board.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

The fact that we are back in the chamber discussing the Scottish Government’s handling of its college policies says it all. How ironic it is that a debate that was supposed to be about the important issue of improving career guidance services in Scotland has turned into a debate about the career guidance for one cabinet secretary. What happened last week was a turning point, when competence disappeared from the SNP government at its highest level. However, it is the credibility question that is most troubling and, as many people in the sector have commented, it is a wholly unwelcome diversion from many of the real issues in the college sector. The debate should be about education and jobs, and I will come on to those in a minute. Let me be clear that our ability to scrutinise the true situation that exists for colleges and, indeed, the ability of the witnesses who attended the Education and Culture committee, has been seriously undermined by the lack of accurate data. Mike Russell’s problem is that he has lost the confidence of the sector, the public at large and politicians across the chamber. That situation is not good for Scottish education. Notwithstanding the fact that the academic year does not match the financial year—that is not the fault of any Government or even the cabinet secretary—new interpretations of the budget figures seem to emerge every time the Scottish Government makes an attempt to clarify them. The public sees a First Minister and an education secretary who cannot make up their minds about whether college budgets are going up or down. It is bad enough that they both misled the Parliament with dodgy figures, but they did not even seem to know what the right ones were. Mike Russell was nodding when the first Minister produced the wrong figures at First Minister’s questions; he was again seen nodding vigorously when he thought that his boss had set a wrong right in the 5 pm statement. But were those figures the whole truth? If the First Minister is correct in amending the baseline figure to £556 million for the financial year 2011-12, instead of the £545 million figure quoted in the Audit Scotland report, does that not mean that the college budgets have actually suffered a cut of more than 24 per cent? Likewise, as a result of the mess created by the Scottish Government with recent figures, there is a danger of fixing too much attention on the budget year 2012-13 and losing sight of what will happen in budget year 2013-14, when it now seems likely that there will be an even greater cut than was previously stated. What does that say about the long-term planning for colleges in their courses, staff and student numbers? How does that affect education and jobs? I repeat what I asked in last week’s colleges debate. Why, when youth unemployment is growing and we have a flagship policy that promises an education or training opportunity for all 16 to 19-year-olds, does the SNP Government still believe that it is right to cut the budgets of further education colleges, which are essential for training young people in the skills that will be needed when the Scottish economy returns to sustainable economic growth? As we have already agreed, colleges could hardly be more important in that respect, nor in reaching out to the many people for whom further education was previously too remote. Last week, all parties in the Parliament, including the Scottish Government, praised colleges for the diversity and flexibility of their work and their potential to widen access. Worse still, as a result of the Scottish Government’s changed policy focus to provide greater student support, there is now less money available for bursaries, which, as everyone knows, are provided specifically to help students who come from poorer sections of society. When the Scottish Government talks to other parties about Conservative policies, it should be mighty careful about seeking the moral high ground. Student support is a vital element of any college budget, but so too are bursaries. The Government should remember that student support will be of little use if students cannot find places in the first instance. The Scottish Government says that further education must change. I do not think that anyone disagrees. It is clear that it wants to move away from a system where institutions matter more than people, towards one that is built around the needs of a wide range of students and much greater flexibility. Those reforms are the basis for regionalisation. They bring enhanced educational opportunities and much greater responsiveness to local demand. That should be the driver for college reform; it should not always be about money. I have previously complimented the Scottish Government on several of its early years policies, which can make a crucial difference at the most important stage in the educational journey. Completely the opposite is true of its policies on the tertiary education sector, where the focus is entirely wrong. The Scottish Conservatives cannot support a policy that is ripping the heart out of institutions that have done much in recent years to make further education more accessible and more flexible, and that aspire to higher standards. That is why we fully support the amendment lodged by Liam McArthur, call for a major rethink of the Scottish Government’s priorities within the education budget and demand that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning resign.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether I may seek your advice. On 25 October, in response to a question that I asked at First Minister’s question time, the First Minister said in part of his reply: “There are now, I think, 18,000 people employed directly in renewable energy across Scotland.”—[Official Report, 25 October 2012; c 12617.] A Scottish Government briefing, which is based on the evidence produced by the renewables sector, says very clearly that there are in fact 11,000 people directly employed in the sector, which is a difference of 7,000. When the error was pointed out to the First Minister’s office yesterday, a Scottish Government spokesman said: “The first minister has corrected the parliament’s official report to make it clear there now are 11,000 jobs supported by Scotland’s renewable energy sector.” Presiding Officer, may I ask your advice as to whether the official record can be amended in this way without the First Minister acknowledging to Parliament that an error has been made and without informing the member concerned?

In the First Minister’s statement on Thursday, he produced a revised baseline figure for 2011-12 of £556 million instead of the £545 million that was cited in the Audit Scotland report. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that that amended baseline figure is correct and that it therefore means that the colleges budget has suffered a cut of more than 24 per cent in real terms?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what recent assessment it has made of the impact of the closure of rural general practitioner surgeries. (S4O-01474)

It is interesting to hear about the pilot in NHS Highland. Is it the Scottish Government’s expectation that more needs to be done not only to ensure that there is good cover but to publicise the GP surgeries that are open and the hours that they are working?

Last Friday, several members were privileged to attend the Scottish Council for Development and Industry awards dinner at the magnificent new Emirates arena in Glasgow, at which Dr Madeleine Albright, the former United States Secretary of State, was the guest speaker. It was a remarkable speech from a remarkable woman. Asked to set out the challenges ahead and how she thought Scottish businesses and industry should respond, she said that understanding globalisation is the key and no more so than in the sphere of education. We must, she said, question what we are training our young people for and why. Her words provide a convenient backdrop to the debate on widening access to our colleges and why we, on this side of the chamber, contend that that overall ambition is being seriously compromised by the misplaced focus of Scottish Government policy. The debate—which I hope will soon be followed by another debate about widening access to universities—will examine the crucial role that our colleges can play in a fast-changing global economy to help Scotland to stay ahead of the game in the manner suggested by Dr Albright. Notwithstanding our acceptance of the very tight financial constraints affecting many economies, we urge the Scottish Government to refocus its budget priorities and tackle head-on the criticism that has been levelled at the Government from so many sources in education, business and industry. I take up specifically the comment from Jeremy Peat of the David Hume Institute that “change must not be at the cost of the crucial role the colleges play in providing opportunities to many from diverse parts of society”. In this chamber and in several portfolio and cross-party committees, we have been reminded many times by experts in the sector that further education reaches parts of the population that other educational institutions do not and that it has an increasing reputation for inspiring those groups towards more meaningful employment, including a greater interest in successful entrepreneurial activity. The role of our colleges is clear. So, too, is the Scottish Conservatives’ respect for all the staff and students who are involved. First, in educational terms, it is clear that our colleges want to move away from an outdated system in which institutions matter more than people. They want to move away from being the institutions that the public often labelled—simplistically—as being in between schools and universities. They want to ensure that their provision of education is responsive to the needs of their local economies as well as to the needs of the national economy, to which they have contributed to the tune of 1 per cent of gross domestic product over eight years. They want better articulation—a point that will be developed by my colleague Mary Scanlon—and they want to provide greater flexibility so that college education really is open to a wider cross-section of society. It is on that point that I want to dwell because, in my book, it is that greater flexibility that matters so much to the modern economy and which provides colleges with their important social function to widen access and reduce inequalities. Colleges have come a long way in recent years in making themselves more responsive to the needs of a much more diverse working population; to the needs of mature, part-time and disabled students; to the needs of women students with families; to the needs of younger students from groups for whom, in days past, a college education would have been only a pipe dream; and to the needs of the ethnic minority groups who were, at one time, completely left behind. We must not forget the fact that out of the 300,000 or so total learners at college, about 75,000 are full time, which clearly means that the majority are part time. Fifty-four per cent of college students are women; the comparable figure in secondary schools is 49 per cent. Only 38 per cent of college students are in the 16 to 24-year-old age group, which many people tend to think of as the traditional student age, and 25 per cent come from the more deprived communities. John Henderson, chief executive of Scotland’s Colleges, said: “One of the enormous strengths of our college system is its ability to cater for a diverse range of students at different times in their lives.” He went on to say that the policy should reflect that, and that the allocation of Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council money must ensure that no one group is disadvantaged when it comes to aspiring to a college education. He pointed out that per head spending in further education is traditionally lower than it is in higher education and secondary education, and that the college sector, which derives a much greater percentage of its funding from the public purse is, obviously, more susceptible to budget cuts. As members know, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has announced that he is keen on college audits. Let me assist him with that. First—notwithstanding the fact that there are many people, including many members of the Education and Culture Committee and its recent witnesses, who have found it exceedingly difficult to pick their way through the unintelligibility of some of the data that has been presented to us as we scrutinise the current budget—is the issue of the overall college budget spend. We acknowledge that there are cuts to the overall Scottish budget and that, by definition, the Scottish Government has to make cuts—we accept that, and we acknowledge that some of those decisions are difficult. However, let us be clear: the decisions about where priority spending should be within Scottish education are entirely a matter for the Scottish Government. The college sector, many businesses across Scotland and the Opposition parties have all combined to send a strong message to the Scottish Government that it is unacceptable that our colleges have been the target of such significant cuts. As the Labour Party amendment rightly points out, those cuts mean that college funding over the next three years is set to be reduced by a quarter—that was central to the Audit Scotland report and its concerns that such cuts present major challenges to the entire sector. Most important, there has been a disproportionate cut to teaching budgets—the very budgets that the college sector tells us make the greatest difference to the quality of coursework that is on offer in our colleges. That means, despite a £24 million transfer from the employability fund to colleges—we are waiting to hear the detail of that—there will be a 15.8 per cent cut to teaching budgets in academic year 2012-13 compared with 2010-11, which means that £73 million will be lost. Since 2009-10, we know that 2,300 jobs have been lost in the sector, and that some college courses have been cut and some have disappeared altogether. We are being told by many students and staff that class sizes are likely to grow in order to cope, which is not the best advert for a sector that has worked so hard to improve standards and which is striving to become more flexible, not less. It is not surprising that the sector now has a major bone of contention with the Scottish Government because it does not believe that that is any of its fault. Secondly, on the question of participation, we know that the number of female learners has declined by more than 26 per cent since academic year 2006-07 and, although some of that can be explained by demographic changes, that is by no means the whole story. Worse still, when we compare that with what has happened to male student numbers, we find that it is twice the rate of decline. Much of the reason for that is the fact that the Scottish Government has chosen to prioritise full-time courses for younger students because of the youth unemployment situation. Indeed, the First Minister said in the chamber last week that that was the priority because full-time places are more likely to lead to jobs. That is perhaps not the best message that the First Minister has ever sent out. We know that women students are much more likely to want to take up evening or weekend courses, which are structured to suit the changing demands of women and their families, and which are the very kind of courses that were designed to encourage more women to take up college places so that they could enter the labour market. At this point, I want to mention the issue of mobility. One of the huge advantages of colleges has been their local dimension and their ability to provide for those who do not have the resources to travel longer distances. That is particularly true of women who have busy lives with their families. How sad it would be if we saw a reversal of the good work in that area. So far, the Scottish Government has not come back with many public rebuttals, except to say that it has laid on more childcare facilities. It has, but that will not be much good if the college places are not there in the first place. What do we make of the situation for those students for whom college education was previously only a pipe dream, who clearly form a large part of the 16-to-19 initiative that the Scottish Government claims is a priority and for whom colleges such as John Wheatley College have been doing excellent work? They are the very students who need greater support, whether through one-to-one or small-group attention, or through help with their coursework, which they are often less able to do on their own. It is my firm understanding that one of the key rationales behind regionalisation was to ensure that there was greater scope for flexibility so that diverse needs would be catered for. I have heard the cabinet secretary say several times that he wants college reform to remove what he describes as the dreadful Thatcherite structures that led to far too much autonomy and overlap of course provision. If his plans to withdraw greater autonomy mean that too many courses are shut down, it is little wonder that he is now on the receiving end of the sharpest criticism. Week by week, we are getting evidence that there are problems. At Carnegie College, for example, three courses—one of which was at higher national diploma level—have gone and, at Inverness College, there are now not enough supervisors to cope with some technical course provision, so how on earth can the Scottish Government argue that its policies are widening access? I do not understand the Government’s reason for that approach, and I suggest that the colleges—which have warned the Government time after time of the folly of its position—do not, either. On that note, over the past 24 hours, we have seen extraordinarily heated exchanges between a college chair—who has now resigned—and the cabinet secretary. None of us in the chamber, except the cabinet secretary, is in a position to know the full facts about the management of the meeting in question and—perhaps even more important—about what communications have taken place. However, given the claims and counterclaims that now exist, which I suggest have been around for some time in the sector, about allegations of cultural bullying from the cabinet secretary, I suggest that there is now a case to answer and that the cabinet secretary should be called before the Education and Culture Committee. I heard the committee’s convener say this morning that he does not believe that there is any need for that, but I think that there are many members who beg to differ. If I may say so, I do not consider it appropriate for the convener of any parliamentary committee—who may, after all, have to act as arbiter on such a matter—to be judge and jury at the same time. Any convener’s first responsibility is to his or her committee. That is even more important when there is a majority Government. As far as I am concerned, the facts speak for themselves—

There are plenty of facts, and I have given members quite a lot of them. This is a very serious matter. I suggest that all the Opposition parties and many parts of Scotland recognise that. Above all, the college sector is crying out for help, because there are misplaced priorities. The Government must acknowledge that. I move, That the Parliament recognises the significant economic and social benefits of extending further education opportunities to a wider cross-section of society; applauds the initiatives of Scotland’s colleges to put in place policies that will widen access at the same time as raising academic achievement; deplores the fact that these initiatives are being heavily compromised by the Scottish Government’s extensive cuts to college budgets, and calls on the Scottish Government to refocus its budget priorities to redress this situation at a time when youth unemployment in Scotland is at a particularly high level.

I do not in any way dispute the complexity of much of the analysis when it comes to college spend. However, does the cabinet secretary acknowledge that it has been seriously compromised this year, and that that has been reflected by witnesses at the Education and Culture Committee, because there is no consistency in how we measure the figures?

Will Stewart Maxwell take an intervention?

There are cuts, as I said in my speech. What is at issue is that the Scottish Government’s priorities in Scotland, for which it is entirely responsible, are misplaced because colleges are having to bear the brunt. Does Stewart Maxwell accept that?

8. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to commemorate the centenary of the outbreak of the first world war. (S4O-01453)

It is encouraging to hear that. The minister will know that the United Kingdom Government has already announced plans to commemorate the centenary with a new flagship scheme that will offer thousands of schoolchildren the opportunity to visit the great war battlefields as well as a £50 million fund to support community events. The Scottish Government has found some funding for the commemoration of the battle of Bannockburn, so I ask the cabinet secretary to outline what financial support the Scottish Government could provide for the centenary.

6. To ask the First Minister what support the Scottish Government is providing to female college students. (S4F-00952)

Can the First Minister explain how the 26 per cent decline in the number of female students since 2007, which is twice the rate of the decline in the number of male students, sits with the Scottish Government’s promises to widen access and to maintain overall student numbers?

This is not the first time we have had problems with SAAS at this time of year. Does the Government intend to ask whether, at this juncture, additional resources can be made available for the phone system, so that fewer problems arise in the first place?

It has been very clear from the contributions to the debate—many of which were based on significant personal experience—that everyone agrees that there is no greater responsibility than bringing up children. We also agree that the state has no greater responsibility than to ensure that children who for one reason or another are not born into a secure and loving family—immediate or extended—are properly looked after. We are also clear that although hundreds of social workers across Scotland work tirelessly to do their very best for every child in difficult circumstances—as Hanzala Malik alluded to—nothing can replace the love and security of a permanent and stable family environment. The evidence is overwhelming, whatever criteria are used, so it goes without saying that that must be the overall policy objective. Within that policy objective, we must be clear that it is the child and his or her immediate family—whatever the definition of that may be—that matters most and that policy making must reflect the very diverse range of needs. If I interpret correctly all the current briefings on the matter and the Scottish Government’s intentions in the children and young people bill, plus all the as yet incomplete conclusions that have been drawn by the Education and Culture Committee, then it is clearly important to design policies that will be in the best interests of the child and their family or carers, but that at the same time will articulate with local authority structures, with schools, with healthcare and with financial pressures. There is a temptation to devise policy the other way round, which is the last thing that we want to do. Barnardo’s makes the compelling point that that can only frustrate moves to ensure that there is a quick and right decision for the child. We note the improvements that Barnardo’s believes need to be made. It has been very good to celebrate national adoption week and to hear the updates on adoption policy from the Scottish Government, which can help to inform members as we enter the next phase. However, there is still some other expert evidence to come. We have an obligation to listen carefully to it and to weigh up the implications before we move further on some aspects of policy. As Stewart Maxwell said, there is a need to talk to real people on the front line. The Scottish Government has acknowledged, as has each of the Opposition parties, that more has to be done to provide workable and equitable solutions rather than just present the statistics and diagnose the problems. How often have we been told at committee that we are very good at that part, but much less good at providing meaningful action, particularly—as Malcolm Chisholm and Liam McArthur said—in the earliest stages of children’s lives? I remember that, in their evidence to the committee, Claire Burns, the strategic policy manager for CELCIS, and the Educational Institute of Scotland said that there has been little improvement when it comes to taking the desired action, although we have been very good at diagnosing the problems. In other words, there have been lots of attempts to do things, but they have not always had the greatest impact. What lessons need to be learned from the experts on the ground? What can we do as politicians to ensure that there are significant qualitative improvements in the life chances of adopted and looked-after children? Some issues that relate to the decision-making process must be addressed. The convener of the Education and Culture Committee set out the challenge contained in the wealth of written and oral evidence that has been presented to us on some key themes. First, as has been reiterated by several former councillors who are now members of the Parliament, local authorities are not yet skilled enough at bringing greater coherence to decision making, particularly when it comes to involving council officers across lots of different departments. It is good to hear the Scottish Government’s intentions on that, especially in relation to dealing with some of the discrepancies. The spirit of GIRFEC is definitely out there, but the practicalities still present problems. It has been pointed out that sometimes there is not enough of a multidisciplinary approach to training among professionals. That issue was raised by Graham Donaldson, among others, when he examined how childminders and teachers could be assisted to provide crucial educational support in the earliest years for children who are perhaps going through some difficulties. It has also been pointed out that, in terms of decision making, it is often the financial concerns of local authorities that drive the policy, rather than some of the other factors that we should look at to achieve better qualitative outcomes. Implicit in such comments is the suggestion that we need to take more seriously the role that the voluntary sector can play in providing additional support. It has obviously been pointed out that in some areas local communities and local voluntary sector organisations can provide some of the greatest support to potential adoptive parents and to families when there is perhaps a desire to become adoptive parents but, for one reason or another, there are problems. The views of the voluntary sector are crucial. There is a wealth of evidence that suggests that a lack of permanence and stability in childhood can have significantly negative impacts further into people’s lives. We cannot sit back and wait and hope that things will change without a different intervention approach in the earliest years. It has been good to hear that there is a will in the Parliament to make that happen. As Nanette Milne said, we are happy to support the Scottish Government’s motion, and both the Labour and Liberal amendments.

6. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government considers that wind farms do not have a negative impact on the landscape. (S4F-00909)

Given the admission by VisitScotland that the building of a wind farm in Dumfriesshire could have a negative impact on the landscape and the substantial growth in the number of local communities opposing wind farm applications, which includes at least one Scottish council that is seeking a moratorium on future developments, on what evidence—legal or otherwise—has the First Minister based that opinion?

In the light of that answer, will the cabinet secretary tell us how many people in the 16 to 19-year-old group are on college waiting lists?

I thank David Torrance for bringing this debate to the Parliament this evening and I add my warm congratulations to the six young people in the gallery. They should be immensely proud of what they have achieved, no doubt in the face of stiff competition from lots of other scout groups. While it is a great result for the six of them, I am sure that they would want to put on the record their thanks to the whole 5th Fife scout group in Kirkcaldy for helping them to achieve their national success and provide wider recognition of the merits of the scouting movement. For exactly the reasons that Dennis Robertson spoke about, the scout movement is at the bedrock of the support for young people between the ages of 12 and 18 as they develop personally, physically and emotionally. I never fail to be impressed by the way in which the scout movement adapts to the challenges that are faced by young generations, which change over time even if there are some similarities. It is that ability to move with the times that I admire so much in the scout movement. The range of exciting opportunities that are provided to people are invaluable when it comes to later life. As David Torrance said in his opening speech, all too often we in the Parliament are confronted with negative stories surrounding what is a tiny minority of young people in Scotland. That disproportionate attention sometimes threatens to diminish the good news, so it is always a pleasure to be able to support worthy causes such as this one, particularly as the group has successfully encouraged more youngsters to join as time has gone on. Other members have mentioned the increase in national scout membership, but I am particularly impressed by the fact that the membership in the Kirkcaldy district has increased for 10 years in a row. That is a considerable achievement given what is happening in some other areas of extra-curricular activity. Indeed, these days, there is even more reason to encourage all youngsters to participate in scouting or similar activities, given the movement’s track record in providing its members with relevant skills, self-esteem and confidence, as well as the opportunity to make the many lasting friendships that come about as a result of the work that such groups do in their local communities. Before the debate, I took a quick look at the Kirkcaldy district scout group’s new website and annual report. I was hugely impressed by the significant contribution that the scouts have made to their local community and the diverse range of activities that they pursue, whether that is helping in old people’s homes, doing a beach clean or whatever. I was particularly impressed by the fact that it was the first group to have a sleepover in Deep Sea World. I trust that it was not underwater, but I congratulate the scouts on that, too. One section of the report that really stood out for me was the chairman’s comments. He wrote: “I make no apologies for placing on written record once again my genuine and heartfelt thanks to each and every adult leader and helper who work tirelessly to provide exciting and enjoyable Scouting activities for the young people throughout the District. Without their commitment and enthusiasm the District would not be as successful as it is so to each and every one of you ... THANK YOU!!” As parliamentarians, we also thank them. This evening’s debate is a timely opportunity to highlight the need for more adult volunteers to come forward to help with local beavers, cubs, scouts and explorer groups. I know from the conversations that I have had with scouts, cadets and girls brigade groups all over Perthshire and other areas of Mid Scotland and Fife that the level of volunteering is still a major issue, but the success of the 5th Fife scout group should be an inspiration to everyone. Many congratulations—I wish the group every success in the future.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made to increase digital participation across Scotland. (S4O-01350)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer. Good progress is being made, but obviously online sources for services can be very important for people in rural communities. Will she give some idea of the specific commitments that the Scottish Government might have in place to help rural communities?

I welcome the debate because—apart from the genuine interest in the Labour Party’s policy repositioning—it is, as Hugh Henry alluded to, about the services that the state should and should not be in charge of. Therefore, the debate is very much about the extent of the burden that we expect our taxpayers to bear. As Willie Rennie rightly said, Labour has paid heed to the central themes of the Christie and Beveridge reports plus the utterances of the many people in the business and civic communities across Scotland who have warned that the current universal benefits payments are simply not sustainable unless there is an increase in overall tax receipts in Scotland or significant reductions in other areas of public spending. All that comes at a time when there are concerns about the bloated size of the public sector in Scotland. So let me say why, in the context of discussing universal benefits, there is a specific debate to be had about higher education, and why we decided some time ago that there should in Scotland be a graduate contribution to increase our universities’ income. First, we studied at length the evidence that was provided to us by senior figures such as Andrew Cubie, Stewart Sutherland and Gavin McCrone, and by groups such as the Confederation of British Industry, Universities Scotland and Scotland’s Colleges—individuals and groups that have spent much of their working lives examining the effects of policy decisions on our higher and further education sectors.

That is not true of people from less well-off backgrounds. We examined higher education structures in other countries, with two specific things in mind. First, the maintenance and enhancement of the academic excellence of our Scottish institutions and secondly, our ensuring that they remain world-class institutions when set against the highly competitive global community and the premise that has been part of every Government strategy—Westminster or Scottish Governments—that it is a good thing to have more people at university. We argued then, and continue to argue, that public funding of our universities is not sustainable in the longer run if we are to achieve both those aims without also damaging other key public spending priorities. That is why, like the experts that I have mentioned, we think that there should be the means to secure additional income for our universities, particularly in the light of the overwhelming evidence—some of which was given to the Education and Culture Committee in the past two weeks—that a sizeable funding gap exists between north and south of the border. That gap will get bigger, especially if we see a trend where there are more Scotland-domiciled students, and European Union students are coming to Scotland at a faster rate than students from the rest of the UK or the international community, and additional income is required because that burden falls on the taxpayer. There are other considerations. University education provides both public and private benefits, which is why a balance should be maintained in funding. Twenty per cent of our population remains functionally illiterate or innumerate; we therefore made the judgment that that group deserves greater priority within education spending. A graduate contribution has, in other countries, a history of providing more bursary support.

I will not at the moment, thank you. There is also the need to ensure that Scottish universities continue to punch well above their weight when it comes to research funding and the development of knowledge exchange. Members should make no mistake about the competitive edge that accrues and the extent of the finance that we need to do just that—a point that was made clearly at recent meetings of the cross-party group on colleges and universities. There is also an inherent discrimination in the Scottish Government’s higher education funding policy: discrimination between those who pay fees and those who do not, for the exact same course. That makes a mockery of the SNP's claim that university entrance is based only on the ability to learn and not on the ability to pay. There is also the on-going anomaly for EU students who, by virtue of EU law, come here free of charge. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning may have partially solved the Irish anomaly, but he cannot solve the EU anomaly because, by law, that cannot be done, so when he makes that claim, he is grasping thin air, rather than the thistle. The SNP blandly argues that none of that matters, and that it is all about numbers, but at what price to our colleges, to the competitiveness of our world class institutions, to their staff, their research funding and their ability to stay ahead of the game for decades into the future? That is why we made the choice to support a graduate contribution. Gavin Brown eloquently set out why we have major differences with Labour and why Johann Lamont need not get too worried about becoming the Tory poster girl just yet, but there is one thing on which we certainly agree with Labour—we need an honest debate. We will advance that debate.

I add my thanks to Hugh Henry for securing this debate and recognise his work in this important area over a number of years. Few issues could be of more importance to this country than the protection of our children. We can never be too vigilant when it comes to defending the young from abuse, abandonment, exploitation, neglect, poverty and harassment. It is, therefore, apt that we should praise the NSPCC for its long and distinguished involvement in the protection of children in our society. It has made a significant impact in its 128-year history. However, as Jamie Hepburn said, that work is, sadly, becoming ever more demanding. Today in Scotland, 90,000 children live in poverty, one in 10 has suffered parental neglect, one in 100 has suffered severe physical neglect and thousands—I think that we do not know the exact number—live in households where there is either alcohol or substance misuse, or both. For many children, the sad reality is that Scotland is not a safe and secure country in which to grow up. I have long admired the work of the NSPCC. No one can have failed to be moved by the television campaign that brought home the harsh reality that children across the United Kingdom face. The positive work that the NSPCC undertakes makes a real difference to the lives of many children. The Renfrewshire programme that Hugh Henry highlights in his motion is clearly helping to address child neglect, but it also provides positive support to parents. As Neil Bibby said in his opening remarks, that is probably the most important focus for the programme’s work. Helping parents and future parents to understand and respect their responsibilities in the home and in wider society is crucial, and is probably the most effective preventative work that can be done. As the NSPCC website states, “Being a parent is one of the most rewarding jobs in the world but it’s also one of the most challenging.” In some communities in Scotland, we probably now have a third generation of parents who lack good parenting skills. There is a vicious cycle of poor parenting that, in turn, has resulted in unacceptable child neglect. Neglect can occur as far back as pregnancy if the mother abuses substances. Once a child is born, a parent or carer can neglect them by failing to provide adequate food, clothing or shelter, by failing to protect them from physical and emotional harm or danger, by failing to ensure access to medical treatment when needed, or by failing to respond to their emotional needs. I am sure that every member of the Parliament will have come across incidences of child neglect in their constituencies. We all know that such cases, by their nature, are difficult and complex and that they highlight the desperate situations in which many children find themselves. The NSPCC programme has set itself the important goal of supporting more than 1,600 families in seven locations in the United Kingdom over two and a half years. I am sure that the Scottish Government will review the outcome of the programme to see what lessons can be learned. Along with many other members, I have been hugely impressed by the NSPCC’s online resources. I hope that the Scottish Government minister will consider how that first-class help and information can be made more readily available. I am pleased that good progress is being made to improve child protection and the inspection regime, which is just as important, and that consideration is being given to how we can respond better to vulnerable children’s needs. I record my congratulations to Hugh Henry on bringing the debate to Parliament.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what assessment it has made of emergency surgery provision for rural communities. (S4O-01311)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that Perth royal infirmary has seen a loss of emergency service provision over the weekends, with no operations now taking place between 6 pm on a Friday and 8 am on a Monday. Given that Perth royal infirmary serves a large rural area, there is growing concern that more and more services are being centralised at Ninewells in Dundee, with the associated travel that is involved. The Scottish National Party has made a specific commitment that rural medical care will not be diminished, so will the cabinet secretary give an assurance that we will not see any further loss of services at Perth royal infirmary?

This has been a very insightful debate. Clearly, the major question is where we go from here. How do we turn the celebration, the warm words and the good will into concrete actions? I have listened extremely carefully to the suggestions from members. Broadly speaking, there are four things that we have to do. I suggest that the starting block is to ensure that we build on projects that we know have worked and for which there is therefore quantitative and qualitative evidence that progress has been made. We all have constituency examples of such projects but, to my mind, the first issue is not just the extremely important one of expanding the numbers involved; it is much more about the quality of the experience. As other members pointed out, it is about an on-going experience on a longer-term basis. Secondly, it is about access to professionally trained PE teachers and trainers, as well as making life very much easier for people to volunteer. I note carefully what the Scottish Sports Association said about employer-related schemes. John Park made a good remark about the apprenticeship scheme. There are obstacles in the way of people, who are more inclined to opt out of volunteering than to opt in. It is good to hear that the Scottish Government is about to build in a new sports strategy. That is essential. It is also good that the Government is making some progress on the two hours of PE. However, I ask the minister urgently to address the problem about qualified PE teachers, of whom we have seen a decline. Margo MacDonald has made the point several times in Parliament that quality in PE teachers is essential. The third issue is improving facilities, rather than just having more of them. Jenny Marra said that some of the tennis facilities in Dundee are simply not acceptable. No one will be attracted to play when playing fields, changing rooms and—sadly, in some cases—pavilions are run down and there are considerable restrictions on facilities. However, it is also to do with ensuring that whatever strategy we come up with fully articulates with policies in other portfolios, whether that is in health, transport, housing or education. Those are the things that will make us succeed. I am sure that we were all overawed by what happened in the summer in the Olympic and Paralympic games but, after listening to the athletes talk on television and reading what they have written in the newspapers, I note what comes across loud and clear is that what mattered most to them was what happened at a young age and the inspiration they had in their early years. Andy Murray talked about entering a major tournament at the age of 12—indeed, Luke Patience has mentioned getting into rowing at the age of seven—and we need to captivate, inspire and educate children at that young age and urge them to aspire to that kind of performance. If we urge communities to build on the examples that we know have worked, we can create a much more prosperous country and make individuals, families and the communities where they work happier and healthier. That is the real legacy and we have to learn the lessons of what our sporting heroes have told us.

At the time of the NUS document’s publication, it was suggested that the Scottish Government might look at the possibility of accepting students from disadvantaged backgrounds with slightly lower qualifications. Will you give a response to that suggestion?

Will the member give way?

I do not disagree with some of what Marco Biagi says, but does he accept that there has been huge and very satisfactory progress in Scottish universities on widening access, and that it is the universities themselves that have made the decisions? Perhaps we do not need legislation for that.

In the coming months, the Scottish people, as well as making the momentous decision on their constitutional future, will likely give the closest scrutiny to the Scottish Government’s political record and its current programme for government. In particular, the electorate will decide whether the correct priorities have been chosen and whether the Scottish Government has laid the foundation for a much more secure economy. Both sides in the union/independence debate can expect the highest level of public scrutiny, which is only right. It is therefore incumbent on us all to provide the facts on which the public can make up their minds about whether they want Scotland to remain part of the United Kingdom. Much of that debate is about the efficacy of policies that affect their everyday lives. After today and tomorrow, we will know much more about how the Scottish Government intends to respond to those expectations. I am sure that the debate will continue to be as robust as it has been this afternoon, which is exactly how it should be. As well as that policy debate, a much more fundamental philosophical debate is going on that is fashioned partly by the unionist parties’ and nationalists’ respective beliefs about the nature of the state and the appropriate social and economic structure for modern Scotland. As well as the internal debates in the SNP about NATO, which currency to use or the appropriate approach to energy policy, there is another debate about how far to extend the powers of the state. There are clear signs that the Scottish Government is increasingly interventionist. The most obvious example of that is in wind farm development. Despite the firm promises that the SNP made in its 2011 manifesto to devolve more power to local communities, the Scottish Government has adopted a direct interventionist approach, even if that means overriding local democracy. How many times in recent months have we seen the Scottish Government ignore the wishes of local people when it comes to proposed wind farm developments, because it is so obsessed with meeting its own energy targets?

With respect, that is a completely different issue. My point is about the demands of local communities. When local communities speak out forcibly and say that they do not want a particular wind farm, we have to take cognisance of that.

I will make a little progress. Perhaps the debate is most acute in education. Let me take two examples. First, I turn to the children and young people bill. There are very clear, laudable intentions in quite a bit of that bill, including ambitions to improve child welfare; to develop better kinship care; to create more coherence in the provision of children’s services; and, more specifically, to ensure the delivery of better services for our more vulnerable young people. It is entirely right that the Education and Culture Committee tackles the very difficult question of whether it is right to remove children from their parents if the latter are unable to demonstrate that they can cope effectively. That debate is an important one and is long overdue. How often have we heard complaints from expert witnesses at the Education and Culture Committee that, all too often, we are good at identifying the problems but cannot come up with the answers? Let me be clear that some aspects of the Scottish Government’s proposed legislation threaten to extend the powers of the state to an unacceptable level, thereby undermining family life and the responsibilities that should be exercised first and foremost by parents and families. The Conservatives have grave reservations about the proposed extension of the powers of the children’s commissioner to include reporting on a parent, a teacher or perhaps a social worker when an individual child makes a complaint. That is fraught with all kinds of difficulties and we will certainly not support any extension of the nanny state to interfere in matters that are not for Government. That bill strikes at the heart of this debate and the issue is one that this Parliament will debate over and over again. I turn to our colleges and universities, which have been much in the news of late. Those institutions are among the finest further and higher education schools in the world. They are successful because of long-standing traditions and structures—in many cases they are many centuries old—that are built upon all that is best in Scottish education: academic excellence; a level playing field of opportunity; internationalism; and institutional autonomy. Their success is their own and it is a well-proven fact that colleges and universities around the world achieve most when they are as free as possible from Government intervention. Of course, widening access is an important debate, but it is not about percentage targets or artificial numerical targets. The debate should be about a qualitative approach and ensuring that there is a level playing field. Setting artificial targets for universities is wrong. It misses the point about where the real problem lies, because that is in schools. That is something that we must target our energies on.

What evidence has emerged from the cabinet secretary’s discussions with stakeholders to suggest that the reforms that are already being made by colleges and universities themselves are in some way insufficient and require Scottish Government direction? We know from previous debates that university courts almost unanimously rejected the suggestion that their chairs should be elected. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that that is one of the recommendations in the von Prondzynski report that he will not now pursue? In yesterday’s debate on police and fire service reform, Roseanna Cunningham said that the Scottish National Party does not consider quotas for membership of governing bodies to be an acceptable way forward. Does the cabinet secretary agree with Roseanna Cunningham and therefore reject recommendation 30 in the von Prondzynski report?

The debate has already shown that there is not an MSP in the chamber or anyone who is involved in making policy on children who does not believe that good-quality family support is the most important building block in our society. Although there may be many divisions between us as we respond to the current debates about what constitute appropriate definitions of family and marriage, there is no dispute at all about the need to do more to help groups that provide crucial support when families—of whatever shape or form—find themselves in difficulty. We have cross-party agreement on that but, as was the case in the drugs debate, the next stage will be the real test. Can we lift the debate, as Nanette Milne said, away from just warm words, and on to a level that involves meaningful action, however difficult and challenging that may have to be? As with the drugs debate, we are talking about an issue that is hugely complex and pervasive, and no party can ever pretend that it has all the answers. It would be grossly naive and arrogant for anyone to assume that they had all the answers, but we can say that we must have the courage of our convictions and not just stand by and do nothing but, instead, take a lead from groups such as the Grampian Family Support Forum. As several colleagues have said, the effects of addiction can make family life lonely and emotionally draining. The families who are affected need help; most often, they need it from within their most immediate communities. That is what makes the Grampian Family Support Forum so special. The same is true of the Fife alcohol and drug partnership and, in the case of kinship care, of family group conferencing. Such groups are crucial in opening up avenues of discussion and breaking down barriers of discrimination or ignorance among some sections of society. As the Parliament knows, the forthcoming children’s services bill will be a major piece of legislation that will provide us all with an opportunity to do things differently and to tackle head on the complexities that we face. Members of the Education and Culture Committee have already faced some challenging questions as we have taken preliminary evidence from many experts who work on the front line of helping children and struggling families. That comes on the back of the hugely important debate about kinship care, on which, to be frank—as Neil Bibby said—none of us can take credit for progress, which has been slow. That is doubly alarming, given the promises that Parliament made on kinship care some years back. We have failed to make things much better, so it is essential that we start by understanding the exact nature of the problem, given the extent of the cross-party support and the political will to help. In two recent Education and Culture Committee meetings, we have been challenged on the inherent problems in defining and measuring outcomes, and we have been challenged to appreciate the real barriers that prevent better progress. Perhaps most difficult of all is that we have been told that the evidence base is patchy and inconsistent. How can we deal with a problem when we cannot put our hands on all the necessary data? That question needs the most careful attention, and groups such as the Grampian Family Support Forum can be instrumental in ensuring that families—who might well be extremely reluctant to come forward in any other forum—can first be rediscovered, and secondly be helped confidentially. We need to be clear that Parliament is setting out on a difficult and probably tortuous journey, during which it will be not just politicians who can make a difference, but the volunteers and professionals on the ground who have the first-hand experience that we have not. Debates such as this are so important because it is immensely encouraging to see that we have the necessary political will and cross-party support. I have great pleasure in supporting the motion in Nanette Milne’s name.

6. To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with the Scottish Qualifications Authority and the teaching profession regarding proposed changes to the higher English curriculum. (S4F-00770)

Last week, teachers of English in Scotland’s schools backed an Educational Institute of Scotland motion that told Mike Russell to reverse his controversial decision to insist that there is a compulsory question on Scottish texts in the English higher, describing it as “nothing to do with education”. [Interruption.] That is the view of the EIS and many English teachers across Scotland. They raised concerns that “Instead of ... enriching children’s learning, it will close it off and narrow it.” Does the First Minister agree with that comment?

The contributions to this debate, which have been fiery at times, put into sharp perspective the extent of the challenge that we all face in tackling the great scourge that is any society that is scarred by the unemployment of far too many young people. The speeches have also put into sharp perspective the difficulties of balancing greater numbers of jobs for young people with a qualitative approach that ensures that those jobs are more than just a statistic in the Scottish Government's official economic data. They should instead be a meaningful employment opportunity. As Iain Gray pointed out in his good speech, the definition of that is vitally important. The employment opportunity must also be fulfilling and be for the longer term, as came through strongly in the discussions at the Finance Committee meeting yesterday. No one is pretending that the job is easy, particularly when it is set against trends in the global economy. It demands detailed scrutiny of exactly where the problem lies, and a well-evidenced analysis of where the policy and spending focus should be. Yesterday and today, my colleagues Gavin Brown and Mary Scanlon have been asking the Scottish Government some very important questions on that front. They have asked it to be clear about the exact causes of unemployment among our young people, and about the quantitative and qualitative measurements by which it intends to judge whether their policy focus is a success. That point was made very well by John Park and Liam McArthur. The minister has rightly said that local business forums can be very helpful in the micromanagement that is required in employment policy. She was right to say that that also includes schools, colleges and universities. That will succeed only if there is a transparent approach and an accepted rationale for where spending is greater and likely to have its best effect. My colleagues and other members are keen to tease out of the minister a little more about the criteria that she is using to award six local authorities additional resources. That comes back to Jenny Marra’s point. Nobody is disputing the reason for doing that, but they want to know the criteria by which the awards are being made possible, and how we will assess the success of the additional resources. The point that was made by several Labour members is crucial: training programmes have to be tailored to suit the skills of young people, rather than the young people being developed to suit the training programmes. I do not accept the high percentages that are sometimes bandied about in some quarters, which say that the vast majority of our young people are unemployable. I do accept—not least because it is the very consistent and powerful contention from virtually every part of the highly respected business community in Scotland—that far too many young people do not have the right skills and, sadly, are not sufficiently well schooled in the basics of literacy and numeracy, or sufficiently aware of the professional approach that is required in the work place. Yesterday, we saw another report on our schools which—yet again—highlighted the need for more action in that area, particularly in our deprived communities. Once again, I stress the importance that the Scottish Conservatives attach to dealing with the issue at the youngest possible age. It is all very well for Governments to be talking about colleges and universities widening access—which is entirely right—and setting a certain number of places aside for students from disadvantaged communities, but—to be quite frank—that is not where the focus should be. That point is too late in the day for many young people, which is why we need to tackle that issue earlier, particularly in primary school. Provided that employers buy into its philosophy and new exam structure, the curriculum for excellence should be a real opportunity to make the school experience much more meaningful to each individual, and to combine that with much greater rigour when it comes to the basic skills. That, combined with taking on board what Donaldson, Roe and Christie all said to us, should allow us to make much better progress when it comes to their developing the right skills. It is by those means that we can hope to change attitudes to technical and vocational training, and to remove the still-persistent view that a non-university education is somehow second class. In his excellent speech in this chamber last week, Sir Tom Hunter had some extremely important things to say to us, as some members have mentioned. We need more imagination and creativity about how we can instil the entrepreneurial spirit in more of our young people. There are many other entrepreneurs who want to see the Scottish Government make much greater efforts to encourage private sector capital into the process. That needs much greater attention if there is to be a fully coherent approach in the manner that the minister has said she wants. That can only happen if we remove the barriers that prevent some employers from taking on new apprentices. We can argue a lot about the numbers and about what constitutes an apprenticeship and what does not. I am sure that that has some importance, but so does the qualitative aspect of what we are doing and that, in turn, demands a much more robust, transparent and evidence-based policy. I support the amendment in the name of Mary Scanlon.

I congratulate John Park on the motion. I am delighted that Ardroy outdoor education centre has reopened and I add my congratulations to all those who fought extraordinarily hard to ensure that that was the end result, particularly as they had to fight against some very difficult financial circumstances. John Park made clear the valuable role that Ardroy has played over a long period of time in helping young people in Fife to develop their skills, confidence and environmental awareness. He also made plain the strength of positive feeling towards the centre among many who have experienced its programmes. The fact that the centre is already fully booked until well into next year, whichever of the 17 different outdoor activities is being pursued, speaks volumes about the need for Ardroy. It would be unacceptable for so many Fife primary school children to lose the opportunity of attending this wonderful facility. I have no doubt at all, especially during the implementation of the curriculum for excellence, that the wider educational experience that such centres can bring will be an increasingly important part of any young person’s school career. John Park is absolutely right to say that it is appropriate that this debate comes just after the important debate that we had this afternoon about the skills that are required. The benefits of outdoor education are well known. It enhances the self-esteem, the self-discipline and the confidence of the young person and it gives children the teamwork skills that are essential for the workplace and in later life. It gives them a healthier and more active outlook on life, makes them more aware of a different environment, in some cases, and it gives them—especially at the end of their primary school career—a new independence and self-reliance that helps them to mature into young adults. As David Torrance said, it can also help to lay the foundations for the Duke of Edinburgh’s award or the John Muir award, which is immensely valuable. However, I would argue strongly that it is the residential aspect of the experiences that can be the most powerful, especially if they can be enjoyed over a week or two weeks and in locations that are far removed from the young person’s home environment. Those are the best learning situations. There are other lessons to be learned from the Ardroy experience—lessons that were part of an interesting discussion that took place at this week’s Education and Culture Committee when, in the presence of some expert witnesses, we debated how best to ensure that there was much better strategic planning of local government and a much better understanding of how the public, voluntary and private sectors could work more effectively together to lay on diverse qualitative educational experiences for our young people. It is not exaggerating things too much to say that there was considerable concern among some of the witnesses that, although we have some marvellous facilities on offer in Scotland, we do not always get the strategic planning right. There are some serious issues to do with how we could try to improve that co-operation in partnership between the different sectors. It was pointed out in a written submission to the committee from Scottish Outdoor Education Centres that unless there is a different, broader approach to those issues, the future of some outdoor education centres, including Ardroy, could be under threat. SOEC pointed out the need to involve more stakeholders in the early strategic decision making. Sometimes our approach to the need for those facilities is a bit short term, and there can be a lack of transparency about how local authorities and the private and voluntary sectors could come together. It is excellent news that Ardroy is back in business—I am delighted that John Park has highlighted that—but there are other messages, too, and a wider perspective that we need to address.

There was an article in the Sunday newspapers last weekend that ventured the opinion that, once people reach the age of 40, their spirit of adventure declines. The article went on to say: “by the time people are out of their 40s altogether they will opt for a more sedate lifestyle more of which will be based indoors rather than outdoors”. It also said that, once people are over 50, they become very risk averse. I will leave members to ponder which description best fits me but, in recent months, it has been an enormous privilege for me to undertake some work with the Tayside mountain rescue team and to see at first hand the extraordinary commitment that it makes—unpaid and often in very challenging circumstances—when it provides support to members of the public who find themselves in difficulties on the hills or at sea. Our 27 mountain rescue teams, which are assisted by three police forces and two Royal Air Force teams, are staffed by some of the finest professionals in Scotland: more than 1,000 in all. Last year, 668 persons were assisted by our teams, and a total of 24,000 hours was required in deployment, 24/7 on all 365 days. The teams give selflessly of their time to assist others, frequently on difficult mountain terrain or in dangerous waters, in treacherous weather conditions and often at night. They do so at a time when the relatively small amount of public money that they receive is under considerable pressure, and when charitable giving is constrained by the effects of the recession. When one considers that it costs a minimum of £6,000 to scramble a helicopter these days and that the annual grant to mountain rescue teams is £339,000, that pressure is put into perspective. Fundraising is not easy. The mountain rescue service would be the first to admit that it is viewed as very specialist, in the sense that it is relied on by only a very small number of people. It is not easy for it to compete for public money with organisations such as cancer charities, Barnardo’s or the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, which obviously have a much wider public appeal. It is true that there are some additional funds that can be provided to assist with extra staff, additional equipment and the mountain weather forecast website—whose accuracy is usually first class—but we should be in no doubt about the pressure under which mountain rescue teams find themselves when it comes to financing their activities. The issue also needs to be seen in the context of the fast pace of technological change. For example, the newest global positioning system and avalanche detection monitors that are now commonly used in the Alpine countries, which I had the privilege of watching in operation, are extremely hi-tech and expensive. I was told that, in some cases, costs have risen by up to 40 per cent in the past few years, so there is concern about how to balance safety needs with the finance that is available. The teams are under pressure for a variety of other reasons. First, a growing number of people come to Scotland to enjoy our magnificent mountains and rugged scenery. Although that is extremely good news for us and is greatly to be welcomed from a tourism perspective, it brings its challenges. The number of older walkers and climbers is growing, and statistics indicate that an increasing number come from abroad and outwith Scotland, which makes it difficult to ensure that the public—in the widest sense—are fully educated about the potential dangers. We often see tourists who are excited by the thought of scaling Ben Nevis or Cairngorm heading out with inadequate clothing and kit. It is easy to understand why if they come from countries where a reliable summer climate means that there is little danger in the hills. That is not so in Scotland, especially this year, when the extraordinary change in weather patterns that we experienced in the spring meant that we jumped from near Mediterranean temperatures to Arctic ones in the space of 48 hours, which had significant implications for climbers and the equipment that they required. Even in mid-May this year, some of our hills—even in places such as Glen Affric and Glen Cannich—were unusually thick with snow and became places for crampons and ice axes rather than the ordinary walking kit that we would normally expect to use. Public awareness is a major concern for Scotland’s mountain rescue teams. The issue is how best to educate a largely ill-informed public and how to ensure that our schoolchildren grow up with some understanding of the responsibility that is required if they choose to venture on to the hills. On 10 December 2010, there was the high-profile case in the media of some climbers who ill-advisedly set out in Glen Doll against very strong advice from weather forecasters and the Met Office, only to cause 42 volunteers, a helicopter and a full medical team to be involved in their rescue. They appeared to have little appreciation of just what was required in bringing them back to safety. Raising awareness costs money and requires a considerable amount of time on the part of the experts, who are already required to undertake intensive training. It is an issue that concerns them greatly, and one that requires some imaginative thinking if we are to make our hills a safer place. There are controversial debates about how much signage can be displayed without spoiling our countryside and whether additional personal insurance should be considered. I understand from some members of the mountain rescue teams who have recently been on training exercises in Austria that we have many lessons to learn from some of the Alpine countries on better co-ordination of the emergency services. Such co-ordination saves valuable time on a call-out and can save lives. It is on that theme that I would like to finish, given the impending public sector reform changes. New structures for police and fire services will have considerable implications for mountain rescue teams. There is already close co-operation between the Mountain Rescue Committee of Scotland and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, but the officers of both are wary of some of the implications of the new structures and what they will mean for the best delivery of local services.

Indeed there is. I thank the member for that intervention. My point is that mountain rescue teams are reporting that there is better co-ordination in some other countries. At a time of public sector reform, we must bear that in mind. Given the lessons that have been learned, we need careful strategic planning that involves all our emergency services, and I know that the Scottish Government is working hard on that. There is a genuine desire to maintain and enhance the voluntary nature of mountain rescue teams, and that needs to be thought through in the context of public sector reform and the financial savings that are required. In two weeks, after what has been a 30-year adventure for me, I hope to climb my final Munro. In that time, I have thankfully not been involved in any incidents, although it can happen to any climber, however experienced and well equipped they are. I have, however, witnessed three mountain rescues, one of which was particularly dangerous because it was on the Cuillin ridge when a climber had fallen a considerable distance into the very inhospitable gully of Coire a’ Ghrunda. The skill of the mountain rescue team, the helicopter pilot and the medics was second to none, and I am quite sure that that was the reason why a potential fatality was avoided. These men and women, who give of their time so selflessly, are one of Scotland’s greatest assets. We must do everything that we can to support them.

In recent weeks politicians, including many in this Parliament, have been on the receiving end of some very blunt advice from employers in Scotland, much of it relating to the employability—or, sadly, otherwise—of some of our graduates and young apprentices. Some of that advice, which in many respects is similar to the advice that Willy Roe provided when he produced his report a year ago, has not made for comfortable reading. Too many youngsters are being castigated for a poor grasp of basic numeracy and literacy, for a lack of effective communication skills, for a failure to recognise the need for teamwork, for not having appropriate expectations in the workplace and, sadly, for not showing too much commitment. There has also been criticism when it comes to science, technology, engineering and mathematics—the STEM subjects—and foreign language skills, particularly from companies that are heavily involved in the production of major Scottish exports. As the minister has said, the statistics for language teaching also give slight cause for concern. There has been a significant decline in the number of young people in the United Kingdom studying some of the key modern languages, and that has been accompanied in Scotland by similar declines in the numbers studying for some Scottish Qualifications Authority higher exam subjects, particularly German and French. The education and employers task force concluded that the UK has the worst language skills of the 27 European Union countries. There has been concern in some quarters about teacher training places in foreign languages. There is obviously a very sharp concern about the decline in the number of foreign language assistants and, in particular, the number of local authorities who are now taking them on. Although it would be easy to exaggerate the extent of the problem, far too many people—including many key employers—are speaking about it for us to ignore the need for radical improvement and for refocusing on the correct priorities. I compliment the Scottish Government on its motion, but we must be thoroughly realistic—I am in some agreement with the Labour Party in this respect—about tackling the malaise that currently makes us bottom of the class. Apart from pursuing the laudable aims that are contained in the report, we must listen carefully to what language teachers are saying. First, they are saying that when schools choose to start languages in primary school, it is essential that they ensure that the teachers have adequate subject knowledge and are fluent speakers themselves. Obviously, there must be a passion and enthusiasm not only for teaching the language but for its culture. Secondly, they make the important point that there must be progression in the learning. It must not just be a varied selection of bits and pieces, or what many schools describe as taster lessons; there must be a methodical progression if we are to ensure that the subject can be properly developed in secondary school, otherwise I think that we lose some pupils and we certainly lose some teachers who might otherwise aspire to go on and develop other languages. They also make the very strong point that we cannot expect there to be sufficient rigour in language teaching unless the pupils have a proficiency in English. Many language teachers will say that they find life increasingly difficult because too many of their pupils come to them without a good grasp of basic grammar in English and therefore, naturally, have little chance of picking up a second language, never mind a third.

Yes. I do not deny that for a minute. However, the point that the language teachers are making is that it enhances pupils’ ability to learn the structures of another language if they have the competence in English in the first place. We must be very careful about that, because it is a point that they all make. It is an important issue. As Neil Findlay pointed out, there has been a very substantial decline in the number of foreign language assistants. I do not think that we can sit back and simply accept that. I understand that there are huge financial pressures on local authorities and that it is very difficult for them to ensure that they can provide employment for those people, but let me suggest two things that we might consider doing. First, there is a huge wealth of talent among our retired teachers of languages in schools. I do not believe that we cannot use their expertise and services by asking them to help in classrooms as assistants, especially when many of them are willing to do that. We should also at least pursue the opportunity presented by the fact that some people in business—particularly those who are key in the export industries—might be prepared to put a little money into helping to provide language assistants in our classrooms. The Government would do well to look at that. The curriculum must have a firm and renewed focus, so that sufficient time is made available for teaching languages. We should be under no illusion about the logistics involved in that. How often have we heard teachers complain that their subject has been diluted in recent years because they have had to share a timetable space or to miss out on pupil contact time in specific year groups—for example, by providing one social science in secondary 1 and another social science in S2? As has been mentioned, we must not forget that coming into the equation is the Scottish Government’s policy on Scottish studies, for example, for which additional space must be found. There are plenty of practical things to think about. We must ensure that enough curriculum space is available and that course content has sufficient rigour. A not unrelated issue is the role that languages can play in university entrance and ensuring that appropriate credit is given to languages in the group of qualifications with which a student seeks a place at university. Some of the decline in the number of pupils who sit SQA exams in languages began at the same time as fewer universities required pupils to have an additional language in their S4 and S5 exam diet. When we are debating the merits of a baccalaureate system, there is an opportunity to look at how that might play out in relation to university entrance. I have no difficulty with the broad aims of the Scottish Government’s proposals. Addressing the languages problem is long overdue, but the policy needs to be carefully thought through so that we do not just pay lip service to a worthy ambition. There must be consistency, a methodical and rigorous approach and the necessary practical adjustments to the timetable to make the aim happen. I have pleasure in moving amendment S4M-03004.2, to insert at end: “, but recognises that this ambitious programme cannot be achieved without renewed focus on the training of qualified foreign language teachers and without substantially increasing the number of foreign language assistants in Scotland’s schools.”

This is a timely debate and it has included thought-provoking and informed contributions from many members. As various speakers have noted, learning a language is not only a useful discipline in itself but can open many other doors to the history, geography and literature of the country whose language is being studied. It can also help with an understanding of the true meaning of internationalism and of how we can widen our horizons in what is an increasingly global community. That global community is changing fast, all the time. It is becoming increasingly competitive, especially with the emergence of new economic powers, and it is vital that we respond to those changes and do not automatically assume that English is the main language of international trade. Those employers who tell us that there must be more focus on foreign language skills when it comes to marketing Scottish products also tell us that we must not underestimate in any way the powerful effect of fluency in a language, especially with regard to business lobbying, networking, getting a job—as in the case of Claudia Beamish’s daughter—and earning a higher salary. We ignore any of those observations at our peril. Liam McArthur and Margaret McCulloch said that many economists have calculated that the problem of insufficient language skills is a barrier to trade. In fact, they have defined it as a tax that costs the Scottish economy up to as much as £591 million. The evidence for that was made clear in the CBI’s April 2011 report and can be seen in the fact that, sadly, some major European companies are bypassing Scotland when it comes to major contracts. There must be a happy blend between meeting Scotland’s needs in a global economy and learning a language because of its intrinsic value. That is perhaps the biggest challenge that we face, because there are tensions in that regard—certainly for SQA, which rightly says that its qualifications provision will depend on demand. Although there may be perfectly legitimate and scholarly reasons for learning Latin, Greek, Hebrew or any of the other languages that do not necessarily feature on the school curriculum these days, there are powerful economic reasons for learning Mandarin, Spanish or Russian—the growing languages. Hanzala Malik and Sandra White raised extremely important issues in that regard. They highlighted concerns—in relation to the SQA and the Scottish funding council respectively—about the exact criteria that are to be used in offering the relevant qualifications; what happens when schools, colleges and universities decide which courses they will offer their students; and which examinations students may be able to take. As I pointed out at the start of the debate, decisions on those may determine how we ensure progression from learning in the early years of primary school right through to the learning that we expect students to undertake in the tertiary sector. I stress again the importance of ensuring that the development of the 1+2 policy and the Barcelona agreement principles, which are mentioned in the Scottish Government’s motion, is underpinned by giving pupils as firm a grasp as possible of their own language in the first instance. I know that debate very well, and I have spoken to many language teachers about it. We must have a proper balance between rigour and the old-fashioned basis of ensuring that children have a grasp of grammar, which is important, and making learning much more relevant than it perhaps was during the schooldays of many members. When I discuss with modern language teachers what we need to take language teaching forward, they raise that issue almost without fail. I will dwell for a moment on foreign language assistants, because they are worth their weight in gold, especially if they are able to work across the transition years. As several members have said, the current scarcity of foreign language assistants, particularly in the state sector, is nothing short of a disgrace and the drop is far in excess of that south of the border. Kezia Dugdale made an important point about how we address the resource situation. I return to the argument that I made in my opening remarks, which is that rather than focusing simply on resources being provided by local authorities, which, as we all know, have great difficulties in providing such resources just now, we must be imaginative about drawing on other resources. That could involve seeking European funding or encouraging the private sector to make at least some provision to help with classroom assistants. We must address the issue. One of the most interesting recommendations in the working group’s report highlights the need to do much more about the transition between primary and secondary school. That is very important, not just in language teaching but in other areas of education. I am interested in drilling down further in that regard, because we need some detail—particularly in the context of curriculum for excellence—on exactly what can be done in those crucial years. Careful planning is required, and there is an issue with finding space in the curriculum—we cannot get away from that. We have heard far too often about the difficulty of allocating time for many subjects such as physical education, history and music. There has been a great deal of publicity about that in recent months and the Government must face up to the challenge of dealing with it—it is a challenge, and I do not think that any of us are in a position to solve it. There is a dilemma in the fact that the curriculum for excellence is based on much greater flexibility, and we must ensure that no Government, of whatever political colour, decides in too much detail exactly what students are learning. I will finish by stressing two important points that Linda Fabiani and Malcolm Chisholm raised: the need for a long-term strategy to get away from the piecemeal approach that has been taken in the past, and the importance of ensuring that any policy that we develop is based firmly on evidence. The debate has been important and enjoyable, and I am happy to support many of the themes that have been developed.

I entirely acknowledge that they form only one part of the Government’s policy. However, I devised my amendment after speaking to many modern language teachers who believe that more foreign language assistants and teachers gaining a higher level of qualification are essential if we are to ensure that the Government’s ambitious policy works.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will undertake an audit of rural policing resources and police stations prior to the establishment of a single police force. (S4O-01029)

The cabinet secretary will acknowledge that in recent years a considerable number of key stations have closed down; in some cases, they have been sold. What assurances can he give that the formation of a single police force will not mean a further reduction in the essential local policing that rural areas require?

I am grateful to Liam McArthur for lodging his amendments. We believe that the overriding need is to enshrine in the provisions of the bill and the subsequent legislation the facility to increase the efficiency and accountability of the National Library and, given the institution’s structure, to ensure that there is a correct balance between the powers of ministers and those of the board. In her evidence to the Education and Culture Committee on 24 April, the cabinet secretary acknowledged that the two key principles were balance and accountability. However, she went on to say that it was not a debate about “ministerial direction in general”. It might not be in one respect, if we look at the technicalities of section 2(2)(d) and 2(3)(c), but I do not think that they can be separated from the wider issue of ministerial responsibility. Some members of the committee were exercised about the fact that the cabinet secretary appeared to be hesitant when she was asked to identify the circumstances in which it might be appropriate for such a power to be used and how she intended to put in place safeguards to protect the independence of professional staff and the board when it came to the making of key decisions by the National Library. That vagueness, combined with the very strong concerns that many stakeholders voiced about the extent of ministerial powers, became the subject of the central debate in the committee, and rightly so. I suggest that the cabinet secretary was much more comfortable about defining the circumstances in which she or any of her successors would not interfere than she was about defining those in which ministers might interfere. At a time when technology is changing particularly quickly, that served only to accentuate the concerns. Those concerns remain, which is why we are happy to support Liam McArthur’s amendments 4 and 5.

I add my thanks to those of Neil Findlay to Stewart Maxwell and the clerks. Stewart Maxwell has convened the committee with his normal sense of humour, and with good stewardship through a quiet authority, which is valued. The Conservatives are of the opinion that the legislation needs to be modernised so that we can maintain and enhance the National Library of Scotland. The National Library is a remarkable national asset. Like others in the chamber, I pay tribute to everyone who is involved in its work, and to the large numbers of the public who are increasingly enthusiastic supporters. I mentioned during the stage 1 debate the move away from the National Library being what some people call the library of last resort that is used only when people have searched unsuccessfully for sources elsewhere. That is no longer an applicable definition. That is good news, but the changes clearly bring different challenges and that is why the bill is necessary. The Scottish Government has set out its proposals for change. We fully support it in its recognition that, in a fast-changing world of technology, we must put in place structures that will help to create not only more efficient administration, but a better system of access to the National Library’s archive, and better coherency and collaboration with the other national archives. It is simply not an option to allow things to remain as they are, and that was made clear to the committee throughout the process by the cabinet secretary and by the witnesses. Throughout the committee’s evidence taking, I was continually struck by the professionalism, the dedication and the expertise of all those involved, and by the careful thought given to the future working of the institution and its role in modern Scotland. That expertise is, in many cases, unique: it brings with it degrees of specialisms that are not seen elsewhere. It is on that point that we had some initial concerns about the original stance of the Scottish Government, and it is the reason why we believe that the size of the National Library’s board should reflect those who can represent the wider range of the specialist knowledge. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for listening carefully to the views expressed at both stage 1 and stage 2, many of which were of genuine concern among the key stakeholders and MSPs about the minimum size of the board. The original suggestion from the Scottish Government that the concerns could be addressed by co-options to the board, when and where appropriate, did not address the more substantial concerns about the need for permanent access to a wide range of expertise. Similarly, to argue that the Scottish Government is, in general, “not in favour of large boards” is not really a satisfactory way of persuading people that the appropriate size of a board is directly linked to the best advantage of the institution and the public that it serves. A second major concern—and one that we have debated this afternoon—is the intended extent of ministerial direction. The policy memorandum lacks detail and clarity about the precise nature of the intended ministerial powers, which could conflict with other areas of the NLS’s management in which ministers have no power. Some guarantees have been given about the promotion of greater collaboration and diversity, but my Conservative colleagues and I remain unpersuaded that the provisions in the bill are not simply about increasing ministerial power for the sake of having a little more control, but at the expense of greater efficiency in the institution. I listened carefully to what the cabinet secretary said about that. I accept her argument in relation to some technical issues, but there is an important general principle to be considered. As I mentioned earlier, the difficulty for the committee was that the Scottish Government chose to reassure us by stipulating situations in which the cabinet secretary or her successors would not interfere. This afternoon, she again defined the issue by stating what she could not or would not do. I accept that, but there is still an important point about the powers that she could have as cabinet secretary. That approach sometimes took us into the realm of the theoretical rather than the practical, which made things less clear when it came to justifying the enhancement of public benefit. Nobody doubts that there is a sensitive balance to be struck when it comes to the legitimate concerns about how public money is spent and the professional judgment of the trustees and the professional judgment and expertise of the librarians—some of whom are in the chamber this afternoon. This bill brings opportunities for the delivery of a better service, for wider access to the splendid archive that is the National Library of Scotland, and for the exciting developments that the cabinet secretary outlined. On that basis, the Conservatives are happy to support the bill.

The debate has been largely consensual, out of a need to ensure that we maintain and enhance one of Scotland’s great national treasures for exactly the reasons that Fiona McLeod put on record. I thank all the witnesses at committee and all those who have sent us exceptionally helpful briefing papers for their considered opinions and expert advice, without which—as the cabinet secretary acknowledged—many of us would have been ill-prepared to work through the bill. The cabinet secretary outlined a great number of exciting developments that are taking place, such as carbon and digital advances and the work involving the John Murray archive. It is an extremely exciting time for the National Library, which means so much in terms of Scotland’s place in world heritage. I thank the cabinet secretary for her willingness to listen to concerns. Although we will undoubtedly remain divided on one important element in the bill—the extent of the ministerial powers—I acknowledge the work that she put in, which involved some complex technicalities. Although those technicalities may not capture the headlines, they are nonetheless an important part of our having confidence in the legislation. It was good to see the cabinet secretary’s willingness to move on the minimum size of the board and on ensuring that there will be as smooth a transition as possible when the current board ends its office to be replaced by the new one. That was helpful, and I am sure that it was appreciated by the stakeholders who had similar concerns at the initial stages. Like all other members in the chamber, the Conservatives recognise the need to make changes to the National Library so that it can maintain its first-class reputation, its considerable professional expertise and its ability to be flexible and adaptable in the future, when technological change will bring a great many new challenges—just as it will to many other institutions with which the NLS will collaborate. That is precisely the reason why we wanted—and would still welcome—more clarity on the extent of ministerial direction. My colleague Annabel Goldie raised an important point. Aside from the two technical points—I accept what Fiona McLeod said about those—there is a fundamental principle at stake. If members read some of the statements in the bill, it is clear that there are potentially wider powers, and I hope that the cabinet secretary will address that in summing up. Although we have, through the democratic process, not won that argument today, I hope that ministers will be mindful of the fact that there was—and remains—genuine and considerable concern among the Opposition parties, and that ministers will be held to account as those powers come into operation in the years ahead. I wish the National Library well in the years ahead, and once again pay tribute to the outstanding professionalism of its staff. We will support the National Library of Scotland Bill at decision time.

14. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to increase economic activity in Perth. (S4O-00962)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, in light of Perth’s regained city status—about which we are all delighted—there is an even stronger case for relocating some civil service jobs to Perth and Kinross, which will provide additional economic incentives for that area?

I was a bit disappointed with the minister this morning when he said that he was surprised that Mr Carlaw had not talked about policy. I am not quite sure what speech the minister was listening to, because Mr Carlaw spelled out about six or seven things that the Conservative Party would do. However, let me try a little bit on education. “When it comes to our schools, the one-size-fits-all approach does not work and, as a result, there is some need to rethink the prevailing orthodoxy and ensure there is greater diversity in the school system.” Those are not my words but those of one Michael Russell, author of “Grasping the Thistle”, which was published in 2006. Then, in November 2010, the same Michael Russell, who was by then an exalted cabinet secretary, told Parliament: “There is a strong case for talking about school autonomy and for relating the curriculum for excellence to the autonomy of teachers.”—[Official Report, 11 November 2010; c 30345.] In October 2011, just after David Cameron published his report into school management, Michael Russell acknowledged that “many schools across Scotland ... have benefited from having far greater control of their own management.” He went on to say that he wanted to work with schools and parents and local communities so that they could take advantage of opportunities for a greater say over their affairs. For once, I cannot fault the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning’s pronouncements. However, I suggest that the current evidence makes it very hard for any politician to work against those sentiments—indeed, I noticed in The Scotsman yesterday Des McNulty writing on a similar theme—so let us look at the reasons why the wind of change is in the air and then measure that against the record of the SNP Government. First, the curriculum for excellence, the principles of which have secured cross-party agreement, is based on the fact that children perform very much better when their learning is tailored to their individual needs and when that learning, as well as embodying the necessary traditional knowledge, is made specifically relevant to the circumstances of their own school and local community. The whole philosophy around the curriculum for excellence is one of seeking a rich educational experience by applying the basic core material to the diverse needs of different pupils and different schools. It tries to draw back from overprescriptive learning, excessive testing and overdependence on educational theory. That is exactly why the recent fuss over how ready schools are to undertake the new exams should never have happened. It was perfectly understandable that schools, which have different structures and different needs, would be ready at different times, so I am still at a loss to see why the cabinet secretary expected otherwise. Instead of listening to his own advice from 2006, he got himself locked into a mindset that the state knew better than schools and parents. What the curriculum for excellence seeks to do is to swap the acceptance of mediocrity in too many schools for an aspiration for excellence.

I would ask the member to have a look at Scottish schools’ attainment levels. What is even more important is that there is an acceptance across the political spectrum and within the education establishment that we are not aspiring to enough excellence. That is one reason why all parties, including the SNP, have signed up to the curriculum for excellence. We have had an acceptance of mediocrity and our results show it. What is interesting in all of this is that Michael Russell is in difficulty about where we go from here. I know that he does not like being told by a Tory about successes south of the border when it comes to changing the focus of school management, so if he will not take it from David Cameron, the Prime Minister, let us hope that he will take it from David Cameron, his namesake in Scotland, whom Michael Russell charged with looking at school reform. David Cameron looked around the world for examples of school successes—perhaps this might help Mr Hepburn—and drew on the European Commission study of 2007 that pointed to school successes in Belgium, the Netherlands and Latvia as a result of increased teacher autonomy; he highlighted the high value attached to the teaching profession in Sweden and Finland because of the extent of teacher autonomy; he produced evidence from Latin America, where no fewer than seven countries demonstrated that the greatest success was found where there was the greatest degree of school management; and he said that there were lessons to be learned from south of the border, where the greatest desire for our free schools has been in the most deprived areas. Indeed, we know that as of February this year 50 per cent of new free schools have come from the 30 per cent most deprived areas—that tells us something. Then there are the comments from the Scottish rural schools network that persistently demonstrate how creeping centralisation is damaging education in some of Scotland’s most rural areas. Sandy Longmuir and his colleagues have made plain their grave concerns about what they say is the “mechanistic vision” of some local authorities and central Government that pays little regard to the context of local communities. The same principles were highlighted by David Berry—an SNP councillor, no less—in East Lothian when he considered the model of trust schools. At the weekend, we learned about the restrictions on placing requests in Edinburgh—the fact that a record number of parents are being refused places for their children at their first-choice primary school. Local authorities throughout Scotland are struggling to meet local demand, which suggests that something radical must be done to change the system. It interests me that there is not only a growing demand from parents and local communities but a desire for change among the educational establishment. I contend that there is compelling educational, social, philosophical, economic and, now, political evidence that it is time to introduce devolution and support our local communities.

If the member does not agree with me, what does he think about Sandy Longmuir’s analysis—which I think relates to Argyll and Bute Council—that “local authorities are attempting to impose a mechanistic vision of education”— just as the Scottish Government is doing— “where all children—regardless of the context of the communities in which they live—will receive exactly the same sort of education”? That is wrong.

What opportunities are there for schools in the regions to participate in the discussions?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to fund road safety improvements on the A85. (S4O-00900)

The minister will be aware that the A85 is defined as one of Scotland’s most dangerous roads and that the report that was published on 28 February this year by the Road Safety Markings Association rated it as one of the worst roads for visible markings. It argued that poor road markings are obviously a contributing factor to accidents. What emergency repairs will take place to repaint the markings on the A85? Will the minister agree to carry out an urgent review of road markings on Scotland’s trunk roads?

When I was doing my teacher training, which was not exactly yesterday, there was a section about skills to use in the classroom, which included a unit about how to use repetition. We were told that repetition could be both a secret weapon and the cause of our downfall. It could be a secret weapon if we used it effectively in stressing the most important points in our argument, but it could be our downfall if we were merely to repeat the obvious and lose some of the essential facts. That turns out to be true also in politics this morning, notwithstanding the fact that we are all fully agreed about the importance of the topic. We had a good debate the last time that we debated the subject, although there were—as ever—political differences. If we have to repeat ourselves a little just seven days later, perhaps that will focus our minds more carefully on the key themes and the facts. We are all agreed that early intervention is the crucial component in determining the future health, social wellbeing and educational achievement of any child. Last week, several members pointed to various aspects of the wealth of evidence that supports that view. I reread the Official Report from last week and, although I agree with some of Johann Lamont’s comments, I note that the main themes in that debate were the quantity of the hours on offer, the quality of provision within those hours, the flexibility to allow parents to take up their entitlements and, crucially, the need to ensure that childcare policies articulate with our other social and economic policies. The motion and the amendment both reflect that we probably need to take slightly different approaches to the quantitative and qualitative aspects of that care. I do not see any difficulties in that. They are not mutually exclusive, and the advice that we have been given—both by SPICe and by some of the legal team—is that they can work effectively alongside each other. However, I hope that we can probe the SNP a little further on exactly what provisions it foresees in the children’s services bill on flexibility in how parents can take up their entitlements and on the use of qualified care staff, which obviously has implications for contracts and so on. Having that information before the division bell rings this evening would be helpful. It is clear that extending the total number of hours matters not just because it is one way of ensuring that we provide more opportunities for our children but because it will allow us to catch up with and—should the Scottish Government succeed in keeping its manifesto commitment—overtake the progress that has been made south of the border. That is particularly important for parents to whom no partner or relative is immediately available to assist in raising their children. The Liberals, who are absent today, were right last week to highlight the regional variations that we face in Scotland in the supply and the cost of childcare. We all agree that that is unacceptable. The solution to the childcare issue will necessarily involve an effective combination of the educational experience that is on offer to the child and the convenience to the parent and the family. That challenge, which—let us be honest—is not easy, should focus our minds. If there is one driving force, it is the need to ensure that the hours that are on offer are provided by qualified professionals and that, in adjusting the hours and the flexibility within them, we are mindful of the contractual arrangements for care staff and, for children from the age of three, the demands of the curriculum for excellence. Balancing the educational and practical needs is not easy. That is why we need to consider what is and is not helpful in legislative and non-legislative processes. I think that the desire is felt across the chamber to focus on the most disadvantaged children who do not get what they are entitled to, which can put untold pressures on the budgets of the poorest families in our society. That is why it is important that we provide the extra choice dimension, which we debated at length last week, so that we can support those who stand to benefit most and who are most responsive to the changing focus of Government policy, by which I mean policy in Scotland and south of the border. I mentioned last week that we should look at ideas from other countries and down south, where greater flexibility is available—not just in how we charge for care—to try to make the situation that little bit better. The debate is important and I will be interested in listening to more comments from the Scottish Government on how we will get such flexibility.

The debate has been quite constructive, not least because it has flagged up one of the dilemmas with this particular childcare policy. The fact is that we are dealing with two very separate issues, the first of which is the number of hours on offer. In that respect, I think that we can all come up with slightly different answers to the question whether that requires primary legislation in all its guises. The second issue is flexibility in the way parents who will have this entitlement use the hours. We must be very careful that we do not create a muddle here. If I read the legal team’s advice correctly, both the motion and the amendment contain factually correct points, and it will all come down to semantics and definitions about what exactly we are driving through. For that reason, I think that Claire Baker and Dennis Robertson made valid points about the basic principles underpinning what all of us on all sides of the chamber are trying to do. These issues come down to three things. First, we are absolutely determined that the best possible childcare be on offer in all parts of Scotland and that it be provided by qualified carers and nursery teachers. That is essential and, indeed, it is what parents want. I know that many of the people who have lobbied us on the issue are concerned about that and at the back of all this lie various debates on certain contractual issues. Secondly, as Claire Baker said, there are issues to do with the mix between the private and the public sectors. The fact that both sectors are valuable providers of care, even though they come from slightly different perspectives, adds to the choice that is available. We should not forget that that mix is essential, particularly in an age in which we want greater choice and flexibility. We need to make it possible for that mix to work as well as possible, and to ensure that private providers do not feel under pressure because of certain diktats from local authorities. Thirdly, we should never forget that the policy is targeted at the most disadvantaged children. They, above all, are the priority, because it is they—and their parents—who need the greatest support. It was in that context that the minister referred to Bronwen Cohen’s article in The Scotsman last week, in which she threw up the challenge that we all face in striving for better articulation between care services and education. As several members have pointed out, the issue is extremely complex. Cross-party support will be required if we are to ensure that we can work through the complexities, just as we have done on other social matters that we have debated in the chamber. That is important. Johann Lamont and Jamie Hepburn rightly flagged up the fact that part of the argument is about how well the welfare system that Westminster oversees works. As I said in last week’s debate, I am very conscious of some of the stresses and strains on that system and the arguments about whether the focus has been on the right places. I hope that the fact that some of the child benefit changes that were announced yesterday were not quite as radical as those that were originally planned is an example of that message having got home. As Jamie Hepburn said, it is essential that we all pull together to ensure that we do what is right and proper for the educational, emotional, intellectual and social needs of our children. We look forward to hearing much more from the Scottish Government about the timing and the content of the legislative process that it intends to pursue. Thereafter, I hope that we can move further forward.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with police forces regarding the development and upgrade of emergency service communication equipment. (S4O-00840)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary is aware of the outstanding work by our mountain rescue teams and particularly of the generous support that they receive from Scotland’s police and other emergency services for such communication equipment. Given the pressure that is placed on what are largely voluntary funds, will the cabinet secretary give a guarantee that mountain rescue service equipment will be very much part of discussions about the formation of the new single police force when they take place?

Thank you, Deputy Presiding Officer.

I apologise, Presiding Officer. I thank the Liberals for bringing the debate to Parliament. Nobody in any political party in Parliament doubts how important the subject is. The evidence is overwhelming about early intervention of whatever sort for the health and social wellbeing and the educational achievement of any child. It is important that we debate the matter and take it extremely seriously. The Liberal motion rightly points to regional variations in supply and costs of childcare. We agree that that is a very difficult situation that needs to be addressed. Childcare costs in Scotland are not only among the highest in the United Kingdom, but are the most variable. The recent Daycare Trust and Children in Scotland report that has been referred to stresses how difficult that is, and that we are at the high end of cost and variability. It is equally unacceptable that there is not so much flexibility in the system, so there is not enough choice available to parents in how they spend their entitlements. Why do I say that? If it is correct that only a fifth of local authorities have adequate facilities for parents who work full time, that is a serious hindrance. Instead of choice being about when and how to spend entitlements, it becomes about whether to work or have childcare. Naturally, that has serious consequences for some parents, especially lone parents. It is too often the most disadvantaged children who do not get what they are entitled to. That can put untold pressures on the family budgets of the very poorest families in our society, which is why it is so important that we target early education support and care at those who stand most to benefit. “Making Work Pay—The Childcare Trap” outlines the problems in the starkest detail. It says that 59 per cent of parents who are living in poverty said that they are no better off working and paying for childcare, compared with only 19 per cent of those with incomes over £30,000; that parents in poverty almost always have to go without buying some essentials to pay for their childcare; and that a quarter of parents in poverty have had to give up work, a third have had to turn down a job and a quarter have not been able to take up education or training because of the difficulties in accessing childcare. I do not think that anyone could argue that this is not an important time to be discussing the current childcare arrangements, particularly against the backdrop of so many other changes to social and welfare policy. The traditional structure of family life has changed beyond all recognition in recent decades, not least in respect of the fact that far fewer people are working in conventional 9-to-5 jobs. As a result, it is important to ensure that those who work unconventional hours are not disadvantaged. I am extremely conscious of the extensive criticisms of some aspects of the Westminster Government’s welfare reform, including the child benefit part of the proposals, which I am on record as having expressed reservations about in the chamber. The concerns are sufficient for the coalition to review some of the details, but the principle of universal credit—which is to ensure that people are better off in work than they are on benefits—is the right one. Nonetheless, in conjunction with that, there is a need to reform the childcare entitlement to provide additional support.

What is right is the principle that it is better to be in work than on benefits. I fully accept that the coalition needs to revise details of its policy and I think that it has admitted that there are aspects that it must revise. That is why we are interested in the ideas that are being promoted by lain Duncan Smith south of the border about the possibility of charging for childcare services by the hour rather than by the block. That makes it much easier for childcare to be more flexible and more affordable, in the sense that parents would not have to pay for care when they do not need it. It is about flexibility as well as about the number of hours; that is the important thing that can drive forward the policy. I hope that we can engage with the Scottish Government on that principle as well as we can on the others.

This has been a helpful—if rather short—debate because it is perhaps more focused than our debate on early years last September, not least because each party is beginning to put more beef on the bones of its policies and, no doubt, because the debate down south about the discrepancies between north and south of the border, whether or not that is controversial, has sharpened our awareness of exactly what needs to be done in other policy areas as well as in this one. Liam McArthur was right to refer to the interesting contribution by Bronwen Cohen, the chief executive of Children in Scotland, in The Scotsman yesterday, in which she argued for a more articulated approach to be taken to care services and education, as keeping them separate, she believed, has been one reason for inequalities developing in access to care. In turn, she argued, that has led to increased costs and to more parents opting out. Bronwen Cohen had the interesting and perhaps challenging message for the Scottish Government that its current policy is not sufficiently ambitious when it comes to the overall perspective. I am sure that the minister would be interested in pursuing further discussions on that. Most important, Bronwen Cohen argued that the promise of 600 hours a year—which, obviously, is more than the 570 hours in England—is all well and good but does not do as much as it should to provide greater choice for parents. That is why we, the Conservatives, are arguing strongly that the choice factor is just as important as the number of hours.

That is good to hear. However, I return to what Bronwen Cohen and others are saying. It is not so much about the quantity of care as it is about its quality and flexibility. Like all the other parties, Conservatives believe that investing in a child’s early years is pivotal. It is beneficial for their future emotional, intellectual and social development. We look forward to hearing many more details from the Scottish Government about the timing and content of the legislative process and about how it will engage with local authorities, private providers and the stakeholders who use childcare services. It is good to hear that the minister will soon convene a conference with business about some of that provision. I am more than happy to welcome the 600 hours, even if it is a recycled manifesto commitment. Some would say that it did not succeed the first time because of costs within local authorities. Some uncharitable commentators would even say that it was because of the cost of class size policy. Notwithstanding that, I welcome it. Again, though, I come back to the fact that it is about not just the quantity but the quality. Such is the overwhelming evidence of the benefits of a good start in life that we probably all agree about the priority that should be afforded to this policy area. Again, that is why we welcome the Liberals’ decision to use their business time to debate the issue.

I apologise on behalf of my colleague Annabel Goldie, who is, sadly, not well today, and thank my colleague Alex Johnstone, who has come into the hot seat at short notice. We are fully supportive of the need to modernise the legislative process so that we can both maintain and enhance the NLS. As the cabinet secretary said, it is a remarkable asset and we pay tribute, as other members have done, to all who are involved in its work, and to the large numbers of the public who are increasingly enthusiastic supporters of it. In the past, some have called the NLS the library of last resort—to be used only when people have unsuccessfully searched sources elsewhere—but that is no longer an applicable definition. That is very good news, but it obviously brings challenges. We fully recognise the need in a world of fast-changing technology to put in place structures that will help to create not only more efficient administration, but a better system of access to the library’s archive, and better coherence and collaboration with the other national archives. To allow things to remain as they are is simply not an option, so we support the Scottish Government and the other parties in their overall endeavours on the bill. Throughout the committee’s evidence taking we were struck by the professionalism, dedication and expertise of all those who are involved with the NLS, and by the careful thought that they had given to the future working of the institution and its role in modern Scotland. That expertise is in many cases unique, and brings degrees of specialism that are not seen elsewhere. It was good to hear that the cabinet secretary will lodge an amendment at stage 2 to reflect that, because there is no doubt that the committee and the witnesses who came to it were overwhelmingly of the opinion that the smaller end of the proposed new NLS board numbers was, indeed, too small. I heard what the cabinet secretary said when she came to the committee about the possibility of co-options on to the board. It is, of course, correct to do that and that option will remain. However, I was struck by just how desirable an aim it is to have a wide range of experience on the board, so it is good that the cabinet secretary has confirmed that she is looking at that again. I note, too, that the cabinet secretary has stated that the Scottish Government is keen on the principle that the governance of major institutions be considerably streamlined and be represented by smaller boards. Indeed, I think that the cabinet secretary said at committee that the Scottish Government is not in favour of large boards. I suggest that what is more appropriate is not so much a generalisation about the size of boards, but what works to the best advantage of the institution and the public that it serves. I fully understand that the current size of the board makes it unwieldy, but we should not go to the other extreme. Before leaving the issue of the board, I urge the cabinet secretary to heed the advice of several stakeholders who are anxious for a smooth transition from the existing board to the new board, which will be very important if we are to carry with us the trust of all those involved. A second major concern, which I think will continue as we debate the bill is—as the committee convener said—the intended extent of the powers of ministerial direction. There was a lack of detail and clarity in the policy memorandum about the precise nature of the intended ministerial power and about whether the power could conflict with areas of NLS management where ministers have no powers. There appear to be inconsistencies in some of the proposed changes. In fact, the chief executive was a little uncertain about how the promotion of greater collaboration and diversity would work when there seemed to be little comment in the policy memorandum about the detail of the proposed new powers. The rest of the education, lifelong learning and culture brief shows that the Government has a record of wanting to increase ministerial power. College and university governance is just one example of that. I can understand that there are some reasons why that might lead to better governance, but I am not entirely comfortable with its being a general principle. We need a cast-iron guarantee that the moves in the bill are not simply about increasing ministerial powers but about greater efficiency for the institution.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I accept what the cabinet secretary said. Others were also a bit concerned about the issue. Ministerial power should be about better governance. However, as things stand now, I do not think that the general principle has been spelled out. The bill provides an opportunity for a better service from, and wider access to, the splendid archive that is the National Library of Scotland, and it will deliver exciting developments, especially on the technological front, in collaboration with the other national treasures. With the provisos regarding the size of the board and the remit of the Scottish Government’s powers, the Scottish Conservatives are happy to support the bill’s principles.

I thank Hugh Henry for bringing this timely debate to Parliament and for his suggestion that there are practical reasons for lodging the motion. No matter whether we are talking about pupils, parents, teachers, education officers or politicians, there can be no doubt in anyone’s mind about the huge significance of the changes that are happening in our schools and the essential need for everyone who is involved to feel comfortable with them. Much is at stake, but I hope that none of us will forget that the ultimate criteria by which we should judge this issue are what is in the best educational interests of individual pupils and how we support their teachers and parents in meeting that objective. We must also remember that this is not a debate about the merits or otherwise of curriculum for excellence or about building consensus—I believe that we have that already. We have had those debates and time has moved on. Nor is this a debate about whether it was wise to have such a long gap between publishing many of the course development materials and setting out the details of the exams—we have had that debate as well. We are not here to make out that our classrooms are in crisis, because they are not. However, we need to deal with the reality in those classrooms, whether it is that as exposed in the EIS survey or by the many other teachers who are in different unions or none. Curriculum for excellence is happening and we must now ensure that schools can provide as smooth a passage as possible between the new courses and the new exams in an appropriate timescale. As I understand it, the main message from the majority of schools—and indeed parents and pupils—is that there is no fundamental objection to the main principles of curriculum for excellence or the new exams that will accompany them. Debates are quite properly going on about whether there is enough academic rigour in curriculum for excellence, whether the articulation between schools and colleges or universities is right and about the wisdom of renaming some subjects, but the basic philosophy is not in dispute. Let us remember why we are making these changes: we are seeking to make learning more meaningful for every pupil, to instil in them an understanding of not just what they are learning but why they are learning and to develop in them skills that are cross-curricular and more relevant to the very fast-changing world in which we live. Cut away all the unhelpful jargon and the unwelcome political correctness, and curriculum for excellence asks all schools to think more deeply about what makes a rounded, well-educated human being who is both adaptable and responsible in modern society. Crucially, it allows schools to be more flexible, and it is on that point that I believe the Scottish Government has shown its greatest weakness. Last week, the Education and Culture Committee was emphatically told by the director of education in East Renfrewshire that its headteachers unanimously wanted to delay implementation on account of the reports that they had received that teachers—and therefore their pupils—wanted additional security. He was not trying to score points off anybody or trying to score media points. He was merely acting in the best interests of his schools. We heard from the EIS—and it produced more evidence yesterday—that it, too, believes that many schools are not ready and that it would be better in such instances to leave things for another year. Alternatively, we heard from the SQA and Education Scotland that many schools are ready to proceed, and they told us about the dangers of any widespread delay—aspects on which I think we can all agree. I hope that we also all agree that it is right for those schools to proceed, for reasons that I note are given in the letter from the headmaster of Clifton Hall school, which the cabinet secretary quoted. It would be ridiculous to argue otherwise. However, it is also ridiculous to argue that all schools must adhere to the same timescale, especially when the cabinet secretary has told some of them that they have special circumstances. Frankly, I do not understand why we should be surprised about the different signals that are coming out from our schools. Curriculum for excellence is a major change. Different schools and departments are starting from different points. They have different pupil numbers and they offer different subject choices across different curriculum structures. Some are ready and some are not. It is by no means the first time that that has been the case in Scottish education. We have coped before and we will cope again without doing any damage to pupils’ education. On top of that, parents and teachers are confused by the cabinet secretary’s public utterances. He offered the view that East Renfrewshire could be treated as a special case because it is not doing standard grades, but it turns out that that is not the whole picture.

The cabinet secretary told me that at committee as well, but the director of education said that there are two specific reasons. The second is that he feels that his schools are not ready. I return to where I started. We must ensure that what we are doing is in the best interests of all pupils. I do not believe that any of us knows exactly what is happening on the ground in our schools. However, I believe that the schools themselves know that and, for that reason alone, they should be the ones who decide. I move amendment S4M-02242.1, to leave out from “that, despite” to end and insert: “the substantial concerns expressed by some teachers and professional bodies that specific schools or departments in some schools are not yet fully ready to introduce the new exams; regrets the confused messages issued by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning about this whole issue, and calls on the Cabinet Secretary to make clear that a decision about whether or not the one year delay is in the best interests of pupils is entirely a matter for an individual school rather than for the Scottish Government.”

This has been a very good debate in which the different points have reflected the differences in our schools, which is quite natural. I am grateful to Dennis Robertson for putting his finger on one of the crucial points, which is that the cabinet secretary is a bully and arrogant. Where could Mr Robertson ever have got that impression from? I do not believe that schools should ever have been put in this predicament in the first place. I have no doubt whatever that the professionals who have been involved for the past eight years, whether SQA, Education Scotland or directors of education in our local authorities, have been working extremely hard, along with our teachers, to ensure that curriculum for excellence goes as smoothly as possible. However, with hindsight I think that the Scottish Government was ill advised to allow quite such a long time to elapse between course development and the publication of the exam details. I understand Janet Brown’s important point that exams should not dictate everything—she is absolutely right in that—and her point that exams should reflect the course work rather than the other way round. However, I also understand the natural anxiety of parents, pupils and, of course, teachers, because pupils want to ensure that they have the widest possible knowledge available as they make their subject choices, which, whether we like it or not, are the defining element in a child’s school career and what they decide to go on to in later life. I worry that there is a cohort of teachers out there, even if we do not know its true size or the quotes that they might give us in private, who for one reason or another feel that they do not quite have enough information on which to build their course development. I may be wrong, but I do not think that many of those teachers are scaremongering; rather, they are anxious about what will happen to them if they cannot deliver on time and if they speak out. We have all had their e-mails, which are articulate, coherent, informed and which plead with us to help them. I have one here from a teacher in a school that the cabinet secretary visited recently—I will not embarrass him by reading it out—who said that he was utterly astonished to hear that his school was supposedly on track to deliver the new exams, when that is clearly not the case. Moreover, I understand from my good colleague Jamie McGrigor that the cabinet secretary was confronted yesterday on that very point by a teacher from Campbeltown, who said that his school was not yet ready.

Mr McGrigor is also on record as saying that the cabinet secretary did deal with the question, but it was in a report of a public meeting of Parliament.

No, it was not. The cabinet secretary will forgive me for saying so, but many other teachers have said exactly the same thing as the teacher concerned and there is nothing wrong in doing that, nor is there anything wrong in our reporting that.

That is entirely a matter for the cabinet secretary to address. As I said in my opening speech, the scale of the change and the fact that schools do not and should not all offer the same examination diet is why we need to accept that the pace will be different in different schools. Of course, such differences are entirely in line with the basic principles of curriculum for excellence. We have had staged changes before and no doubt we will have them again. I do not see anything wrong in that, providing that there are sound educational reasons for doing it. We must judge the whole debate on sound educational reasons. Those are the crucial factor. Nothing else matters.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm whether the tripartite group is discussing the inflexibility of hours, as a result of which some supply teachers can be kept in school beyond the time period when they might well be able to get another job?

What did the cabinet secretary mean when he said that he would be “promoting and extending the use of the Scottish baccalaureate and advanced higher”, which is on page 6 of his statement? Is that meant in relation to entrance qualifications, employability skills or greater opportunity for flexibility in the transition process? Will the deliberations be concluded at the same time as the new Scottish Qualifications Authority details are announced in April? Secondly, does the cabinet secretary now accept that the timescale that he gave colleges to seek assistance from the college transformation fund was too short, given the enormous importance of the restructuring programme and given the contention—this is mentioned on page 4 of his statement and page 17 of the responses—about the basis for funding decisions? Finally, what principles will underpin the legislation that the cabinet secretary intends to use to develop stronger links between college provision and communities?

I thank the cabinet secretary for prior sight of statement and wish him a speedy recovery in restoring his voice to its normal tone. I want to ask the cabinet secretary about three things. First, he is well aware that some areas of the teaching profession are concerned—whether they are chartered teachers or not—about the fact that chartered teachers do not always have enough time to read up on their subject material given all the other curriculum for excellence and CPD material that they have to get through. How does he envisage the situation improving in the context of the McCormac recommendations? Secondly, Gerry McCormac is on record as saying that he wants Scotland to look at best practice in other countries, at home and abroad. Apart from looking at the American examples that the cabinet secretary listed, what specific plans are there to make a comprehensive analysis of best practice in other countries? Thirdly, recommendations 17 and 34 in the McCormac review encourage greater devolution of planning and staffing decisions to head teachers instead of leaving more responsibility with local government. Does the cabinet secretary agree with those recommendations, and if so, why does he feel it appropriate to say, in the context of the section about external experts, “I am explicitly ruling out the model that is proposed by Renfrewshire Council, or variants of it”? Irrespective of whether we agree with Renfrewshire Council’s decision, is it the cabinet secretary’s job to make that explicit statement?

The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning said on “Good Morning Scotland” last Friday that “East Renfrewshire is in a very special position” and that he was not surprised that it wanted to do things differently. Why, then, should all other local authorities be told that it would be tremendously disruptive if they were to do things differently?

As both the minister and Kezia Dugdale have said, there is no worse economic ill than unemployment. It is a waste of the most precious factor of production, and it clearly has devastating implications for the individual, for his or her family and for the social fabric of the nation. It has those implications for anyone, but there must be particular concern when thousands of young people, in growing numbers, find themselves out of work—whether because of structural or cyclical changes in the economy, or because of a mismatch of skills. Notwithstanding the difficulties in providing a universally accepted technical definition of the term “unemployment” and in measuring it correctly, it is not hard to find the evidence to explain the current, deep-seated concern among all political parties. In a three-month period last year, the unemployment rate for 18 to 24-year-olds was 23.5 per cent in Scotland—which was 3.1 percentage points higher than the UK rate. The rate increased by 5.6 percentage points over the year to September to November 2011, whereas in the UK it increased by 2.2 percentage points. Over the same year, the 18 to 24 youth employment rate in Scotland decreased by 2.9 percentage points, compared with a decrease of 1.3 percentage points in the UK. Just as concerning, however, is the wide variation in youth unemployment rates across Scotland, from just over 2 per cent in the Shetland Islands to more than 11 per cent in Clackmannanshire. It is not difficult to see the extent of the problem, and that is why we broadly welcomed the announcement by the Scottish Government that it would be creating a new portfolio, with the minister having responsibility for youth employment. It is also why we welcomed the additional £30 million, the recommendation that there be much greater liaison between industry and business, and the formation of the national economic forum. That was all very good news, as was this afternoon’s announcement on the new social enterprise initiatives. However, that is also why we fought so hard with the other Opposition parties to ensure that the college sector did not have to put up with the totally unacceptable original budget settlement. We are pleased that some progress has been made, but, like the convener of Scotland’s Colleges, John Spencer, we are in no doubt about the significant challenges that remain in the college sector as a result of the disproportionate cuts, the factual context of which we have set out in our amendment. The fact that John Swinney overruled Mike Russell’s comment last week on the original budget settlement being “full, fair and final” speaks volumes about the pressure under which the SNP was put by those who genuinely feel that there is a lot of pressure on the college sector.

I am happy that Mr Dibsdall’s comment is on the public record, which is what I quoted from last week. I have said that we welcome some of the changes that were made yesterday, but the cabinet secretary should be in no doubt that the college sector still has grave concerns about the disproportionate cuts in it. We are aware that the Scottish Government is yet to come up with what would amount to a formal strategy on how it will proceed, but it must be allowed to do that with co-operation and scrutiny provided by the other parties. What must be done specifically by the Scottish Government, as opposed to moves that can be made by the Westminster Government and international markets to alleviate the pain of the global recession? Addressing unemployment among young people is not a matter of having a single policy—that was clearly flagged up in the Smith group report—and it is not all about economic policy. There are social issues, too. It is not long since we debated in the chamber the importance of policies in the early years strategy. There are young people who are suffering from on-going structural changes in the economy and the resulting mismatch of skills. We should be mindful of the fact that, although the vacancy rate has shown a modest decline in the past year, nearly half of that vacancy rate reflects the fact that employers still do not believe that some of those workers have the appropriate skills. I return to a point that I think I mentioned in a previous debate about what Willy Roe said in his excellent report, which the Scottish Government has commented on. It is about ensuring that there is greater flexibility. It is not just about ensuring that young people have the right knowledge; they need to have the right attitude, the right skills and the right knowledge in that order. That is an important point that needs to be pressed. The Smith group said that Scottish education is still too rigid and focuses too much on preparing students for university and college. I agree with that, and recommend yet again that we must be much more imaginative—the minister used that description—about the structure of the secondary school curriculum. We debated that this morning in the context of the findings of the McCormac and Donaldson reports, which suggest that we need to do far more to ensure that all schools—not just the majority—strive for excellence and strive to deliver the opportunities that are appropriate to the needs of our young people rather than appropriate to the needs or convenience of a political philosophy that is either too state interventionist or too beholden to extending bureaucracy. Nothing is more important than creating jobs and ensuring that our young people have the right skills to fill them. I move amendment S4M-01978.3, to insert at end: “and notes that, following the debate on the Budget (Scotland) Bill on 8 February 2012, the total financial settlement for the Scottish Funding Council further education programme is now £559.7 million for 2011-12, £526.4 million for 2012-13, £494.7 million for 2013-14 and £470.7 million for 2014-15, which is a cash-terms cut of £33.3 million in the first year.”

The sector in Scottish education that has made the most substantial progress in recent years is further education. It has delivered excellence in so many aspects of its institutions, transformed the quality of college courses and widened access to many students of all ages who in previous times would not have been able to take advantage of further education. Lately, it has responded effectively to the need for reform and to the need to develop new structures that combine cost-effective models with the specialisation that is described in the Griggs report, which was published yesterday. It was a Conservative Government that granted the colleges their independence in 1992, as a result of which they have enjoyed much greater autonomy and flexibility, and have been able to drive up standards, which I very much hope will not be threatened in the future. As a Parliament, we pay tribute to that work and to the manner in which the colleges have coped with some very difficult challenges. Given that success, however, why have we each received thousands of e-mails from students, staff and trade union members expressing concerns about the future of our college sector and seen several question times in the Parliament and numerous column inches devoted to exactly the same issue? At last Thursday’s education questions, the issue of college funding was raised in no fewer than seven out of 18 questions, but the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning—with his usual modesty—did not appear to be in the least bit concerned. Indeed, he even accused the Opposition parties of not accepting the truth about spending on Scottish education, of always looking back rather than forward and of not listening to what he was saying. I am in a relatively charitable mood this morning. The Scottish Conservatives want to debate the truth about spending on Scottish education; we are happy to look forward rather than back, and we are even happy to listen to the cabinet secretary, however painful that may be. We have before us the Budget (Scotland) Bill and the worthy supporting document over which I am sure Mr Swinney has expended—and, I hope, is still expending—much time and energy. If the cabinet secretary would like to have a look at page 24 of the supporting document, he will see what has happened to college funding. I know that Mr Swinney will want me to put that in the factual context, so I will do just that. He has faced some tough choices: fact. He produced an extra £15 million transformation fund to help with college rationalisation and reform: fact. That £15 million therefore reduces year 1 of the budget cuts from £38 million to £23 million: fact. However, let us dig a little deeper and pursue some of the other facts, which I suspect the SNP does not like quite so much. The consequences of the tough United Kingdom situation have resulted in a real-terms cut of 1.3 per cent—that is the Scottish National Party’s own figure—so it would be unfair of me to stand here and argue if Mr Russell had asked Mr Swinney to make similar savings in the Scottish FE budget. However, what no one can understand—however hard they try—is why, at a time when there are no fewer than 88,000 young people aged 18 to 24 unemployed in Scotland, and when the Scottish Government has a flagship policy to provide a training opportunity, education or work for all 16 to 19-year-olds, the college sector is being asked to cope with cuts of 8.5 per cent in teaching grants on top of all the cuts that it faced last year. The colleges are being asked to cope with a cut in funding from £544 million to £470 million. There will be progressive cuts of £38 million in year 1—less £15 million—£50 million in year 2, and £74 million in year 3, so that by 2015 there is an annual cut of £74 million. They wonder what on earth they have done wrong. At last week’s education questions, Mr Russell said that he would prefer politicians to listen to the experts in the college sector rather than deal in their own spin, so let us do that. John Spencer, convener of Scotland’s Colleges, has said twice that it is inconceivable that colleges will be able to absorb more cuts without harm being done to student places, staffing or the quality of courses. We now know that those cuts could amount to over 20 per cent in real terms, assuming that student support is maintained at a flat cash level. That view is echoed by Miles Dibsdall, principal of Edinburgh’s Telford College, who has said: “To think that the sector could operate or indeed maintain provision after having our budget slashed by 10 per cent last year was challenging, but to have them reduced again over the next three years is just baffling. This is an incredibly difficult feat and I dread to think of what the sector will look like in a few years’ time when these new cuts are felt.” Robin Parker of the National Union of Students has said that the SNP was absolutely right in May to promise to protect college budgets but “absolutely wrong” to be proposing such extensive cuts at a time of such large-scale youth unemployment—a view shared by Andy Willox of the Federation of Small Businesses. Why has the Scottish Government chosen to punish the colleges so hard, particularly in the current economic circumstances?

It is perfectly true that there are cuts south of the border, but the Scottish Government is responsible for the cuts north of the border, and that is what we are debating. The Scottish Government simply cannot get away from the fact that 1,000 staff were shed in the FE sector last year and that several colleges have warned the cabinet secretary that more are likely to go this year. They are telling him very bluntly that many of the savings and efficiencies have already been made and that there is less and less scope for cuts without paring down some of the most essential parts of the sector. Colleges are looking at their budgets for 2012-13 and having to focus on the more expensive end of the scale, which is the 16 to 19 age group, since the higher costs of student support are to be found in that age group. That is on top of the real-terms cut of £11 million in student support. Many of those students are on national certificate courses at the start of the learning process and need more support, so there is surely a potential impact on some of our more vulnerable students. What will happen to provision for part-time students, mature students and students with disabilities, who could, according to the Scottish Consortium on Learning Disabilities, lose up to 34 per cent of part-time places? Those groups are all essential to ensuring that we have a more mobile and flexible workforce across the economy. The Scottish Government cannot claim any longer that there cannot be greater flexibility in its budget decisions about higher education and FE. It is nonsense to say that the college cuts are all the fault of the Westminster Government. The Scottish Government had a choice to make and got it wrong—and I think that it knows it has got it wrong. It was a political choice, and the responsibility for it must lie firmly with the cabinet secretary. I return to where I began by praising the outstanding work that has been done by those in the college sector over recent years. They have coped admirably with the challenges placed on them, and they are undoubtedly a hugely important part of the post-16 reforms in building a more flexible and stronger economy. They should be congratulated rather than punished by a Government that has muddled its priorities and ended up with a total lack of coherence in FE and HE policy. They are fearful of further cuts and fearful of cutbacks in student places—or, if the places can be maintained, cutbacks in teaching time. They are fearful about whether exciting new projects will ever see the light of day, and they wonder just what mergers will mean to them. In short, there is considerable doubt that the college sector, which has made such outstanding progress, will emerge anything other than weaker at the end of the day. Mr Russell told us last week that his Government is second to none when it comes to supporting student finances—far better than any previous Government north or south of the border and probably better than any arc of prosperity in the world, if Mr Russell had his way. He said that his budget figures are “impeccable” and that the budget settlement is “fair, full and final”. Well, I invite him to accept the seriousness of the situation that he has created, to swallow his pride and to cut through all the shameful bombast of the past few months. Colleges deserve our support, and I suspect that the vast majority of members in the chamber—even within the ranks of the SNP—believe that it is time for Mr Russell to ask Mr Swinney to reconsider his budget proposals. I move, That the Parliament warmly congratulates Scotland’s colleges in terms of the outstanding contribution that they have made to improving educational opportunities for a wide range of learners, improving the alignment between available skills and local employment opportunities and in embracing the need for structural reform; condemns the Scottish Government for forcing on the sector deeply damaging financial cuts for the period 2012-15, which are disproportionately greater in 2012-13, and which will inevitably have a detrimental impact on staffing, student places and support for students from more disadvantaged backgrounds; fails to understand how these financial cuts can be reconciled with the Scottish Government’s flagship 16 to 19 policy and the need to address the very worrying youth unemployment statistics that have revealed that 88,000 young people aged 18 to 24 are now out of work, and calls on the Scottish Government to urgently reconsider the proposed budget settlement for the further education sector.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

What more bombast can we have from the cabinet secretary on this? If the Conservatives had their way, there would be extra money in the HE sector that we would not have to put back into the college sector. That is exactly what the SNP policy has led to. The Government is punishing the colleges because it has not had enough money for the HE sector.

Yes, absolutely.

14. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with local authorities on introducing council counters in post office branches. (S4O-00652)

Will the minister agree to investigate the possibility of a national framework for co-locating council and police counters in post office branches, to provide additional help and services for the public, particularly in rural areas?

I thank the cabinet secretary for prior sight of his statement. He said that the two reports have not been written on the basis of concerns about the failure of governance in either sector. Both reports recommend very radical reforms, which include ministerial oversight of the regional college board appointment process and the new constitutional regulations for university courts. If the cabinet secretary believes—as I know he does—that our universities and colleges are doing very well in their educational outcomes and international standing, why is he so intent on making these changes? Secondly, can he confirm that Mr Alan Simpson was, in effect, representing the university chairmen rather than speaking on his own behalf, and that the chairmen have very serious concerns about the proposals for reform of university governance? Finally, there are to be regional boards, and those boards—rather than specific colleges—will now receive Scottish funding council funding allocations. How does the cabinet secretary envisage that that will increase accountability in comparison with the existing system?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had about the future of modern language teaching in primary and secondary schools. (S4O-00614)

I thank the minister for the update on progress. The Government has been keen on the Barcelona scheme for primary schools, in which at least two modern languages are taught to children at an early age. What discussions is the Government having with local authorities to try to reverse the cuts in modern language assistants? Only seven out of 32 local councils have assistants.

I welcome Hugh Henry and his new team. We wonder and wait with interest to see whether their appointment will change the dynamics between the Scottish National Party and Labour in education debates. We last debated raising attainment on 27 October. I am happy to do so again, because we should never relax our efforts to do everything possible to secure better attainment levels for all our pupils. However, if we are to debate the topic regularly, and particularly if we are to debate it twice in such a short timescale, it is important that we take stock of the progress that has been made on Government commitments. I will therefore consider the commitments that the Scottish Government made just three months ago and where we are with them. On the early years, progress has generally been pretty good, notwithstanding the concerns that Hugh Henry rightly raised. There is determination in all parties in the Parliament to ensure that we make the greatest impact in that area of policy making, such is the crucial influence of early years development on a person’s life chances. On that point, we welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to be more focused with public spending when it comes to care for disadvantaged children. In the October debate, the Scottish Government made much of the need for a much more effective parenting strategy. The issue was referred to over and over again in yesterday’s excellent debate on looked-after children. There can be no differences across the political spectrum on the essential need for an effective strategy, but can the Scottish Government update the Parliament on what it has done in the intervening three months to set out the key principles of the strategy? How will discussions with relevant stakeholders and the cross-party discussions that were promised take place? Can the Government give us some idea of the timescale? In yesterday’s debate, concern was expressed that despite consensus and good will in so many quarters we must admit to a corporate failure to improve attainment levels for looked-after children. We need to ensure that the same malaise does not affect the parenting strategy. On preventative spend, the need to ensure the principles of the getting it right for every child agenda and the need for much more effective organisation of local authority departments, we cannot be too critical of Scottish Government policy. I turn to aspects of the Scottish Government’s contribution to the October debate that caused concern and, in some cases, were rather worrying. Labour is right to express concern about the curriculum for excellence, but we should be specific in our critical analysis of the situation and we should not suggest that there is widespread difficulty in every area, which is not particularly accurate. Crucial to the success of curriculum for excellence is improving literacy, which deserves just as much attention as the early years and parenting strategies deserve. I was rather taken aback in October when the Scottish Government omitted to say much about literacy, given that it had set so much store by the issue at an earlier stage. The cabinet secretary has given a little more insight into the matter today, but it would be helpful if he told us more about the focus of the group of successful head teachers, which I presume is considering approaches to literacy that have had an impact. We can also learn from some local authorities, which have had better results than others have had. As I said at the time, I was astonished that in October’s debate the Scottish Government managed just one sentence on the Donaldson, McCormac and Cameron reviews, which the Scottish Government itself set up and which all had as their underlying principles improving schools and raising attainment. We heard a little more this afternoon, but we have not heard enough. What has been the Scottish Government’s response to Graham Donaldson’s finding that too many teachers are uncomfortable about teaching basic literacy and numeracy and indeed that many teachers might have problems in that respect themselves? What has been the Scottish Government’s response to concerns that academic rigour is being lost in some secondary school subjects and indeed that subjects are being lost, as Hugh Henry said, because teachers do not have enough time to read up on subject areas, given all the burdensome paperwork that they encounter? What has been the Scottish Government’s response to the recommendation in all three reports that we need much greater flexibility in our schools and greater devolution of power to schools and away from local authorities? Curriculum for excellence might be the greatest change to our schools in a generation, but those reports recommend fundamental changes to our school system, and it seems more than likely that the commission on school reform will say exactly the same thing. The review panels include highly respected professional men and women from different backgrounds, and from different political parties and none, and they all urge the Scottish Parliament to make radical changes to our education system so that it becomes much more responsive to the individual needs of pupils, teachers and parents. One of the most important messages, that of increasing the flexibility of staffing, is exactly the one that the Scottish Government needs to take on board. Finally, I turn to the crucial issue of colleges and what I see as the most blatant contradiction in any area of the Scottish Government’s education policy. How is it logical to trumpet a flagship policy on 16 to 19-year-olds while making swingeing cuts to college budgets and asking colleges to dig deep into their reserves to make the changes—

I ask the cabinet secretary, when he sums up, to give us a categorical assurance that he will review his strategy on colleges, particularly in time for the forthcoming budget. I move amendment S4M-01677.1, to insert at end: “, and notes with interest the current deliberations of the Commission on School Reform under the chairmanship of Keir Bloomer, which, along with important recommendations contained in the recent Donaldson, McCormac and Cameron reports, confirm that raising attainment levels is also dependent on the delivery of a school system that is much more responsive to the demands of pupils, parents and teachers.”

I was not expecting this role, but I have had a pleasant afternoon listening to remarkable speeches, some of which have been remarkable because they were so informed. As we debated in the chamber back in October, and as we discussed in committee throughout November and December, few issues are more important than how we raise attainment among young people. As the convener rightly said at the beginning of the debate, when it comes to attainment levels of looked-after children, no one can really feel anything other than shame over Scotland’s record for far too many of those young people. Like the convener and many colleagues from all across the chamber who have spoken, I do not pretend in any way that the issue is easy, particularly as there has been so much good will for many years in trying to deal with the problem. There has been an absence of belligerent policy differences, by which we are sometimes characterised in the chamber. I think that we all feel a little concerned and perhaps a little bit embarrassed that we have tried to do things several times and have been very good at coming up with aims and objectives but have not, for one reason or another, managed to get the results that we would like.

When she spoke earlier, Christine Grahame gave us an example from Peebles, and examples from Aberdeen were also given. She is absolutely right that it is important that the committee take on board examples of best practice, as there is no doubt that we get the best ideas from best practice. Evidence that the committee took—this came through in Liam McArthur’s and Dennis Robertson’s speeches and Claire Burns of CELCIS certainly put it to us—suggests that very much better co-ordination of the services that are involved in helping youngsters is the key to our making progress. We were particularly struck by Claire Burns’s comments on there being a need for teachers, social workers, healthcare professionals and welfare officers to be much more aware not just of the work that they do—Claudia Beamish made that point—but of their responsibilities, and for their being at one in putting in place the appropriate assistance for children. The principles that underpin GIRFEC—particularly in the Highland Council area, to which Mary Scanlon referred, and which has led the way in much of this—are unquestionably the right ones, but time and again we have heard that they are not being applied consistently.

Kevin Stewart has made an important point, which I think was echoed in Graham Donaldson’s approach in his recent work. We will get much better results for children the more we learn about one another’s roles and the better we can co-ordinate. The member has made a very good point. The committee is conscious that there is sometimes confusion and a bit of inefficiency in the care of individual children. We should be clear that that is by no means anyone’s intention, but there is sometimes a problem with the system. There is a message for all of us from witnesses: some of the legislation may be seen to be a little contradictory and things work against one another. We are a little uncertain about how much evidence on that exists, so we need—I think that the convener of the committee would agree and I know that my colleagues on the committee would agree—to investigate the matter to assess how much of a problem it is. The paramount issue of trust among looked-after children has come through in the debate. Children fare better when they trust the individuals with whom they deal, and they will trust them if they feel that their circumstances are secure and that they will get help in any circumstance in which they need it. That is why permanence is important and why the earliest opportunities need to be addressed. I have mentioned in Parliament several times that the early years strategy is working extremely well, although there is still work to be done. Adam Ingram’s comments and work in the area have been significant. We cannot get away from the fact that the early years agenda is vital in addressing issues of attainment not just for looked-after children, but across the board. We need to ensure that that comes through in all our institutions and local authorities. The committee was struck by comments that the central focus must be on outcomes, rather than on how we diagnose problems in the first instance; it has come through in some members’ speeches that we must think more about outcomes than about diagnostic techniques. We are good at telling ourselves what is wrong, but we are perhaps a little less good at putting it right. Throughout my time in Parliament, I have been struck by the compelling evidence that makes it clear to us all how important the early stages of development can be not just in school, but at home. We must understand that, when we talk about the early years, we are talking not only about the early stages of a child’s life after birth, but about pre-birth situations. Members have talked about a parenting strategy and the circumstances in homes that we must address in order to help adults or young carers who are trying to assist looked-after children. We must help those people to address the difficulties and challenges that they face. On behalf of the committee, I point out that we are conscious that we have tried something different in our approach. As yet, we have not produced a report or anything other than a mass of material. Our intention is to allow members from throughout the Parliament to input their ideas and experience—in some cases, their professional experience—and to go back to challenge some of the witnesses who have given us evidence, and to bring all that together. I again thank everybody who has contributed to the debate and I pay tribute to the committee convener and my colleagues on the committee. We still have a great deal of work to do, but everybody is 100 per cent behind that.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm whether there is a timescale for the transformation fund that he announced? When will that money be spent, as directed by the Scottish funding council?

The minister has acknowledged three times this afternoon the strength of feeling in some of the communities. He will also acknowledge that some of that strength of feeling, particularly among some of the Beauly to Denny power line steering group and the petitioners, related to health issues. Will he explain why there was no attempt to allay those concerns in his statement?

I apologise that I have to leave the chamber immediately after speaking. I have a longstanding engagement for which I am a little bit tight for time because of the adjustment to today’s agenda. I thank Sandra White for bringing the debate to Parliament, and I certainly concur with any proposal that can help to raise awareness of the commendable achievements of our young people. Read any local newspaper around the country and it is not too hard to find examples of the extraordinary efforts of many young people, at school or in their communities. Sandra White has already referred to some fantastic examples in Glasgow. In Drumchapel, we have seen the fantastic work of the G15 youth project, which helps young people with issues such as unemployment; it also helps young people to address drugs and alcohol abuse and campaigns against vandalism. The Prince’s Scottish Youth Business Trust has invested £37 million in helping young people who are aged between 18 and 25 to start up their own businesses, and how imaginative some of their ideas have been. On top of all that, an interesting statistic came out last week. Charitable giving in Britain, including by our young people, remains at a particularly high level and among the best in the world. Nor should we forget about the huge efforts of a growing number of young carers who give so much of their time to looking after family members, often in very difficult circumstances. That said, the 2009 social attitudes survey reveals some uncomfortable facts that we ignore at our peril, particularly the fact that misplaced perceptions rather than factual evidence can often be the determining factor in the public opinion of young people—I refer to the young man to whom Sandra White referred—and the national media can too often play a role in perpetuating that. The good-news stories seldom make the headlines, whereas the bad-news stories often do. It is disturbing that half of those who were surveyed thought that the media were particularly negative towards young people, but two thirds of those who were surveyed thought that many young people in their own communities were extremely positive. Those sums do not add up, and that is a matter of concern to us all. It is clear that there are cases in which there is a higher incidence of negative behaviour among young people and in which it would be completely wrong to ignore what is often a vicious circle of antisocial problems that have a corrosive effect on the fabric of communities. However, instilling confidence and self-esteem in our young people is crucial. Young people who are experiencing significant problems at home or in their personal life often feel that they have no one to talk to about those problems. The project that Sandra White has described is excellent in that regard. It gives young people a place that they can go to to talk about their problems and get specialist help. That is sometimes important from a role model aspect. Sometimes, those people have had very little, and they have been too frightened or embarrassed to talk about the problems that they have faced. One of the most challenging issues for a young person is finding somebody who cares about them and understands their problems. I did not appreciate how much work some of the truth about youth groups have done, particularly in setting up a new website, which I have looked at. I was very impressed by that website, as it is exactly the kind of support that is required. I warmly commend the work of the truth about youth project, but we must not forget about the important role that parents and schools can have in tackling some of the issues. As parliamentarians, we have a responsibility to try to take that forward. I will not hear what the minister says, but I am sure that he is aware of those difficulties. I firmly compliment the project and Sandra White, and again apologise for having to leave the chamber.

Does Mr Gray agree that it is the job of all MSPs and cabinet ministers to ensure that we are working on the problem together? All portfolios have a responsibility for driving forward the jobs agenda. That is one reason why it is perhaps not sensible to have one minister in charge of it all—it involves education and all sorts of things. Does he agree with that?

I am grateful to the Labour Party for bringing this debate to the Parliament. As Iain Gray rightly said, it could hardly be more important, and he eloquently outlined the reasons why. There can be no doubt whatever that rising unemployment is a serious issue, particularly when we hear that no fewer than 100,000 young people are unemployed in Scotland. The stakes are high but, although the Conservatives can well understand why Labour seeks what the motion describes as an “emergency response”, we argue that there is an even stronger case for a swift but nonetheless carefully considered and coherent strategy that goes across all the portfolios in the Parliament, for exactly the reasons that the First Minister set out. If there is a lesson from history, it is that short-term responses usually have only limited impact. The First Minister is again right—that is twice this morning—to recognise that there are various types of unemployment and therefore various causes. Clearly, many young people are suffering from the effects of the cyclical downturn and the depressed state of demand in the Scottish economy and demand for exports from Scottish companies. However, other young people are suffering from an on-going structural change in the economy and the resulting mismatch of skills. We should be mindful that, although the vacancy rate has shown a modest decline in the past year, nearly half of that vacancy rate reflects the fact that employers in this country do not believe that those workers have the appropriate skills. Willy Roe made that point in his excellent report that was published last year, and it is made consistently by the Confederation of British Industry and many chambers of commerce. That issue means not only that we are experiencing problems with our education and training programmes, but that a large number of businesses in Scotland have to spend too much money working on upskilling that population rather than on job creation. It follows that addressing unemployment issues among young people is not a matter of a single policy. Of crucial importance are policies that promote sustained economic growth, specifically via investment in longer-term capital projects, which boost the level of consumer demand and have a multiplier effect across the whole economy. We need to spend within our means, rather than allow debt and borrowing to spiral out of control. Another aspect is the requirement to provide young people with the right skills and, perhaps more important, the flexibility of skills that allows them to adapt to the demands of the modern economy. On that point, Willy Roe makes an interesting remark. He says that three things are essential for a modern, progressive workforce: the right attitude, the right skills and the right knowledge—in that order. He goes on to say that our schools, colleges and universities have too often dealt with them in the reverse order. That is an important point that should give us pause for thought. If there is a strong message emanating from Scottish businesses, it is that too few of our young people understand what constitutes a professional attitude. It is sad to hear those in restaurants, hotels and rural businesses saying that they would prefer to take on young foreign workers rather than young Scots. I do not believe for a minute that the potential is not there; of course it is, but there needs to be much more focus on it from an early age. I warmly commend the Government’s early years strategy, and the work being done by the other parties to ensure that we get the strategy right, but I also commend several aspects of the work of the highly respected Smith group, which makes clear the need to ensure a focus not only on the early years but on the transition period between primary 7 and secondary 1 and 2. I also commend some aspects of the youth contract that has been introduced by the Westminster Government. As well as helping employers to cover their share of national insurance costs, wage incentives and new Jobcentre Plus schemes, the contract is designed to provide better quality work experience and more focused careers services. I base my opinion on the feedback that I receive from a variety of employers, and I have no doubt at all that the way we can help our young people to get on to the employment ladder and, just as important, to stay on it, is to ensure that they are better prepared for the environment that will confront them in the workplace. Let me turn to what I, and many other people, see as a major inconsistency in the Scottish Government’s policy priorities. It has stated, not unreasonably, that policies to improve the opportunities for 16 to 19-year-olds should be an essential commitment in this parliamentary session. At the same time, however, it has placed on our colleges the unacceptable burden of disproportionate spending cuts. Those cuts will impact particularly badly in the first year of the 2012 to 2015 spending review and will, extraordinarily, come at a time when the Scottish Government claims that it is doing everything possible to promote and enhance the opportunities of all our young people. How can it be right that such extensive funding has been withdrawn from the college sector when colleges are a crucial part of the economy when it comes to helping our young people?

I am just about to finish my speech. There is far more to this debate. The First Minister is absolutely right to say that we are all responsible, but so too is the Scottish Government for getting its priorities right. I move amendment S4M-01449.1, to leave out after “produce” to end and insert: “a swift and considered response which will provide long term sustainability for youth employment in Scotland by combining the recommendations of the highly regarded Smith Group with job creation incentives in the private sector and a capital investment strategy designed to boost economic growth; and further calls on the Scottish Government to reduce the excessive college cuts planned for the first financial year of the 2012-15 Spending Review which appear to be in direct conflict with the claims of the Scottish Government that the new 16-19 programme is its top priority.”

The cabinet secretary is right to concentrate on the early years. I mentioned the early years in my speech and I think that all parties in the Parliament agree with the cabinet secretary on the issue. Does the cabinet secretary accept that the Smith group recommended that the transition between primary 7 and the first year of secondary school be improved? That is when young people could be getting better careers advice and a better understanding of what jobs they may eventually end up in.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions ministers have had with the European Parliament regarding additional funding for broadband. (S4O-00430)

That is helpful. Will the cabinet secretary give us an idea of the principles that will underpin the criteria for determining the spending priorities for broadband in rural communities throughout Scotland when he announces his plans in January?

Will Hugh Henry give way?

It is not surprising that this has been a fairly highly charged debate. However, as Neil Findlay and Jamie McGrigor said, nothing should distract us from facing up to a hugely challenging issue. If politics is about anything, it is about the ability to make tough decisions, even if at times they are unpopular. We, on this side of the chamber, are certainly not going to apologise for measuring up to that challenge. We should start from the understanding that there is clear cross-party agreement that the pensions status quo is not sustainable, especially in Scotland, where the public sector is a bit bigger than it is south of the border. There is a fundamental need for reform. Originally, it seemed that politicians on all sides had accepted the conclusion in Lord Hutton’s interim report of October 2010 that there is both a short-term need to address the pensions issue, resulting from the imbalance between the employer and employee contributions and the problem of an ageing population, and a long-term need to redesign the pension schemes completely so that they are less of a burden on the taxpayer and less open to the wide variations received by employees. There is both a short-term and a long-term issue. None of us doubts the emotional context of the debate, nor the fear of some employees that the increased contributions that they will be asked to make will create difficulties for them in their personal financial decision making. However, I am afraid that I cannot accept Richard Baker’s assertion that the lowest-paid people will come off worst. The Westminster Government has given a guarantee that people who earn under £15,000 will not have any increase at all. Nobody doubts that this is a difficult issue. However, to do nothing is not an option. That is why it is important to understand the facts as well as to appreciate the strong feelings.

Forgive me, but I think that there are two issues there. First, the assertion was made that we are not looking after the lowest-paid people. That is, frankly, not true. The minister is referring to a measure for change within the whole pensions structure. The facts are important. The cash-terms expenditure on paying out pensions to public sector pensioners over the past 10 years has increased to £32 billion—no one needs to be reminded that that is roughly the same amount as the Scottish budget. Secondly, as Mary Scanlon rightly said, the taxpayer contributes three times more to an average civil service pension than the average private sector employee pays in to a pension. Thirdly, that average public sector pension remains at £5,600 a year, compared to only £3,900 in the private sector. Despite some of the protestations in this chamber, we are clear that moving towards a career-average scheme would be fairer, as everyone would receive broadly the same amount for every pound that they contribute and it would guard against the risks that come from individuals jumping on to higher salaries in the later stages of their career. We should not forget that that is also a logical step that is in tune with some of the greater flexibility that is likely to be a feature of future employment trends, similar to those that were described by Graham Donaldson when discussing the future of the teaching profession.

All the Westminster parties are clear that there is a short-term need to deal with the funding of pensions, which we face because of the serious economic difficulties that we were left with by the Labour Party. However, there is obviously also a longer-term provision to change the structure. I make no apologies for raising both of those parts of the approach because, as Mary Scanlon pointed out earlier, we must ensure that the pensions system is not only sustainable in the long term but can deal with some of the difficult issues that we face just now. I will finish on what is perhaps the most controversial issue of all: the impending strike action, on which there have been heated exchanges. No one doubts the difficulty that we face, particularly given the backdrop of tough economic times. No one doubts the strength of feeling on all sides. We respect that. That is why the Westminster Government has been at pains to have constructive engagement with the unions and why it saw the need to make a substantially improved offer. The negotiations are on-going and, as other parties have said, at Westminster and in this chamber, while they are on-going it is not appropriate for strike action to be taken. It is incumbent on all of us to understand that, although feelings are running high, the problem cannot just be swept under the carpet. We must deal with it. We must confront it. We must get some kind of sustainability for the future. I support the motion in Mary Scanlon’s name.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Transport Scotland regarding motorway gantry signage. (S4O-00366)

Will the minister give assurances that the gantry signs will hold time-sensitive information about weather forecasting as we approach the winter?

I remember an elderly veteran telling me five or six years ago that he was worried that, in the course of time, armistice day, as he described it, would cease to have such national significance and that, as future generations succeed those who were on the front line in the two world wars and the families of those soldiers, it will become much harder to convey the meaning and true spirit of remembrance. It was a perfectly logical concern but, although I do not doubt that changes will probably occur decades on, I am absolutely certain that future generations can be relied on whole-heartedly never to forget the sacrifice of their forebears, especially if our young people are anything to go by. Indeed, based on the past few years, I would say that there is a heightened rather than a diminished awareness among young people of what remembrance means. Just last week, I witnessed two groundbreaking school projects in action, both of which asked young people to become much more actively involved in supporting remembrance activities in their local communities, and not just during the month of November, but permanently. At one school, pupils were actively engaged in finding out more about the names on a local war memorial and were contacting their local council and the Royal British Legion to find out how they could participate in the on-going care of the monument and its surrounding gardens. They had been inspired by the UK Government initiative in the run-up to the 100th anniversary of the start of the first world war in 2014, which will provide opportunities for young people to adopt a war memorial. At another school, research was under way to identify just how many veterans and their families are in the local community and what support could be given to them through the community service part of the Duke of Edinburgh’s award scheme. Although schools have always played an important role in the historical understanding of war—ancient or recent—awareness is growing of the need to involve schools more permanently in their local communities to support all those who have been affected by the experience of war, which is something that has poignancy all year round, not just at this time of year. As other members have already said, this year marks the 90th anniversary of the poppy appeal and that, too, has seen an increase in local schools’ interest in visiting the Lady Haig Poppy Factory in Edinburgh, which gives pupils an insight into the issues that confront veterans and their families and the many people whose job it is to look after them and help them to readjust to civilian life. The technology of war might have changed beyond all recognition in that 90-year period, but the issues that face our armed services as they return from battle are, in some cases, remarkably similar to what they would have been 90 years ago. Our young people, in the main, have a very mature grasp of that fact. I take the opportunity to put on record our thanks to Poppyscotland for its outstanding work. We are humbled, not only by the scale of veterans’ achievement, but also by their experiences, and by the fact that they have taken up so many imaginative projects to ensure that young people are fully and meaningfully engaged in the process of remembrance.

In the spirit of consensus, I say that it is important to look at employment issues and the educational purpose of the remembrance spirit and what it is all about and that, yes, I will make representations, but it is important that we do so on a non-party-political basis. The spirit of remembrance transcends all political boundaries in this country. Of course, the other reason why young people have greater contact with the war experience is because they see so many veterans, not much older than themselves, of the front line in Afghanistan and other theatres of war around the world. If they do not meet those soldiers personally, through the many school links and programmes, various social media bring them closer to those soldiers’ experiences and provide them with much more up-to-date feedback on what the war meant for them and their families. They see extraordinary feats—whether an expedition to the Antarctic or rowing the Atlantic—by men and women who have been seriously wounded, and they connect with and are inspired by their bravery in the same way as their grandparents and great-grandparents did and were years ago. Each year, the nation rightly pays its respects to all who have made the ultimate sacrifice and to the families who are left behind, and each year we rightly express our unequivocal support for our armed forces wherever they might be deployed. Wearing a poppy might be a simple act, but it unites us all in our remembrance and gratitude—and it also makes a huge difference to those who serve in the armed forces. Our young people, just as much as those of us who are older, have an acute understanding of what the poppy means and we should be greatly encouraged by many of their acts of remembrance in our local schools.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of flood defences in the Perth and Kinross Council area. (S4O-00300)

If the forecasters are correct, it seems to be likely that we are in for another difficult winter, which continues to cause concern to communities that are most vulnerable to floods, some of which the minister has just acknowledged. What discussions has the Scottish Government had with local authorities to ensure that the maximum possible assistance is being given to those communities when it comes to preventing flood damage this coming winter?

What discussions has the Scottish Government had with local authorities in predominantly rural communities with a view to widening access to advanced higher courses for pupils in those areas?

There is no greater responsibility than bringing up children—and no greater responsibility for the state than ensuring that children who, for one reason or another, have been taken into care are properly looked after. Although we must acknowledge that hundreds of council workers across Scotland work tirelessly to do their very best for children in such circumstances, nothing can replace the love and security of a permanent and stable family environment, and it goes without saying that that must be the overall policy objective. The Scottish Government and the Opposition parties have acknowledged that, notwithstanding the numerous and genuine efforts that have been made to address the problem, more has to be done. We cannot get away from statistics that show that since 2001 the number of looked-after children in Scotland has risen by 69 per cent and increasing evidence that, in some parts of this country, the problem is reaching crisis point. For example, between 2005 and 2008, the number of looked-after children in one council increased by 85 per cent. Moreover, just last week, there were worrying reports that children’s services in Dundee had reached “saturation point”, largely as the result of certain very difficult social problems in the city. As a result, the city has been overspending on its children’s services by £1.6 million annually. Although it is important to stress that such worrying situations are not the norm across Scotland, it is nevertheless evident that the country’s councils have had varying degrees of success in addressing the situation. Indeed, as the Education and Culture Committee heard only yesterday, quite a bit of progress has been made. The standard of reporting is better; better systems are in place for ensuring that there are coherent plans to look after the best interests of each child; school attendance has improved in some areas; and there are some signs that educational attainment levels are increasing. We should be encouraged by all that. However, it is only a small start when it comes to dealing with the stark reality. Last year, 56 per cent of school leavers gained five or more qualifications at Scottish credit and qualifications framework level 5 or better. The figure for looked-after children was only 0.5 per cent, and only 2.5 per cent of the 15,000 or 16,000 looked-after children in Scotland go on to further or higher education. We also know that, as with exclusion and attendance rates at school, drop-out rates can be high. Furthermore, evidence shows that around half of the looked-after children in Scotland encounter mental health problems and, even worse, problems in accessing the relevant mental health services. Indeed, my colleague Mary Scanlon exposed that very issue just last week. In the whole debate about looked-after children, I have been struck by two comments. First, at yesterday’s Education and Culture Committee meeting, Claire Burns, the strategic policy manager for CELCIS, the centre of excellence for looked-after children in Scotland, said that she thought that we were very good identifying the problems but much less good at measuring outcomes and providing solutions. Secondly, the Educational Institute of Scotland has stated that there has been little improvement in attainment for looked-after children “despite the considerable volume of policy, guidance and legislation in this area”. In other words, there have been lots of attempts to do things, but not enough of them are having much impact. What lessons do we need to learn from the experts on the ground? What can we as politicians do to ensure that significant qualitative improvements are made in the life chances of our looked-after children? First, there are some issues with the decision-making process. From the wealth of written and oral evidence that was presented to the committee, some key themes emerged. Local authorities are not yet skilled enough at bringing greater coherency to decision making, particularly when it might involve council officers across several departments. The spirit of getting it right for every child is definitely there, but the practicalities still present too many problems. It has been pointed out that there is not enough of a multidisciplinary approach to training among professionals. That issue was also raised by Graham Donaldson when he examined how teachers could best be assisted to provide crucial educational support for looked-after children. In addition, there appears to be widespread concern that the range of professionals who are involved in looking after any one child are not always best informed about the care plan, and we need to take that very seriously indeed. It was also pointed out that there can be issues with decision making that relate to procurement, and that too much time can be spent on tendering and contractual processes, which are often expensive, without due regard being paid to the qualitative outcomes. We were told that the procurement process can often get bogged down in ideological prejudices to do with whether preference should be given to public contracts or to private contracts when, in fact, a combination of both should often be used, and when much more recognition should be given to the role that the voluntary sector can play. The single most damaging barrier to helping our vulnerable children is bureaucracy and red tape getting in the way of finding them permanent and stable homes within an appropriate period of time. The Westminster Government is determined to tackle frustration with that, as the Prime Minister made clear in his announcement earlier this week. We should not tolerate any situation in local authorities in which there are fundamental weaknesses in the decision-making process. Secondly, it has been pointed out that local communities and local voluntary sector organisations can often provide some of the greatest support, particularly when it comes to assisting parents, providing financial and educational advice, and helping families to address issues of addiction and dysfunctional home life. We should not ignore the views of the Aberlour Child Care Trust—Scotland’s largest children’s charity—whose research shows that many care homes that are run by the voluntary sector deliver not only a better standard of care but better educational attainment than some of their local authority counterparts. Thirdly—and lastly—there is obviously the issue of educational attainment itself and the need to do far more in our schools and colleges in particular to be better prepared to identify and support the best interests of looked-after children. The curriculum for excellence will go some way towards doing that, but we still need to do more to adopt a multidisciplinary approach. There is a wealth of evidence that suggests that a lack of permanence and stability in childhood can have a significant impact on young people that can last long into their later years. Everyone knows that we cannot sit back and wait and hope that things will change without a different approach being taken to early intervention. We are happy to support the Scottish Government’s motion and the Labour amendment.

I will refocus attention on the subject of the debate. I do not think that there is a more important subject for debate than how we should raise attainment for pupils in Scotland. I do not doubt that good things are happening, as the minister said. Scotland is a leading light when it comes to teacher training, we are leading the way when it comes to the process of pupil self-evaluation and there are imaginative developments in the early years, as well as signs of some improvements in attainment levels, so I am not prepared to share the view of some who write on educational matters that our schools are always seen to be struggling; neither am I prepared to accept, however, some of the Government’s extraordinary rhetoric when it comes to the reality of certain trends in Scottish education. How extraordinary it is that, on a subject as important as attainment, we have such a benign Government motion that does not flag up the key policy directions. A wealth of excellent work has been done in the recent Donaldson, McCormac and Cameron reviews that has been given only passing mention this morning. We should be focusing all our attention on two important recommendations from those reports. First, we must ensure that we have the best teachers and headteachers in all our schools. Secondly, we must ensure that we can raise the motivation and aspiration of all our pupils from the youngest age. As McCormac said in his report, we need to do far more to tackle some of the disturbing evidence from Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education and from other countries, which makes for such sober reading. The fact that just over half of Scottish school leavers finish school without receiving a higher is nothing to be proud of, nor are the statistics on the extent of the attainment gaps that exist between geographical areas and socioeconomic groups, which were so brutally exposed in the Sunday Herald at the weekend. I am very clear indeed that the evidence before us from those reports suggests that raising attainment is not all about money. If that were the case, we would be well ahead, because since 1999 we have doubled the amount of spending on schools, yet we have not seen comparable changes in attainment and, sadly, there has been little improvement in our performance according to international measurements. Although I believe that comparisons with other countries can be useful—and, in some cases, extremely useful—the most important measurement is often how much better we are doing against ourselves, and that is why we must be prepared to look at much more than just the efficiency of public spending on our schools. I suggest that a combination of five things, if delivered together, will raise attainment levels among pupils—especially those in our most deprived communities who, for me, must be our priority. It is simply not acceptable to say that weaker local economies, or more disadvantaged communities, are necessarily an excuse for poor performance. Of course the challenge is greater—no one would deny that—but so, too, is the prize of being able to deliver better educational outcomes for those pupils. Let us not be shy about telling the truth and being up front about what needs to be done. First, let us consider carefully not only the broad principles of the combined reports of Donaldson, Cameron and McCormac, but some of the small print too—because that is where some of the most important comments lie. They make it clear that, as well as increasing professional support for teachers, leadership in schools is crucial. I am talking not simply about the usual traditional concept of leadership, which most people think lies with the headteacher, but about leadership in our classrooms and among our pupils. The issue is competence—and confidence in that competence. Let us not dismiss the concerns raised by Graham Donaldson when he said that too many young teachers have issues with literacy and numeracy, which has a major impact on their teaching abilities—even if many of them have many of the other talents that can help to make them outstanding teachers. The problem cannot be ignored, nor can the issue of literacy and numeracy at large, because it is nothing short of a disgrace that one in six pupils leaves school without being functionally literate. Although I think that there is genuine intent to tackle the problem, I still do not believe that we are doing enough to ensure that the best practice of teaching traditional methods, and testing accordingly, is more widespread—methods that in local authorities such as West Dunbartonshire and Clackmannanshire have produced better results, for weaker pupils just as much as for more able pupils. Secondly, it is becoming patently clear that comprehensive education beyond S2 has failed. The one-size-fits-all approach is not working. It does not provide the flexibility and diversity that we need. Our system is too centralised and too overregulated. We need greater flexibility so that we can do much more to expand the vocational and technical training that this country so desperately needs. There are more lessons to be learned from David Cameron’s review of devolved school management, particularly as he binds together the underlying philosophy of curriculum for excellence with the need to allow heads to have greater control over the provision that they make for their pupils. He points out that the curriculum for excellence is not compatible with the existing structure of school management. How much I agree with him on that point.

David Cameron put the argument across strongly when the Education and Culture Committee took evidence. The curriculum for excellence allows individual schools to have much more control over how they organise their subjects and over how they deliver education to pupils. Logically, that must allow us to devolve more management to schools. I entirely agree with that principle. I will finish by combining some comments from the Donaldson report and the programmes of Teach First, which have worked so successfully in England, America, Australia and Germany, especially when it comes to helping pupils from poorer backgrounds and raising their aspirations. Donaldson makes it very clear indeed that he thinks that the teaching profession will have to be much more adaptable than ever before, and that it is time to attract a greater diversity of backgrounds into the teaching profession. I do not take issue with the Scottish Government’s motion, except in that it is far too bland about the key points that will improve attainment. I move amendment S4M-01134.1, to insert at end: “, and believes that there are important recommendations contained in the recent Donaldson, McCormac and Cameron reports, which, when implemented, will raise standards in Scotland’s schools, deliver a school system that is much more responsive to the demands of pupils, parents and teachers and will provide greater incentives to turn around failing schools.”

Will the member take an intervention?

The debate has been very interesting. We should be in no doubt that the motion is benign. I listened carefully to what the minister said at the start of the debate, and picked out from her speech seven key points about what is important. I do not think that any member has any problem with the importance of the early years, preventative spend, the health policy link, children’s services, including expanding the GIRFEC agenda, working with parents, the curriculum for excellence, and 16 to 19-year-olds, but the motion is benign in that it does not get down to the root-and-branch changes that have been recommended in some of the most recent reports that have been commissioned by the Government through painstaking efforts. Foresight has gone into those recommendations, which are on the Government’s table right now. We must take on board a lot of what is said in those reports, as they are manifestly about raising attainment, ensuring that we have good-quality teachers and headteachers in all our schools, and raising the aspirations of every single child in this country. I do not agree with everything that Ken Macintosh said, but I agree that funding is not the main issue. It is about building on the first-class work of the General Teaching Council for Scotland, raising the professionalism of teachers across the board, and speaking about the uncomfortable truth that a very small minority of teachers should not be in our classrooms. It is about dealing with literacy and numeracy, moving on to a post-McCrone settlement that will find support among our teachers, and ensuring that the school system is much more responsive to the needs of pupils, parents and teachers rather than to the Government and quangos. It is about building greater flexibility into the system and being prepared to admit that the comprehensive structure has failed too many of our pupils when it comes to mastering the basic skills. Those are all serious issues that have been taken up by Graham Donaldson, Professor McCormac and David Cameron, and they demand serious answers. Several members have rightly mentioned the importance of the early years. It is true that the early years are important, and it is right that the Scottish Government has acknowledged their importance and that that acknowledgement must be complemented by a range of policies to do with health visitors, nursery and child care, and disability care—Joan McAlpine mentioned that—and policies that will help to promote better parenting. Sandra White focused on that. As we know, there is a much stronger correlation between better attainment and children who grew up in a loving, caring and healthy environment. I want to pick out Derek Mackay’s contribution, as he focused on policies that work. It is a lesson for all members that, whichever party we belong to, we should take up policies that work and that can demonstrate that they improve attainment. Derek Mackay referred to things that are happening in his part of the world in Renfrewshire and Glasgow. Those things have worked. The nurture groups have basically worked, and many of the schemes that have encouraged greater parenting involvement have worked. My colleague Jamie McGrigor referred to many initiatives in rural schools, where the use of the campus by the community and the increased involvement of parents in the school have worked. That is extremely important. No member will be surprised to hear me come back to a policy of giving greater responsibility to headteachers and teachers in the classroom, which has been a substantial feature of the evidence that has been presented to the Government recently. We should consider the results of schools that have first-class headteachers and schools that were failing but have been turned around by their headteachers. As Marco Biagi said, the headteachers of those schools have thrown off the mantle of Government objectives and have done things for themselves. They have got results, and good for them. I know that I will be criticised for ensuring that free schools are part of our policy, but I say to members who criticise the Conservative policy and argue that free schools are the privilege of the middle classes that that is not the case. In a third of cases in which the offer of free-school status has been taken up in England, the applications came from disadvantaged communities. The advantage of the pupil premium, which Liam McArthur mentioned, is that it provides an incentive. Free schools in England are working and parents are being attracted into the system. The Teach First programme brings some of the finest graduates into schools to help some of the most disadvantaged pupils. I have looked at the programme in Germany, England, America and Australia, where it has turned around the results of many poorly-performing schools and given ambition and aspiration to children who perhaps previously had little of either. Surely that is what it is all about. I ask the Government to consider the programme carefully. Teach First is an important project and Scotland would be well advised to consider it. I accept that there must be guarantees that the GTC would have some oversight of registration. Education policy in this country should be driven by what works, not by political ideology. I support the amendment in my name.

If there is a sector in Scottish education that has made the most substantial progress in recent years, it is the college sector. Its institutions have delivered excellence in many aspects, have transformed the quality of college courses and have widened access to many students, of all ages, who in previous times would not have been able to take advantage of further education. Since colleges were granted their independence by the Conservative Government in 1992, they have enjoyed much greater autonomy and much greater flexibility, which has allowed them to adapt to the demands of their local regions, to build much better links with other educational institutions and to develop courses around the different needs of individual students. The Parliament pays tribute to that work and to the enthusiastic manner in which colleges have set about dealing with the current challenges that face them. In the vast majority of cases, they have an outstanding record. That is why they are, quite rightly, puzzled and upset that, despite those achievements, they are being asked to accept the brunt of the education spending cuts in this year's spending review—cuts that come hard and fast on the back of an average 10 per cent reduction in budgets last year. Last week, John Spencer, the convener of Scotland’s Colleges, said that it was inconceivable that colleges would be able to absorb more cuts without harm being done to student places, to staffing or to the quality of courses. Over the period 2011 to 2015, those cuts could amount to more than 20 per cent in real terms, assuming that student support is maintained at a flat cash level. That view is echoed by Mike Dibsall, the principal of Telford College, who has said: “To think that the sector could operate or indeed maintain provision after having our budgets slashed by 10 per cent last year was challenging, but to have them reduced again by 14.3 per cent spread over the next three years is just baffling. This is an incredibly difficult feat and I dread to think of what the sector will look like in a few years time when these new cuts are felt.” He is referring to the fact that the further education sector is likely to be asked to cope with having its funding cut in real terms from £544 million to £435 million in 2011-15 while it watches the higher education sector get an increase from £926 million to £982 million. Why has the Scottish Government chosen to punish the colleges so hard, particularly when they will be integral to the new Scottish Government flagship policy of offering opportunities to all 16 to 19-year-olds, when unemployment among young people is high and when businesses across Scotland have heaped praise on the college sector for its ability to train more students and apprentices in the new skills required for today's fast-changing world? Surely, there is not much logic to the Government’s position. I can suggest one reason why the Scottish Government has taken this action. It is because of its persistent refusal to bring in additional sources of private income to higher education, thereby putting additional strain on the whole education budget.

For the simple reason that the Scottish National Party Government will not accept the fact that it cannot just say that it does not approve of the principle of asking anyone to pay to learn. It cannot say that to students from the rest of the United Kingdom, who face the exact same problem because they are being asked to pay in Scotland. That does not affect the argument that the member has just raised.

There are many FE students who might have higher education places in colleges and, if they come from the rest of the UK, they will surely be paying.

Along with many in the university sector and many public figures such as Lord Sutherland and Sir Andrew Cubie, the Scottish Conservatives have persistently argued that free higher education is unsustainable. We maintain that position, notwithstanding the claims from the Scottish Government that it will plug the funding gap for the next three years. At what price to our colleges? The Scottish Government cannot get away from the fact that 1,000 staff have been shed in the FE sector so far this year, the school college partnership work has been significantly reduced and, despite claims to the contrary, the number of learners has decreased. The Scottish Government can no longer claim that there cannot be greater flexibility in its budget decisions about HE and FE. Until budget year 2010-11, the Scottish Government had separate budget lines for capital expenditure for the two sectors but for budget years beyond that the Scottish funding council has one pot for both sectors, so the Scottish Government can no longer claim that its hands are so tied. There is new scope for flexibility and therefore there should be much greater scope for a more equitable share between the two sectors. I do not for a minute take issue with the desire of the Scottish Government and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to examine whether HE and FE are delivering best value for money. I do not doubt for a minute that some rationalisation is necessary—even some mergers in the future—but let us hope that the handling of that is not condensed into a six-week period like it was in the disgraceful situation at Abertay and Dundee, tellingly described by Lord Sutherland at the Education and Culture Committee on Tuesday as a “merger by fax”. Reform is essential, but so is the continuing autonomy of the sector and so is colleges’ desire to play an equal part in any tripartite discussions that must take place between the Scottish Government, the Scottish funding council and the colleges themselves. Discussions about the future structure of our colleges and universities will be extremely important and they must include the fullest possible consultation with all parties. I will now concentrate on the priorities of the Scottish Government. It has made it very plain that there is to be a much greater focus on the provision of opportunities for 16 to 24-year-olds and especially those in the 16 to 19 age group. It is a laudable ambition; but why then cut colleges’ resources? By definition, they will be expected to play a key role in this initiative, which will make additional demands on the college sector. As I understand the Scottish Government’s proposals, regionalisation is at the heart of the post-16 programme and it is predicted that there will be some savings as a result. However, I cannot see how any of those savings can possibly occur in a sufficiently short timescale to avoid serious pressures on colleges as they try to develop post-16 arrangements. Indeed, if possible mergers were to be part of restructuring, it is possible that costs could increase rather than decrease in the short term. The Scottish Government should be aware that there is a lack of evidence to suggest that significant savings can be made in the short term. Let us not forget that there are many other student groups at college: part-time students, mature students and a minority of apprentices, who are all an essential part of the work of colleges and essential to ensuring that we have a mobile and flexible workforce across the economy. How will they fare if more demands to help with prioritising the 16 to 19 reform are laid on colleges at the same time as crippling budget cuts? What will happen to the provision of HE places—28 per cent of the total HE provision—especially for students from disadvantaged areas? Does that really sit well with the principles that underpin this Government’s priorities? I do not think so. The Scottish Government’s economic strategy commits to maintaining bursary support to help young people to remain engaged in college and training. It is right to ask the Government whether it can confirm that student support in colleges will be maintained in real terms over the course of the spending review period. Bursary support is crucial to many students who would not otherwise be able to access further or higher education and it is also crucial to maintain a diverse student intake. We need a cast-iron assurance that bursary support will be maintained and that there will be no prospect of increasing inequality between the level of support for FE and for HE students. I return to where I began by praising the outstanding work that has been undertaken by the college sector over recent years. Colleges have coped admirably with the challenges put upon them and they are undoubtedly a hugely important part of the improvements in post-school education. They should be congratulated rather than punished by the Government, which has muddled its priorities and ended up with a total lack of coherence in FE and HE policy. It is incumbent on us all to heed the warnings in formal communications from Scotland’s Colleges about what could happen as a result of the spending review. The organisation fears further cuts. In the worst case that some predict, which is a cut by a fifth in the total for colleges, colleges fear cuts in student places or—if places can be maintained—cuts in teaching time. The colleges are also fearful about whether they will be able to maintain the college estate. As I said, the college sector has made outstanding progress in recent years, but there is considerable doubt about whether it will emerge as anything other than weaker. That would be hugely detrimental to Scotland and to our economic potential. I move, That the Parliament notes the profound concern expressed by Scotland’s Colleges that last week’s Spending Review has severely damaged the ability of colleges to maintain student places and staffing levels, and their ability to deliver quality education across all areas of the further education sector; notes that the core funding cuts to colleges of 13.5% could result in a real-terms cut of over 20% if student support is maintained at a flat-cash level; believes that this is a direct consequence of the Scottish Government’s refusal to allow additional private sources of finance in the higher education sector thereby putting additional financial strain on every other area of education spending, and calls on the Scottish Government to explain why, in light of the findings of the post-16 review, it has severely cut back on the highly successful school/college partnerships that provide enhanced vocational opportunities for young people.

Notwithstanding the cabinet secretary’s comment about cuts, why does the college sector—relative to the higher education sector—have to bear the brunt of cuts?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that it is up to the Scottish Government to decide the spending levels in HE and FE?

6. To ask the First Minister who has responsibility for decisions regarding university mergers. (S4F-00166)

On Tuesday, Lord Sutherland described the consultation process regarding the possible merger between the University of Abertay Dundee and the University of Dundee as a “merger by fax”. Does the First Minister believe that it is acceptable for those universities to have just six weeks to respond to the Scottish funding council’s request that a possible merger be considered?

I hope that I am qualified to participate in the debate, even though I do not have a doctorate. I thank the Scottish Government for at least giving us a little more in the way of detail this afternoon. When the Scottish Government launched the initiative, those of us who are education spokesmen were contacted by journalists and asked what we made of it. I said that I had to confess that I was a little confused about what the proposal was. I went back and looked at the Scottish National Party manifesto and I still remain a little confused, even though the Scottish Government has given us a few more details this afternoon, because I am not entirely convinced of the logic. The manifesto states that the SNP wants to “develop the concept of Scottish Studies”, which would create, “a distinct strand of learning focused on Scotland and incorporating Scottish History, Scottish Literature, the Scots and Gaelic Languages, wider Scottish culture and Scottish current affairs.” The SNP manifesto goes on to say that “All pupils will have access to this strand at Primary and Secondary levels.” I am confused for two reasons. First, I thought that it was plain to most observers that Scottish studies, in their widest sense, were already embedded in the Scottish curriculum and that they will be enhanced in all schools by the curriculum for excellence. I thought that maybe I had got this wrong, so I went off and did quite a lot of research to check whether I had made a mistake. I found a Times Educational Supplement Scotland article from 2008 about developments for the curriculum for excellence, in which there was a very full run down from teachers in schools all across Scotland—in English, mathematics, home economics, history, biology, physics, chemistry and French—who had all explained, in considerable detail, exactly how Scottish themes were present in their subjects. I also found a sizeable Learning and Teaching Scotland document—all 317 pages of it—in which there is a very precise and detailed description of exactly how Scottish studies are embedded in the curriculum. It lists at length how Scottish themes are a core part of pupils’ learning. I will quote some of them. On classical languages, the document states: “By studying a classical language, young people will become ever more aware of how vital parts of Scotland’s culture, the arts, law, political systems and social values are both directly and indirectly linked with the classical world.” On religious education, it states: “The experiences and outcomes draw on the rich and diverse context of Scotland’s cultural heritage through the use of Scottish stories, images, music and poems.” On modern languages, it states: “children and young people can gain access to the literary heritage of humanity and develop their appreciation of the richness and breadth of Scotland’s literary heritage.” That left me with an important question: what else does the SNP think it is necessary to teach children about Scotland? Why has what started out as a concept been transmuted into a strand and then into a subject? What on earth is it that the current curriculum does not have that would make a new case for Scottish studies?

Of course I welcome any measures that give teachers more confidence. What I am asking is: why is it that the proposed Scottish studies course gives something extra that is not already in the curriculum? We have hordes of bits of paper that tell us that Scottish studies are already a fundamental part of the Scottish curriculum. My second reason for being a little confused is related to other curriculum developments. The SNP, of all parties, should know the criticisms that it faces about trying to fit everything else into a crowded curriculum. Who was it that said that they would deliver two hours of quality physical education per week to every pupil? Who persuades us, or at least tries to persuade us, that they are making good progress in this area? Who is it that has received submissions from concerned history teachers about losing discrete time in the social sciences and from language teachers who are concerned that we are not devoting enough time to German, French or Spanish? It is bad enough trying to explain to those teachers why they are being squeezed in the curriculum without a new subject appearing, to add further tensions. I appreciate that the SNP has decided not to make the subject compulsory—thank goodness for that—but even by being an optional subject, it will have significant implications for the timetable in schools, so the SNP needs to come clean and explain which subjects will be squeezed as a result. Let us be charitable. If I thought that important aspects of Scottish studies that are essential components of a better education for our pupils were not currently being taught, I might have a little more sympathy with the SNP. However, all the research that I can find seems to offer a wealth of evidence that there is already very considerable and good-quality coverage of Scottish literature, language, politics, culture and history. Indeed, coverage has increased recently, as a result of changes to Scottish Qualifications Authority highers and the introduction of curriculum for excellence. Therefore, from a logical and an educational perspective, I am struggling to see why the proposed addition to the timetable is necessary and why it will not overlap with existing courses. Is not the proposal also a bit of a kick in the teeth to the people who spent hours devising all the curriculum for excellence materials, only to learn that some of their work might have to be changed? Perhaps it is not surprising that some people think that there is something a little bit political in the proposal. It is hard not to be cynical, but I will try. I hope that the SNP will be able not only to answer the two questions that I raised, but to dispel any hint that its proposal is more to do with the SNP’s pet themes than with anything else. Before anyone in the SNP tries their usual tack and says that the Scottish Tories are anti-Scottish, I remind the Parliament and the cabinet secretary that it was the Tories, under Scottish secretaries Malcolm Rifkind and Michael Forsyth, who provided far more money for Gaelic, the £8 million Gaelic television fund and the National Heritage (Scotland) Act 1985, which financed many projects on Gaelic and Scots. I also remind members that the Tories supported the introduction of a discrete Scottish history paper in higher history. I will take no lessons from—or be indoctrinated by—anyone about the Tories being anti-Scottish. Of course we support arguments in education that are aimed at ensuring that all pupils understand and appreciate the extraordinary richness of Scotland and its historical, social, cultural and political identity, but I am not persuaded of a need for a new Scottish studies programme. I will not be surprised if that goes for many teachers, too. I move amendment S4M-00959.1, to leave out from “welcomes” to end and insert: “agrees that it is essential that all young people should have the opportunity to learn and be better informed about their country and its place in the world, including its historical, literary, linguistic and cultural inheritance as well as its landscape and natural heritage, and that such learning provides a more relevant and connected learning experience that raises ambition and attainment for all, but believes that these educational opportunities are already extensively and successfully embedded in the curriculum without the need for the addition of discrete Scottish Studies.”

I totally accept some of the points that the member is making but would he agree that it is the point of the curriculum for excellence to concentrate on many of the local circumstances and the environment from which learners come?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the impact of introducing a funding floor for local authorities. (S4O-00189)

Setting the floor at 85 per cent is estimated to have no direct financial benefit to some local authorities. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that taxpayers of those authorities, such as Perth and Kinross Council, will not lose out?

I add my congratulations to Jamie Hepburn and thank Save the Children for its important and thought-provoking report, which flags up so many of the barriers that are facing those who are in lower-income groups and the difficult choices that they have to make when they are looking after their children. Notwithstanding some of the comments from Labour members about the UK Government, I have to say that the Labour Party in Scotland and the former SNP minister who has just left the chamber did a great deal to refocus the debate. Hugh Henry was right when he said that we have much that we can be proud of. There is no doubt that early childhood development through good-quality care or educational opportunities is crucial to determining the future health and wellbeing of children. The statistical evidence for that is non-contestable. The possible attainment gaps are well established; they can open up at as early as 22 months and, if we do not do something radical about that, it is difficult to close them later in life. I therefore welcome the debate very much, but I suggest that the discussion is not just about childcare but about an opportunity that goes well beyond providing invaluable support to parents: the provision of early years education to enhance and promote children’s wellbeing and development. Indeed, not getting that right can have profound and potentially expensive ramifications later in a child’s life. I believe that all parties in the chamber have done a lot to move that debate on, which is good news. I hear the criticisms of the UK Government in relation to the tax and benefits issues, but I do not entirely agree with what Malcolm Chisholm and Hugh Henry said in that regard. I believe that the Westminster Government has taken to heart the importance of early education. One of the first policies that it implemented was the entitlement to 15 hours a week of free early education. That is an important provision that we can build on in Scotland. The message from parents that they want greater flexibility and the free entitlement, particularly for those in disadvantaged communities, can take us a long way down that road. An important point, which I think Bob Doris raised, is partnership issues for both nursery and childcare provision. We face far too many rigidities in Scotland in that regard, because, through local authorities, the state can dictate a bit too much at times just what placings are available. That is unfortunate, because parents want much greater flexibility and choice. However, it should not be just about convenience for parents, as the social and educational interests of the child must always be at the heart of provision. The Save the Children report provides compelling evidence of the difficulties facing many families because of what it describes as the childcare trap and it sends out a strong message to employers—the point made about colleges in this regard is important, too—that they have a vital role in supporting families and our young children. We need to take that message to heart, so I warmly congratulate Jamie Hepburn on bringing the debate to Parliament.

I thank the cabinet secretary for prior sight of his statement. The cabinet secretary makes much in his statement of the increase in transparency and accountability for both colleges and universities, which are fine principles. However, will he give the Parliament an assurance that that does not mean greater Government control and centralisation? The Government also proposes a minimum income of £7,000 for the lowest-income students. What proportion of the total number of undergraduates will receive that income, and will it be open to European Union students?

Notwithstanding that answer, will the First Minister tell us how many places for Scottish and European Union students will be cut in the next five years as a result of the pressure on universities to take far more students from the rest of the UK?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the prior sight of his statement. Will he confirm whether the increased fees that are to be charged to RUK students will be indexed in line with inflation? Given that the vast majority of English institutions have now set their fees, with the average being £8,600, will the cabinet secretary confirm whether he believes that the total funding gap is still only £155 million? David Willetts confirmed yesterday that there will be 10 per cent more cash in the English university system by 2014-15. What increase in cash terms will be enjoyed by Scottish universities in 2014?

I congratulate Mike Russell and his team on their re-election, and Mr Macintosh and Mr McArthur on their new posts. I pay tribute to those who are no longer in this Parliament: their contributions to the debate on education certainly made us think, even if we—or I—did not always agree with them, which made for a very healthy debate. I think that we all appreciated the hustings that we took part in during the election period, because they also often made us think. Some interesting issues were raised, as well as a lot of concerns, which events this week have emphasised. Councils are clashing with the SNP over school closures, and the Educational Institute of Scotland is organising a ballot on whether it will go ahead with a boycott of curriculum for excellence, which would be most unfortunate. EIS and the Scottish Secondary Teachers Association are not happy about COSLA’s submission, which they view as a bit of an attack on the professionalism and autonomy of teachers. There are grumblings about the SNP’s refusal to acknowledge the size of the universities funding gap, and—perhaps most worrying of all—there is the headline that we have seen about teacher numbers. These are troubled times, and there is a host of concerns that would, if they were allowed to continue, threaten all that is good in Scottish education. As the cabinet secretary said, there is much that is good in education in Scotland, and that needs to be celebrated. Those problems in education are not all the fault of the cabinet secretary, which he will be pleased to hear, but they increasingly reflect some of the SNP’s wrong-headed policies. There is an increasing perception in some quarters that the cabinet secretary is trying to spin a line that is a little different from reality. We have had a persistent and—in my view and that of many people in higher education—quite extraordinary refusal to accept the full extent of the funding gap in higher education. We have heard an insistence from the cabinet secretary that plenty of money is available for local authorities to carry out the restructuring of all their schools programmes, and an insistence that the teacher recruitment statistics are perhaps not all that accurate. Perhaps they are not 100 per cent accurate, but they reflect a very worrying situation, and we must measure up to that. I am well aware that there have been some rather inflammatory comments in the world of education recently, which does not help. However, there is nonetheless a strong message out there that people in education feel very strongly about things at present, and we must respond to that. I will try to draw together some of the strands of criticism of the Scottish Government from the many different quarters of education—early years professionals, teachers in our schools, classroom assistants, people who are working as specialists in physical education, drama and art, and college and university principals and lecturers—because there is a common theme, which reflects what I think is wrong with the statist approach in its truest sense. The concordat was meant to herald a new era of co-operation between central and local government, together with an understanding that the absence of the straitjacket of ring fencing would mean that councils had much more freedom to decide things for themselves—a concept that the SNP often stresses. In reality, the concordat has proved to be much more of a straitjacket: it has forced local authorities to accept rigid targets set by central Government. Not only have those targets proved to be undeliverable, they have proved to be different from the priorities within local government. There are plenty of examples of that—I will not go through them all—but the policy on class sizes may be the one that has been most affected. The cabinet secretary is now admitting that the policy will take much longer to achieve than expected. Without class size targets, councils would have been better able to choose their own priorities—and perhaps would have put more money into teaching jobs. We will need to consider such issues carefully, because the teaching market needs to be more flexible. I think that the cabinet secretary is probably moving a little in that direction. It also looks as if the Scottish Government will adopt more of a statist approach with colleges and universities—we need only ask people in the colleges about the comments on collective bargaining that have been made or ask people in the universities who fear an attack on the autonomy of the university structure. Of course we want accountability, but we certainly do not want to remove autonomy, which is one of the inherent principles of our university system. I strongly support the Donaldson review, and I hope that I will support the coming report of the McCormac review. Jointly, those reviews offer the best way forward for providing greater flexibility and for enhancing the professionalism of Scotland’s teachers. Both reviews were tasked with making important and challenging changes—to raise attainment levels and to motivate teachers, give them the resources that they require and assure them that they are a highly valued part of Scottish society. The teaching unions are keen to stress that our teachers, by and large, are first class. Parliament, too, must send that message about all the things that teachers do. We must maintain the strong academic tradition of both higher and further education. The debate over finances has been well rehearsed, and Parliament is well versed in the views of the Conservatives. However, I ask the cabinet secretary not to use the excuse of the funding issue to attack the autonomy of the colleges and universities, or to attack the way in which they choose to organise themselves. That would be very dangerous, and such an approach could make it difficult for people in both sectors to realise their international ambitions. We need to be very careful about that. The funding crisis must be resolved—no two ways about it. The cabinet secretary has put his eggs in one basket, saying that the state will provide. However, he must give the Parliament confidence that, if the state is to pick up the tab, there will be no cuts in student numbers, in courses or in any aspect of our university system, and that he will not become overreliant on the fees of people who come in from outside Scotland. The cabinet secretary stresses the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. He must keep that firmly in mind.

For clarity, I ask the member what the Labour Party’s policy is on higher education funding.

I thank the cabinet secretary for prior sight of his statement. I have just two questions. When it comes to the length of the moratorium, the cabinet secretary implied that it was a question of revisiting the legislation and possibly the guidelines. If that is correct, all of us in Parliament have a duty to make the legislation clearer than it is now. Will it take a year to do that, or could it be done in a shorter timescale? My second question is about the logic of what is proposed. If we are talking about a legislative or a guideline interpretation issue, should the proposal not include all schools, rather than just rural schools?

I begin by giving Dr Nanette Milne’s apologies. She was due to open the debate for the Conservatives. I am obviously now doing that, so my role will be taken by my new colleague Ruth Davidson, who will make her maiden speech summing up—I do not think that that is a usual occurrence. If members see some musical chairs in a minute as we switch round, it is because her console is not working. I very much welcome Shona Robison’s appointment. The idea that there is a minister in charge of sport speaks volumes about the Government’s intention. That is good news. Many members will have seen the recent reports of the heroic efforts of Major Phil Packer and several of his colleagues who, over the past few years, suffered very serious injuries in Afghanistan. Together, they have succeeded in some extraordinary sporting achievements that would be considered remarkable for able-bodied persons, never mind for those who have returned without one or, in some cases, two of their limbs. Whether rowing across the Atlantic, finishing the London marathon or climbing El Capitan in Yosemite park, those former servicemen have demonstrated with extraordinary courage and conviction that sport can have an enormously powerful effect when it comes to transforming people’s lives. Although theirs might be a special case, the values about which they speak are often held up as those that define much of what is good in sport: self-discipline, teamwork, responsibility, the building of self-esteem and confidence, and the sheer enjoyment of taking part in something that can bring wider social and health benefits to the individuals concerned. The many Scottish sports stars—men and women from many different parts of the country and from many different backgrounds—all tell us that sport has given them much. They also share the belief that grass-roots support when somebody is just starting out on the journey is important. That support is as important as anything in sport and we need to do far more in Scotland to ensure that we broaden the grass-roots support that is available, whether in the form of more qualified coaches, greater use of the nation’s sporting facilities, the provision of more equipment, help with transport costs or more supervision of our young people. It does not matter whether somebody aspires to be an Olympic champion or simply to enjoy a little sport for occasional relaxation and leisure, the importance of grass-roots support in setting people out on the right track must not be underestimated. That is especially true for young children.

Mark McDonald makes a first-class point. I concur with what he says. It is important that we address the matter. It does not matter whether we ask Chris Hoy, Andy Murray, Mark Beaumont or Rhona Martin: they will all tell us that they would be nowhere without the grass-roots support that they received. Some people would say that too many of our sports stars in the past had to go elsewhere to complete their training but, as the minister said, a wonderful opportunity is presented to us by the forthcoming Commonwealth games, the Ryder cup, the open championship and, of course, the Olympic games in London with all the capital developments and the economic and social spin-offs that will come from those events. It is good to hear that the planning for those events appears to be within budget and on time. We must continue to monitor that carefully as time goes on because other countries know to their cost what happens if contracts are not properly scrutinised and if there is mismanagement in the strategic planning of such events. If ensuring that the events go to plan is a difficult exercise, so too is the effort that is required to build a lasting legacy. That legacy will require a change in attitude and culture if it is to transform more than just a few sections of society. That is why the Scottish Conservatives have worked intensively with Gavin Hastings to establish a grass-roots sports trust—an independent charitable trust run on the basis of supporting communities by making available more opportunities for youngsters in areas where there has been too little activity. I hear what the Government says and I applaud it for some new initiatives, but we must do much more—particularly in an age when, as Dr Simpson said, councils are struggling with their finances—to ensure that we truly value PE staff, outdoor education specialists, swimming pool attendants and any other support staff as people who can set youngsters on the first road. Another important aspect of our trust fund idea is the facility for businesses, philanthropists and other groups to have the opportunity to put something back into their communities and to do what they can to inspire greater physical activity among all people in that community. Be in no doubt about the effort that is required to engage more fully with these youngsters. The SNP has made some progress on the target of two hours of quality PE, but progress is still fairly short of the target set out in 2007, which is demonstrated by the shifting of the target to 2014. That shows the extent of what we have to do. It remains the case that many schools hide behind excuses for why they are unable to deliver better opportunities. Perhaps there will be improvements as a result of HMIE inspections, the curriculum for excellence and some of the initiatives that the minister has set out. I yet again plead that we must look to provide five days of residential outdoor education for all pupils, because it is my fundamental belief that that experience gives them so much. I will always be grateful for the sporting opportunities that I have enjoyed, and continue to enjoy, as a participant at every level of sport. I have played many sports and I am perhaps most inspired when, as a coach, I see what happens to youngsters when they get that spark of inspiration. That is what we need to do as a Parliament. I move amendment S4M-00168.2, to leave out from “acknowledges” to end and insert: “and recognises that far more priority must be given to increasing and improving physical education in primary and secondary schools, to delivering opportunities in outdoor education for all pupils and to improving grassroots support in clubs and schools and community access to sporting facilities across the country.”

I congratulate Kezia Dugdale on what was a very thought-provoking maiden speech. When the new Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning was the old Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, he told us in his usual quiet, unassuming and modest way that the education brief was never easy and that he was not someone who would run away from the difficult challenges. Again, in his usual quiet, unassuming and modest way, he told us that he would never do anything to undermine the success of Scottish education. Well, we should hope not. I do not doubt that considerable progress has been made. For example, the Donaldson review and, I hope, the forthcoming McCormac review are jointly the most likely means of paving the way for enhancing the professionalism of teachers across Scotland. Both those reviews were tasked with addressing highly challenging but nonetheless vital changes that will raise attainment levels and give teachers resources and motivation and the assurance that they are highly valued and are an essential link in the chain that will build a more successful Scotland. We supported the SNP on many of its policies to develop a better strategy for the early years—the most important years. I pay tribute to the work of Adam Ingram in that policy area. We also supported the SNP on its Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 and we support the need to review whether every section of that legislation will actually promote a more robust and transparent approach to decisions on whether to close individual schools. We agree with the SNP—or, rather, I think that it agrees with us—about the need to reform school management, even if I suspect that we will continue to disagree about what that reform should be. However, that is probably as far as it goes when it comes to agreement, so fundamental is the difference between our respective approaches to policy. Let me turn now to what we regard as the most serious educational challenges confronting the new Government, which are not just the challenges in addressing the SNP’s failure to deliver many of its 2007 manifesto policies but the other serious challenges confronting the educational establishment. Let me turn first to schools. Writing in The Scotsman on Tuesday, Peter Jones said: “Whether you do comparative studies of examination results between Scotland and elsewhere, look at the results of standardised testing carried out across numbers of countries, or listen to what employers say about the abilities of school-leaver recruits, you are forced to the conclusion that Scottish education is not the best we could have.” Notwithstanding the occasional hyperbole and journalistic licence with which a few commentators have debated what is happening to educational standards, the vast majority, including Peter Jones, base their comments on fact—indeed, on exactly what parents, teaching professionals and business leaders have been warning about for a considerable time. Scottish schools, which were once in the vanguard of international educational achievement—where they must be again—have shown in too many areas for comfort that they are sliding down the UK and international attainment scales, despite having considerable additional funds.

I certainly can, because it is a fundamental issue about those children for whom school does not work at all. It is about those children taking the opportunity in a fast-changing environment of new qualifications to move into the world of work, where they can train on the job. That policy has been accepted by many chambers of commerce and other people in business. The conclusion about the schools policy is either that the extra money that has gone into schools since the beginning of devolution is not being well spent or that money is not actually the issue. For us, a great deal of the debate is about the inherent failure of the concordat between central and local government and the fact that there is insufficient flexibility in the system to allow headteachers and, indeed, classroom teachers the freedom to decide what is in the best interests of our pupils. Like every other member, I have heard over weeks and months the concern among members of the teaching profession about the straitjacket in which they find themselves when it comes to the ability of local authorities to look after their best interests. This week, we have also heard criticism of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities as it has tried to respond to the issue. Its submission to the McCormac review has been denounced as an attack on teachers when, in fact, the real reason behind what is in its submission is that it knows that the current structure for managing and funding our schools is no longer sustainable. The clarion call for radical new thinking that has been led by the Scottish Conservatives is being echoed in many areas of education. The case for change has been made: deciding the nature of that change and how to deliver higher standards across the board now needs to be the priority. I turn to further and higher education and the two issues that, above all the many others, will determine whether we can maintain the strong academic tradition of our colleges and universities. Quite apart from the SNP’s fallacious argument that higher education should be free, there is the extraordinary continuing belief in SNP ranks that the funding gap that Scottish universities face is only £155 million. That sum was based on the assumption that the average fee in England would be £7,500 and that, crucially, fees would not be linked to inflation, yet we now know that 100 English universities—75 per cent of all higher education institutions in England—have declared that the level at which they will set their fees will equate to an average of £8,766. In addition, we know that the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills and the Office for Fair Access have said that the English universities will be able to raise their fees in line with inflation, so what credibility does the SNP have when it says that the funding gap is only £155 million? I issue another stark warning to the cabinet secretary: he should not use his failure to address the funding issue to criticise what he says is a lack of accountability in the further and higher education institutions, for if one thing is clear it is that there is a fear in the sector that the Scottish Government wants to centralise control and to compromise their autonomy. For them, sustainable funding and preserving their autonomy are non-negotiable. They are the inherent principles on which Scottish further and higher education are built, and they must remain so.

To have taken part in this legislative process has been an interesting and enlightening experience, even if the passing of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill will not—I dare say—go down in history as the Parliament’s most high-profile moment. Notwithstanding that, it is important to ensure that we put in place better records management. It has also been extremely encouraging that there has been almost unanimous cross-party agreement on how best to preserve and enhance the precious fabric of the nation’s heritage. Having good-quality, accessible public records and archives is an essential part of improving the welfare of society in general, if not democracy itself. It is fair to say that such records can make a life-changing difference to individuals and families. That point was forcibly made in some of our witness sessions—Ken Macintosh has just alluded to that. Although the main driving force for the bill was the unsatisfactory circumstances that affected many of our most vulnerable people, especially those flagged up by the Shaw review, there are other reasons why it was important to do more to improve things, particularly in order to create greater efficiency, spread good practice and keep costs to a minimum. We all accepted that all organisations receiving public money have an obligation to ensure that records are properly kept and that they are accessible and transparent. That said, the debate was really about how to strike the right balance between ensuring that there was greater efficiency, not imposing too much of a regulatory burden on different bodies, and including more organisations under the wider net of officialdom. The latter was—and, I think, remains—a slight concern of several voluntary sector groups and organisations, without which Scotland would be a much poorer place, especially when it comes to looking after vulnerable people. There were genuine concerns about whether a new legislative framework would be not only unnecessary but burdensome and time consuming for staff who have many other things to do, particularly when budgets in the voluntary sector remain tight. We give credit to the Scottish Government for taking on board all those concerns and for arriving at the bill we have before us today. It is good that the Government has listened carefully. There was concern about possible overimplementation of the legislation and about increasing workloads and so on. The Scottish Government deserves credit for having responded to those concerns and giving cast-iron assurances about the language in the bill and the need to ensure that the relationship between the keeper and the authorities will be fully consultative and agreed by both parties. I am grateful to the minister for that. It goes without saying that everyone was sympathetic to the former residents of children’s homes and special schools, and their families, who were able to put on record their immense difficulty and sometimes harrowing experiences in accessing the records that they required. Those difficulties presented a strong case for change and for addressing many of the inconsistencies in records management throughout Scotland. We have successfully addressed those issues. Like other members, I strongly recommend that all members endorse the bill this afternoon.

If I have unwittingly hit the record for the Opposition member who got the Government to accept the largest number of amendments to the Public Records (Scotland) Bill, I will also try to set the record for the shortest winding-up speech. I simply wish to thank all those who provided us with what was very moving and accurate evidence; the lobby groups, which gave us a lot of interesting information; all the clerks; my colleagues on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee—I know that we do not always agree on things; and the Scottish Government, for its engagement on the bill. I definitely encourage all my colleagues to support the bill at decision time.

The cabinet secretary has been at great pains to say that the SNP’s policy is based on the ability to learn rather than the ability to pay. In his announcement, he said that the £62 million—which is 40 per cent of the £155 million that he claims must be found for the university sector for 2014-15—must come from non-Scottish students. What will happen if he finds that Universities Scotland and many other expert commentators are correct in saying that the funding gap is much bigger than his estimate? Will that not simply mean that EU students and students from the rest of the UK will end up having to pay even higher fees and, therefore, completely destroy his claims about the policy’s being based on the ability to learn as opposed to the ability to pay, or will it mean that the Scottish taxpayer is saddled with increasing student debt?

It happened in England.

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the reported comments by Universities Scotland that “Universities are autonomous legal entities” and that “The appointment procedures for the university’s principal is a matter for each institution’s governing body”. (S3F-2953)

It is good to hear that the Scottish Government is very supportive of robust, transparent and autonomous processes. They can perhaps be enhanced, but many are already in place. Will the First Minister agree that another advantage of introducing a graduate contribution, apart from ensuring that the universities would receive more money, which they require, is that such a system would make the leaders of those institutions even more accountable to students and staff?

The minister said that universities are autonomous institutions with the right to select their own students but that they must also accept that there is a legitimate wider public interest in who trains to be a teacher. Is it the Scottish Government’s belief that, in future, other bodies might participate in the final selection process for teacher training? Along similar lines, if a teacher was thought in any way not to match those criteria, would that still be a matter for the GTCS to decide?

Does the First Minister agree with Universities Scotland, Lord Sutherland, Sir Andrew Cubie, a range of people in the sector and the Scottish Conservatives that, if we are to continue to have world-class universities, which all of us want, there must be a graduate contribution?

In this hectic season of budgets, election preparation and the endless requests to attend hustings and briefing meetings, there is also the very important business for parliamentarians in interpreting the key messages that come from the main groups that are interested in our respective portfolios. There is a wealth of information in which each group sets out its own manifesto. Reading through those that relate to education, including—interestingly—those that relate to the tertiary sector from where there is perhaps the greatest demand at the moment for additional resources, there is universal acceptance that the early years are paramount, not just because of the health and social aspects that were described by Murdo Fraser in his introduction, but because it is a delicate task to get the balance right between those factors and the child’s education. It is a given that children invariably fare better when they grow up in a loving, caring and well-balanced environment in which family life is the centrepiece and in which they can flourish, both socially and academically, in the company of their teachers and school friends. It is important to recognise that there is no ready mix of those factors and that success can never be prescribed merely by the actions of Government. That point has been made in each of the thoughtful preceding speeches. Of course, what Government can do is put in place a raft of policies that help to create a more conducive environment in which parents and their children can thrive and where the education experience, from its earliest stages, is of the highest quality. Apart from ensuring that there is greater support for parents to recognise and adopt their full responsibilities in fulfilling their challenging role in society, we need to find ways of providing a structure of education that can combine excellence with flexibility, greater parental choice and greater diversity, so that the child’s needs and the expectations of the parents drive the system, rather than its being driven by any doctrinaire vision that believes that the state knows better than anyone else. So, what needs to be done on the education front to complement the health policies that were outlined by Murdo Fraser? First, we need to ensure that we do much better in providing parents with greater choice and flexibility in nursery school placing. I suggest that there is a consensus among all the parties that nursery support is invaluable, not only to the wellbeing and development of the 107,000 children in Scotland who attended pre-school education in 2010 but in providing support to parents who live away from their own parents or relatives or who are raising a child on their own and cannot rely on their partner for support. That is why we think that there is room for improvement in the current system. Many parents want greater flexibility when it comes to using their entitlements. As a result, some—not all—parents want a wider range of providers. A Daycare Trust report that came out yesterday, shows that the average annual cost of 25 hours of nursery care a week for a child under two is highest in Scotland, at £5,220, compared with just more than £5,000 in England and a little more than £4,700 in Wales. Conservatives argue not only that if there is more choice, parents will have more options in choosing which provision best suits them and their child, but that more robust competition between providers will inevitably lead to an overall reduction in costs, in some cases.

The member has made a reasonable point. There is work to be done in that regard and it is important that child care be included in the package. That is something that we definitely need to think about. Secondly, when it comes to providing greater choice, partnerships need to work properly. Partnership nurseries that involve local authorities and private providers should be true partnerships. Currently, some local authorities are dictating the allocation of places and ignoring official guidelines. Indeed, partnership status has been withdrawn from some private nurseries in Scotland, which means that parents have had to find another partner nursery or risk losing a part-time funded place. In some cases, that is worth up to £1,550 per year for each child. That is a wholly unsatisfactory situation. Thirdly, we want to work with teachers, support staff and teacher training colleges to ensure that there is greater emphasis on effective training for all teachers and support staff in recognising special needs at the earliest stage. As Mary Scanlon has said, detection is vital. The Scottish Government has done pioneering work in that respect and we give Adam Ingram and his colleagues credit for the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2009, but we need to do more to help teachers and parents to identify problems at the earliest stage, so that there is proper co-ordination of the individual programmes that can help children who have special needs. We need to be aware of the demands from teachers about the important need to address the issue. Fourthly, we need to address literacy and numeracy at the earliest age. There are many international studies on the theme, the vast majority of which show that an early grasp of literacy and numeracy can heighten a child’s confidence and success, and that children are more likely to flourish when teaching methods are consistent. We look forward to further developments in the area. Children need and want stability. Without doubt, what happens in a child’s earliest years has the biggest influence on their future. There is a very fine balancing act for Government to achieve, between standing aside to allow society to place its full trust and faith in parents and the family and legislating, where it must, to provide better welfare. Like many other social debates of the modern era, the debate is highly emotive and complex, but it is one from which we must not shy away. If we do not get parenting and early education right, we will not get our future right.

It is only a few weeks since the Parliament passed the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, at which time the view in the chamber on the importance of preserving and enhancing the very precious fabric of the nation’s heritage was unanimous. During that debate, there was considerable discussion on the need to ensure that we preserve all that is best for future generations; so too is that the central principle behind the bill that we debate this afternoon. Good-quality and accessible public records and archives are an essential part of improving the welfare of society in general, if not also the democracy about which Sandra White spoke in her reference to common good funds. If I may be allowed to say so, she made a very good point in that regard. It is fair to say that records can make a life-changing difference to individuals and families; that point was made forcibly to the committee on several occasions. While the main driving force for the bill was the very unsatisfactory circumstances that affected many of our most vulnerable people, particularly those whose cases were flagged up by the historic abuse systemic review, there are other important reasons why we must do something to improve things. I refer in particular to the need to create greater efficiency, spread good practice and keep costs to a minimum. No one doubts the need to do that if we are to ensure more of a level playing field across the country and if we are to avoid the gaps in our knowledge that poor record keeping—or, indeed, in some cases, no record keeping—can bring about. I think that we all accept that organisations that receive public money have an obligation to ensure that records are kept properly and that they are accessible and transparent. That said, there is still a debate to be had on striking the right balance between ensuring greater efficiency and not imposing too much of a regulatory burden on bodies and including more of them under the wider net of officialdom. As the minister rightly said, we need to keep the debate in perspective. We need to remember that the debate is on how to improve the management of records, not on what records are, or are not, included under the remit of public bodies. The latter debate might, understandably, arouse even more controversy. I heard the exchanges about the voluntary sector, in particular the exchange between the minister and Claire Baker. I, too, have concerns about the voluntary sector. These are organisations without which Scotland would be a much poorer place, particularly when it comes to looking after our most vulnerable people. I fully understand what the minister said on the subject, and I am grateful to her for her reassurances, but we must take on board the fact that the voluntary sector does so much for Scotland; it serves the country very well. At the moment, the voluntary sector is under not only huge financial pressure, but legislative pressure. We must take cognisance of the pressures that the sector is under. It would be a great pity if some people felt obliged to move away from the voluntary sector because of those burdens. My biggest concern was about the evidence from some voluntary sector groups that they could find no compelling evidence of a major issue with their existing processes and that the new legislative framework could be not only unnecessary but burdensome and time consuming for staff who have many other tasks to do, particularly when budgets are tight, which applies not just in a recession. Those concerns raised serious issues for me, which the minister has given an assurance will be addressed at stage 2. Linked to that is the genuine concern, which some members have mentioned, about a tendency to overimplement the bill, because of the mindset these days that we must do that. I would be concerned if workloads increased as a result, so it was good to hear the minister’s reassurance on that. Everyone is sympathetic to the former residents of children’s homes and special schools and to their families, who have had immense difficulty in accessing the records that they require. We appreciate the emotional issues that have resulted from sometimes harrowing experiences. It is clear that those difficulties present a strong case for change and for addressing many of the inconsistencies in records management across Scotland, but it is vital that we as parliamentarians scrutinise properly all the effects of making the process legislative rather than voluntary. We are happy to support the bill’s principles.

I warmly welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate, which has been secured by Andrew Welsh. Apart from the fact that we are celebrating Angus College and all our other colleges, the debate is timely for the reasons that Johann Lamont set out. There are on-going deliberations on how we should fund higher and further education in Scotland and, more broadly, on how we should prepare our young people for the world of work. That has been a pertinent issue this week, given some reports from the business community. Colleges in Scotland have proven themselves to be outstanding, and are an important part of the Scottish education landscape. They are also fundamental to our economic success as a nation. They offer a huge range of qualifications, from access courses at Scottish credit and qualifications framework level 3 right up to PhDs at level 12. Their recent strength has lain in their adaptability to national and economic circumstances and in their flexibility in responding to different regional demands. That is a factor that is aided in no small part by the enhanced autonomy that they have enjoyed since a Conservative Government passed the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992. Like universities, Scotland’s colleges are rightly protective of their autonomy. The enhancement of that autonomy will ensure the continued success of the sector. In its most recent briefing, Scotland’s Colleges stated: “The success of the college sector is fundamentally dependent on local autonomy and the flexibility and responsiveness that this creates.” Andrew Welsh gave us clear evidence of that in his speech. I am sure that it will come as no surprise to members that the Conservatives want to encourage greater scope for colleges to work with local schools, universities and businesses to enhance their economic and social contribution and to open up new opportunities to students through better integrated learner pathways. On working with schools, it would be helpful to have a more clearly defined two-route system from 14 years onwards, and to put much more emphasis on the skills that are required in the world of work, whether that is on awareness of the crucial need to turn up for work on time, to be appropriately dressed in a professional environment, or to know how to make calls and write letters to clients or customers. Senior businesses raised that important point just this week. If we are serious about opening up new academic and vocational routes to pupils, it is important and logical that colleges, as the largest providers of skills for new entrants and existing employees in the Scottish workforce, play a foremost role. From an academic perspective, I agree entirely with the suggestion from Scotland’s Colleges that there could be simplification of some academic qualifications, but nonetheless greater rigour in some ways for members of the student population in Scotland’s colleges who are undertaking considerable higher education courses. On collaboration with universities, there is a lot of good will from both the college sector and the universities and there is a lot of scope to build upon the excellent collaborative work that has taken place. Andrew Welsh referred to that and gave examples, and I know that my colleague Alex Johnstone will expand on the matter. I have put it on public record many times that there is great scope in Scotland to adopt the principle of greater flexibility in the exam system. That can help to facilitate benefits for the education of more of our young people and allow us greater flexibility in how we fund it. It is clear that that will be important. Our time is short. I congratulate Andrew Welsh not only on his long service, but on securing an important debate in which I am happy to have participated.

I do not like to admit it, but it is more than a quarter of a century since I last sat in a university economics lecture. It is also over a quarter of a century since I was a young student teacher at Boroughmuir high school, where Robin Harper was a teacher of modern studies. The pupils said that they liked Robin Harper very much and that he was a terrific teacher, and that they liked best his colourful ties. Some things do not change. Likewise, some things do not change in economics. Certain principles stay very much the same: first, unemployment is bad; secondly, productivity is good; and, thirdly, individuals have the potential to be the greatest asset of any country. Our hearts sink when we hear that the Scottish unemployment rate is rising three times faster than that in England, that the percentage of unemployed school leavers has risen by more than a percentage point in the last five years, that Scotland’s productivity rate is almost 5 per cent lower than the UK average, and that we have an education system that still, despite all its assets, fails properly to equip too many of our school leavers with the skills and knowledge that employers demand, and which pressures too many young people to go to university because there are not sufficient opportunities available for a non-university-based education. Indeed, that last point has become my party’s clarion call because it has identified the issue as being a fundamental problem that must be addressed if we are to claim that we are genuinely concerned about the economic and social advancement of Scotland. That is why I welcome the opportunity to debate Robin Harper’s motion, which has rightly identified the growing problem of unemployment among 16 to 19-year-olds. Although I can agree with the general tone of the motion, it is our view that if we want to deliver the best possible opportunities for young people, there needs to be a more diverse range of opportunities even before they reach the age of 16. As far as we are concerned, there should be a clearly defined two-route system from 14 onwards, in which young people are able to choose the form and type of education that they would like to continue, be it largely skills based or more weighted in favour of academic pursuits. That demands that young people receive improved and much more varied advice in careers departments. That system has been proved to be incredibly successful in countries such as Denmark and Germany. Those are countries where youth unemployment is lower than it is in Scotland, predominantly because their young people have become much better at defining their career paths and are better equipped with business skills. Nora Senior, who is vice-chairman of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, said recently at a conference that “there needs to be a whole-scale change to the way we talk about vocational and academic qualifications”. I acknowledge the Scottish Government’s attempt to take that further. It is a view that has also been endorsed by Angela Knight, who is chief executive of the British Bankers Association. She rightly suggests that we will go much further if we improve the quality of the careers advice that we give to young people as early as secondary 1 and S2, so that they are given sufficient access to all the information that they need to make an informed choice. Quite simply, if we as parliamentarians and Scots want to maximise the opportunities of our young people, it is not good enough to continue with the mediocre status quo of channelling all our children through a one-size-fits-all school system; an education, I suggest, for which they may in some cases have neither the inclination nor the aptitude to take best advantage. They have, however, other aptitudes, which would be much better utilised if they were given a different focus. The myth remains—it is a myth—that university is always a better place to be for fulfilling career aspirations. If we want change, we must ensure that we are offering our school pupils a wider range of options at an earlier age—options that are flexible and which are backed up with the requisite support. My colleague Gavin Brown will make comments about a Scottish youth microcredit scheme and how to engender a more entrepreneurial spirit. Any system that aspires to make entrepreneurs and wealth creators out of our young people is always worth a second look and, as Robin Harper rightly said, it is very much part of Scotland’s distinguished tradition. However, entrepreneurs need vision, they need direction and—crucially, I suggest—they need to posses the requisite skills and acumen to make the most of business. I was interested this week to hear the Law Society of Scotland make strong recommendations that classes on legal issues, rights and responsibilities should be on offer in Scottish schools. That is a similar theme to the one that has been pursued in petition PE1354, which has been brought to the Scottish Parliament by the campaigner Stewart MacKenzie. The same can be said for classes on financial management and entrepreneurship. That is why it is imperative that we make the changes that we have suggested in the debate. It is not enough, as the comparative evidence on microfinance suggests, to provide handouts while hoping that miracles will occur. Politicians need to show leadership.

This has been a largely consensual debate on many fronts, which is perhaps not surprising because it would be very hard to argue against the main principles of the bill. It has also been a very interesting debate and, as Ted Brocklebank said, it must continue. The fact that there have been so few amendments is becoming a major debating point, but it does not suggest that parliamentary scrutiny has been any less rigorous. It has been more rigorous, and we should bear that in mind. The bill was set out as a technical amending bill rather than one of substantial import and substance, but it has encompassed some extremely important points of detail and it has raised important issues about legal interpretation. I will come back to that later. As many members have said this afternoon, Scotland’s historic environment is the very precious fabric of this country. It is one of the most defining aspects of Scotland and it can bring enormous social and economic benefit, most especially in the form of visitor income. The bill matters even if it will not necessarily hit the headlines in the same way as many other items of parliamentary legislation would. Of course, the minimal cost involved was also in the bill’s favour. That was a pleasant change as far as the Government was concerned. Perhaps that is one reason why the bill has progressed a little more smoothly than most. When it comes to the front line in the protection of our historic environment, there are many legal issues. At stage 1, many people made a powerful case for the general principles of the bill and its prime objective, which is to preserve and enhance Scotland's historic environment for future generations. They made some points of legal detail. The comments were informed, and I pay tribute to the many people who gave us evidence and played a supporting role. Their deliberations were balanced and informative, and the briefings that we have received since have also been helpful. I note the comments, made by various members, about there being a need for clarification in several areas and perhaps a little need for the streamlining of the administration of our historical environment. That point was picked up by several speakers during today’s debate and by several key stakeholders throughout the earlier stages. There can be no objection about the need for greater clarity, especially when it comes to the interpretation of existing legislation, notwithstanding the current need to make the legislation compatible with the Valletta convention. For example, at stage 2 there was an interesting debate surrounding amendment 14—the doocot amendment—and what circumstances have to pertain before a local council can or, perhaps more important, should use its powers of intervention. The committee convener raised the issue following a constituency issue that had questioned what constituted a state of danger. The minister was very clear in her evidence on 15 December 2010 that powers exist to do something about that, but committee members needed to make up their minds about whether they were being used appropriately. That is quite an important issue as we bring the bill to its conclusion. There seemed to be some doubt in the minds of various councils, so there was ambiguity on that point. We should bear that in mind for the future. Secondly, there was much debate about the defence of ignorance in section 3, particularly the possibility of all but removing the defence. There are genuine situations in which human error can occur. We had to be conscious that the problem could be compounded if a lack of clarity about what constitutes an historic monument continues. Thirdly, there was the issue of the production of certain inventories. Like any taxonomy, they are open to interpretation—a point made by others in their stage 1 contributions. Although I would argue that difficulty should never be a reason for not doing something that is worth while, we urged caution when it came to section 11, where the bill attempts to deal with responsibilities. Ted Brocklebank made the point that the jury is still out, not least because of some of the divisions of opinion that exist between the committee and stakeholder groups. Notwithstanding that, we give our full support to the bill.

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing this evening’s members’ business debate and, more important, on his role in leading a campaign of more than five years to dual the A9. The fact that 8,500 people have signed the petition to date and that several campaigners and families and friends of those who have been directly affected by accidents on the A9 are present this evening is testament to the strength of feeling on the issue, and rightly so. As members have pointed out, the A9 is officially Scotland’s most dangerous road; it has the highest fatality rate of any road in the country and on average there are more than 200 accidents on it each year. No one pretends that dualling the A9 will end all accidents, but it is clear that such a move will greatly reduce the number of accidents and save lives. We all know that the major problems with the A9 between Perth and Inverness are the long and dangerous stretches of single carriageway across which it can be very difficult to turn and, as we have all seen for ourselves, that many of the worst accidents occur on stretches where the road continually switches between single and dual carriageway. The A9 is, by definition, one of Scotland’s most important transport links, particularly north of Perth, where it is very difficult to take alternative routes. It must therefore be a priority. As Charlie Gordon said, it is important to maintain a particular tone in this debate. In that spirit, I suggest to the Scottish National Party that it consider what it said in 2007 about the trams project. At First Minister’s question time, there was a debate about the importance of semantics; semantics are certainly important here, because I think that the SNP perhaps gave the wrong impression in 2007 about what trams project money could or could not be used for. That is a matter of public record. The SNP should reflect on that, because I do not think that the transport issues in these two areas can be played off against each other. They are quite separate projects with very different aims and, if we are to believe what the SNP said in 2007, money for them was to come from different funding streams. As we know, far too many lives have been lost, there have been too many serious injuries and too many families have been affected because of the lack of dualling on the A9. None of us, whether in the Opposition or in the Government, can afford to ignore the statistics and the despair of the affected families. Having the title of Scotland’s most dangerous road is frightening and causes communities across Perthshire and the Highland region considerable concern. We all appreciate what has to be done; this evening, let us work together to try to find some answer to this horrible problem. I warmly welcome Murdo Fraser’s debate.

To ask the Scottish Executive what advice it has given to Transport Scotland regarding the use of electronic overhead gantry signs. (S3O-12593)

I suspect that I am not the only member who has received representations from constituents about the rather bland and at times irrelevant messages that appeared on some motorway gantry signs in the recent bad weather, which did not relate to the up-to-date road conditions. I appreciate that the wording of the messages is a matter for Transport Scotland, but does the minister agree that it is his responsibility to consider new ways of ensuring fully effective communication between Transport Scotland, our police, the Met Office and groups such as BEAR  Scotland to provide motorists with accurate real-time information?

Ask her what the imperfections are.

I remind the cabinet secretary that most members in the chamber can read. It is another year, another Thursday morning and another education debate—a debate that is probably puzzling the voters. Just what, they will rightfully ask, is the main subject to be discussed in this, the first education debate of our election year? I, too, was a bit puzzled, especially when I saw the motion and the other amendments. I sought guidance from the chamber desk on what would or would not be declared competent business this morning. "Education" was the theme, I was told, so let me use the debate to set out why I believe we are right to be critical of the SNP's record in education, but also to set that against some tasters from the Tory education stall for the elections in May. That is what the voters deserve and what they will be expecting us to do. Education was something for which Scotland was once renowned, across the world. Scotland was the home of the third-oldest university in the English-speaking world, the home of the European enlightenment and the home of intellectual giants such as Adam Smith, Adam Ferguson and William Robertson; we even boasted of having three universities in the top 100 in the world in 2009. I want educational excellence to be a thing of the  future as well as of the past, and I am sure that that is the aspiration of every member, never mind every party, in the Parliament. However, that will not be the case unless we confront the facts—all the facts, not just the ones that the cabinet secretary has read out this morning. That is not to deny or to diminish some of the excellent features of what is happening in our Scottish schools on a daily basis. Some of the unacceptable facts are as follows. Since 1999, successive Scottish Administrations have doubled input spending on our schools, yet the overall standards of the outputs have not been so good. That important fact has been central to the considerations in the Donaldson report, which will be published today. Two thirds of S2 pupils are struggling with literacy, and 13,000 pupils still leave school each year unable to read or write properly. Only 30 per cent of pupils in S2 are reaching the required standard in maths, despite the figure being 85 per cent in P3. Scottish pupils are now ranked below the global average in maths and science. Aside from the basic attainment issues there are concerns, as some Labour members have mentioned, about poor discipline in some schools, about a lack of PE and extra-curricular activities, about the availability of some higher and advanced higher courses and about whether headteachers have too little power when it comes to running their own schools. More recently, our world-class universities tell us that the Scottish Government has presented them with a financial situation that is unsustainable beyond the next academic year. Some people will argue that that is to do with the proficiency of two SNP education secretaries. Just as important have been the unrealistic and uncosted election pledges that they made in 2007, which raised expectations well beyond the ability to deliver them. Those pledges were specific in terms of numbers: 18 or fewer pupils in all primaries 1 to 3, a guarantee of maintaining 53,000 teachers, two hours per week of quality PE, and so on. Those are very rigid national targets, which, notwithstanding the concordat, have provided huge headaches for local authorities—and they were encouraged by the SNP Government to be much more flexible in setting their priorities. That is a real tension within the system, which, I suspect, is behind much of the recent fiasco in Argyll and Bute. This year, 2011, is an election year, and it is incumbent upon all of us not to dwell on other parties' failings but to say what we, as Opposition parties, would do. Scottish Conservatives firmly believe that Scottish education can be excellent once more, but not if there is the pretence that all is well in the current system and if there is an in- built resistance to change. That attitude is increasingly being encountered in the educational world—by Graham Donaldson, Keir Bloomer, Lindsay Paterson, the EIS and Universities Scotland to name just a few. That change must embrace the true spirit of devolution, so that decisions are taken, as far as possible, by the people who are most skilled to make them: by teachers and headteachers, who know far better than local authorities what is best for the needs of individual pupils in their schools; and by parents, who want the assurance that every local area will have a good taxpayer-funded school on their doorstep and that they will have more freedom to choose which school best suits their child and more flexibility when it comes to spending nursery care entitlements. There must be the opportunity for groups other than local authorities to set up new schools, more autonomy for our colleges and universities and more assistance, whether through pupil premiums or increased college and university bursaries, for pupils who might not otherwise have access to the best possible education. Nothing will change if the Government in Scotland continues to be obsessed with a one-size-fits-all policy for local authorities, which stifles parental choice, perpetuates the monopoly of state provision of schools and all too often leads to contentment with academic mediocrity rather than excellence. I look forward to lunch time, when we will be able to see the full detail of Graham Donaldson's recommendations, particularly on how teacher training can play its role in raising standards, especially in relation to literacy and numeracy. The Parliament's Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee will shortly review the process of school management, just as the cabinet secretary wanted to do when he wrote his seminal book, "Grasping the Thistle", when he hoped that SNP back benchers would move away from the outdated view that SNP councillors know better than headteachers—maybe he meant cabinet secretaries. Education, whether in the earliest years or at post-graduate level, is at a watershed in Scotland. There is great need for change, and voters realise that. Let us give them a robust debate, which is worthy of the political process. I move amendment S3M-7692.1, to leave out from "condemns" to end and insert: "notes the SNP government's failure to deliver on its education pledges; further notes that many of them were unrealistic, uncosted and the wrong priorities for pupils and parents; regrets that the Scottish Government has failed to bring forward any substantive reforms to school management, but recognises the educational benefits of 'free schools' and of giving more decision-making powers  and greater financial control to head teachers of all other publicly funded schools."

I thank the cabinet secretary for prior sight of what is a very robust statement. If the cabinet secretary is absolutely convinced, as he seems to be, that he has acted with propriety throughout the period, will he say why he chose not to publish some of the communication, which would have been immensely helpful last week when we asked for that to happen? It would have cleared up the issue with parents and his constituents. Secondly, will the cabinet secretary confirm for the record that he has not had any correspondence with SNP councillors in other parts of the country, making directions to them about school closures? Thirdly, will he confirm why the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning was giving some direction to SNP councillors and telling them what should be happening in their areas? Is that a cabinet secretary who is running away from very difficult decisions?

It has been very important to have the debate, and I pay tribute to the professional manner in which Hugh O'Donnell has set about representing the best interests of the autistic population and to the assistance that he provided to the committee in flagging up what he saw as the deficiencies with the status quo. No one doubts that we need to do more. We need to ensure that there is no postcode lottery when it comes to support; we need better information and earlier detection in nurseries and in schools; and we need to ensure that those with autism are given as much help in adulthood as they are in childhood. It is the duty of any committee in the Parliament to scrutinise fully the evidence before it, to weigh up the arguments on all sides of the debate, and to ensure that no stone is left unturned when it comes to seeking the best possible outcome for those whose best interests are at stake. Quite naturally, the debate has at times been emotive, passionate and challenging, but that is a good thing as it has allowed all of us to tease out every aspect of the main concerns brought out by the proponents of the bill. I pay tribute to all those who provided us with evidence and to all those who have written in to highlight their own concerns. Almost without exception, those representations have been sincere, articulate,  highly informed and exceedingly useful in helping us as members of the committee to make up our minds about what we should recommend to the Parliament. Let me be clear: there has been no disagreement across the chamber that we have to support people with autism—a point acknowledged by the health minister. Rather, the debate is specifically about whether we need legislation to make that possible. To make that assessment, we were required to make a level-headed judgment about what benefits legislation could bring that a non-legislative process could not. Let me deal with the three most important concerns. First, there is concern among many autistic groups and their support services that they face significant challenges, especially when it comes to accessing public services. Secondly, the strong point was made that, unless a strategy is backed by legislation, it will not be implemented, because there is no compulsion on local authorities to do so. In other words, a postcode lottery could remain in how well local authorities make provision. Thirdly, there was the overriding concern that many adults with autism suffer undetected and in social and economic isolation. None of the concerns is inconsiderable but, at the end of the day, we needed to question whether the existing legislation is satisfactory in addressing the concerns of people with autism and, if the answer was no, what examples could be found to show how new legislation could improve the outcomes. In each case, I, like my committee colleagues, was persuaded by much of the evidence. I was not, however, persuaded about the need for legislation. Let me explain why. First, it could easily be argued—indeed, it has been argued—by other groups that autism is not alone in requiring better support. Exactly the same demands about a strategy could be made for sufferers of Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, motor neurone disease and many other conditions. They, too, have a good cause and, from both a practical as well as legal position—not to mention the cost factor—it would prove exceedingly difficult to avoid a discriminatory situation that would set a precedent for extensive and costly legislation across the board. Secondly, the committee found it difficult to find specific examples of legislative changes that would bring additional benefits that would not already be available if the existing legislation were working properly. I suggest that perhaps one difficulty in measuring all of this is the relatively embryonic stages of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2009, which has not yet had sufficient time to bear fruit,  including in the ability to provide the extra support that can be given to all people with additional support needs, especially in the practice of earlier detection, which the Conservatives successfully fought to include in the act. I know only too well that Hugh O'Donnell and many people who provided evidence are likely to feel bitterly disappointed and perhaps badly let down by the committee. I understand that, but I want them to know that we have gone through the proposal with a fine-tooth comb and I think that we have made the right judgment.

Can the cabinet secretary update us on the Scottish baccalaureate for the arts and social sciences?

I, too, thank Johann Lamont for initiating the debate. I pay tribute to her for the outstanding work she has done, which is part and parcel of showing the Parliament at its best. I pledge again our full support for kinship carers. I agree entirely with Paul Martin that perhaps we do not debate the issue often enough, which would allow us to bring everybody together.  It is no secret that my party holds up the family unit as the best possible welfare state while fully acknowledging that the family unit takes many forms. As Sandra White and Paul Martin have said, a loving family will always be better placed to provide social, economic, emotional, educational and moral support than will be any other institution, which—through no one's fault—cannot be expected to provide the same level of individual care. That fact is widely accepted by all parties in the Parliament. The speeches that have preceded mine prove the point: kinship care is the best option when children cannot live with their parents. It provides the child with the best chance of overcoming the often disruptive and stressful circumstances that they face. Scotland has no shortage of kinship care and it has outstanding examples of it. More than 13,000 children are cared for by grandparents, uncles, aunts or other relatives—that is one in 70 children in some form of kinship care arrangement. We should recognise that such arrangements are saving the taxpayer vast sums of money every year, and that feat is even more remarkable when we consider the age group of many of the people who are doing the caring. About three quarters of kinship carers are the grandparents of the child, and more than a quarter of the children are cared for by a relative who is at least 50 years older than them. That presents a considerable challenge. Figures such as those put the sacrifice and generosity of carers into sharp focus. We cannot thank them enough. Sacrifice and generosity have already been mentioned in relation to the Scottish Government's commitment to try to achieve by 2011 parity between payments to kinship carers and those to foster carers. My views on the issue are already on record; so, too, are my concerns about having in place a concordat that sets even more of a challenge because while it contains specific national Government targets it also allows councils to set their own priorities. We need to address that issue more fully. I wish to focus on the sometimes forgotten point about kinship care. It is a dilemma that faces us all in the chamber as we acknowledge that there will be many different reasons for kinship care. We know that the majority of children who fall into that situation are there because of a breakdown in relationships with their parents, which is often fuelled by a number of social ills, including substance abuse, criminality, child neglect or abuse. It is only in a small number of cases that children end up in kinship care because of a family bereavement or very difficult circumstances arising from illness. While we salute the relatives who take over the caring responsibilities for the children, we also  need to recognise that the other half of the story is often one of family breakdown and of parents proving themselves to be unreliable and irresponsible in some way—a trend that, I would argue, is becoming more common rather than less common. In other words, kinship care is a double-edged sword of family beneficence on one hand and of family breakdown on the other. About 137,000 children have no parent in work; 200,000 children are living in poverty; 60,000 children are affected by the drug problem of one or both parents; 100,000 children live with parents who are addicted to alcohol. It might be an inconvenient truth for us, but the Joseph Rowntree Foundation tells us that the gap between rich and poor has widened over the past 10 years, and there is more evidence of the social and financial pressures that are contributing to the rise in the breakdown of Scottish families. Until we get to grips with that as a united Parliament, as has been said such statistics will continue to highlight a very frightening circumstance. I finish on the need to make a full commitment on this issue, and I again congratulate Johann Lamont on all the work that she does.

We currently have world-class universities and world-class students. The cabinet secretary made it plain in a letter to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council that the Scottish Government expects that world-class reputation to be maintained and that it will raise academic standards and maintain student numbers. He has also made a pledge that the  Scottish Government will preserve the principle of free higher education. First, with his preferred option 1—vague and uncosted as it is—the cabinet secretary has said that the state should have prime responsibility for funding higher education. If prime responsibility does not mean sole responsibility, does the Scottish Government's preferred option—option 1—mean that graduates will now have to make a contribution? If so, how much? Secondly, why has it taken the Government three years to produce what is no more than a discussion paper when the university sector and my party were warning of the urgent need for solutions to address the issue all that time ago?

As others have done, I want to thank all those who helped clearing away the recent snow and ice—especially the many hundreds of people whose diligent efforts were responsible for keeping open our essential services. In particular, I saw at first hand the efforts of pupils, parents and teachers who went to great lengths to ensure that schools could be kept open, especially for pupils sitting important preliminary exams—although I hope not exams in arctic oscillation. I was enormously impressed by the many thoughtful gestures of good will that were made by pupils to help elderly people—and not-so-elderly people—across the road or safely back into their  properties. I witnessed a group of high school pupils whose initiative in distributing a wheelbarrow of grit was impressive and much commended by the whole street of residents, if not by the parents who found the grit missing from their garage. I should also mention the pupils who gave up their lunch hour to help clear the entrance to a care home and the pupils who set up a 24-hour shopping rota for their elderly neighbours. Those young people turned out to be the salt of the earth in more ways than one, and in a day and age when, too often, young people do not get the best press, it was heartening to see their community spirit, and I am pleased to hear that the Scottish Government will recognise that with some special awards. Much criticism has already been directed this morning at the Scottish Government for the way in which it handled the extreme weather situation—deservedly so, in many cases, particularly in relation to the gridlock on our roads, which other members have dealt with. The First Minister and his then transport minister were being controlled by events rather than controlling events themselves. Last week, the First Minister stated that "the Scottish Government should have done much better in terms of the information flow". — [ Official Report , 9 December 2010; c 31417.] That point has been dealt with by my colleague, Jackson Carlaw. There was weak leadership and an absence of direction, but there is a much wider issue at stake: the question whether there is a better way of delivering our public services, particularly when our country experiences poor weather conditions. I will, therefore, concentrate my remarks on how we can help schools and nurseries to be better prepared. Any parent will understand that, from time to time, they will have to take time off work to look after ill children. It is important that employers are as flexible as they can be to allow for that. However, from the communications that I and many other colleagues have received, the lack of communication regarding school closures has been an issue. Fife Council was quick to acknowledge that when it apologised for the inconvenience that school closures had caused and stated that it would move quickly to improve communication to parents and children about school closures. However, is it really appropriate that local authorities, which are often spread over wide geographical areas, insist upon operating a one-size-fits-all policy in relation to school closures? Across Scotland, at the height of the big freeze, many local authorities took the decision to have a  blanket closure of schools, regardless of the fact that the weather patterns varied considerably across the area. Would not it be better if the decision to close a school or keep it open was left in the hands of the senior teachers in that school?

By and large, I think that many of headteachers are, as long as that decision is made in consultation with the local authority and with regard to the information and advice with which the local authority provides them. Headteachers know best what the immediate routes into the school are like, what the conditions around the school building are and what the needs of the pupils and their parents are. I have no doubt that headteachers agree with that. Witness some of the innovative decisions that have been taken by headteachers; for example, the headteacher at Hamilton College who went well beyond the call of duty to look after pupils overnight, and the headteachers who advised hundreds of parents to step in and clear snow so that some of the little ones could get to their classes safely. I think that it is important that such decisions are taken at the local level. It is also vital that headteachers know that the council will give them backing for keeping schools open and that they should not have to worry about action being taken against them because they have had the courage or, more often, the common sense to do something a little bit different. There is a lot of misinformation out there, and that can sometimes make headteachers a bit reluctant to keep their schools open. Parent-teacher councils can also have an important role in that regard. We must ensure that we are better prepared to deal with poor weather. The clearing of paths and access to schools is an issue that was raised in many local authority reports, and I hope that the Scottish Government—as it has indicated this morning—is considering that. There have been many positive suggestions—for example, that local councils can provide better information by using text messages, or that teachers may be able to report to the school that is closest to their home in order to provide some type of supply service for the period of poor weather.  As has been widely mentioned in today's debate, the Scottish Government's response to and handling of the extreme weather situation was inadequate. I would welcome any further details from the minister of the discussions that the Scottish Government will have with local authorities on future preparations for severe weather, and in particular on the contingency plans that it is putting in place for schools.

Will the First Minister acknowledge that, irrespective of the result of today’s debate at Westminster, the real issue at stake is the increased funding gap between Scottish universities and those south of the border? Will his Government provide a more sustainable long-term future for Scottish universities than that under proposals that Labour and Plaid Cymru have just announced in Wales?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made to improve road safety on the A977. (S3O-12243) I note that the A977 does not intersect with the roads that have previously been mentioned.

The minister will be aware that the A977 has experienced a significant increase in traffic—particularly in heavy goods vehicles—since the opening of the new Clackmannanshire bridge. What mitigation measures are being put in place to deal with the increase in volume of that heavy traffic and to limit  its speed, so that there is improved road safety for the smaller communities on that route?

Stage 1 is an important staging post in assessing the many issues that are the origin of the bill. I pay tribute to Patricia Ferguson for the methodical manner in which she has enabled us to examine each issue. The staging post has given members the opportunity to consider the evidence that our constituents provided—there was considerable evidence, in my case—and the evidence that various interested parties supplied. As David McLetchie made clear, the Scottish Conservatives had reservations about whether there was a need for a legislative process. However, as time has passed we have become increasingly concerned about the loopholes in the existing legislation and increasingly conscious of the concern that remains about whether the sector itself could take the measures that are needed to ensure that it reforms. An important factor—I ask members to forgive the pun—is that 30 per cent of people who are looking after properties are letting down their customers in some way. Too many disappointed people have flagged up the lack of a sufficiently  robust complaints procedure, and too few residents are aware of their rights. As we heard in the debate, in almost every constituency in Scotland there is evidence of residents encountering difficulties with their factors. There is no doubt that in many—although by no means all—cases, such residents are from older and perhaps more vulnerable groups. Therefore, the issues deserve full parliamentary scrutiny. I put on record again that many factors do an excellent job and provide first-class facilities across the board. It is essential that we support those factors and that proposed new legislation is neither overbureaucratic nor too restrictive for the choices that customers must make. We need to be clear that new legislation will tackle: first, the question of accreditation, regulation and quality assurance; secondly, the absence of effective complaints procedures against factors who default; and thirdly, as Sandra White said, the need for greater transparency when it comes to obtaining relevant financial information about a managing company's accounts. When it comes to better quality assurance, we need a level playing field, as Paul Martin said. Currently there is often a considerable contrast between conditions in older title deeds, which make almost no provision for common decision making, and conditions in newer title deeds, which provide for more extensive and more comprehensive service provision. We have understood the calls to seek mandatory regulation, including compulsory registration, since that might be the best way of benchmarking factors against best practice. There have been arguments on both sides for us, but the key principle must be to ensure effective consumer choice and the absence of expensive red tape. We are absolutely clear that there must be an effective complaints procedure that leaves no scope for the difficult factor to manipulate the situation and discriminate against the customer. There must be clarity about the respective roles of the managing company and the body of owners and residents, and their responsibilities as well as their legal rights. We believe that there must be much greater facility for financial transparency, so that owners and residents can see clearly what their money is being spent on and how value for money can be measured. We particularly noted the concerns that were raised by the Scottish Consumer Council when it made its submission to the Office of Fair Trading, that in too many cases consumers find it difficult to exercise collective choice and switch,  which can be a constraint upon suppliers and can prevent consumers from getting best value for money.

Mr Brown makes a valid point, and I and the Conservative party in general accept it. It is a strong message in the bill. The relationship between the property manager and the owners in a shared property is currently defined by complex legislation, property deeds and agreements, which often means that customers do not understand their rights and obligations. Likewise, consumers often fail to understand the processes that are involved in switching, and should they wish to pursue complaints, there is an absence of an effective mechanism, which allows dishonest factors to play the system even more. I was an initial signatory to the bill. I am very much persuaded by the information that I have received from my constituency area that legislation is necessary. I therefore reiterate our support for the bill at stage 1.

I have no doubt about the responsibility that we face as we debate the bill in its final stage. It is absolutely beyond question that the children's hearings system is an immensely important part of the way in which we protect and care for our most vulnerable children. It is also beyond question that the central principles of the bill are those that were first set out by Kilbrandon in 1964—principles that are just as relevant today as they were then. However, it is clear that several aspects of the current children's hearings system needed to be addressed, although I was sceptical at the start of the process about whether we really needed a legislative process to make the necessary changes. As I said earlier this afternoon, we should note the extent of the differing opinions, even at the later stages in our deliberations, and not just between stakeholder groups but within them. That situation has made our job as parliamentarians even more complex. A wide range of issues have been raised, including how to improve training and national standards; the right of the child to confidentiality; ECHR compatibility; improving the feedback to panel members; the definition of the term "relevant persons"; and many more. However, for me, the most essential challenge throughout the passage of the bill has been to ensure that the best part of the existing system—the effective delivery of assistance for each child at local level—is retained while we modernise the structure, improve accountability and deliver better outcomes for our young people. At several points in the process, I worried about whether we were about to construct a legislative sledgehammer to crack a relatively small  administrative nut—I had to put that in for the minister—and whether the Scottish Government was at times becoming a little too anxious about issues to do with the ECHR. It was much more important to me that we found a clear, manageable, fair and acceptable situation for all the parties that built on the best practice to be found in the local environment and with which children and panel members are most familiar. I have been adamant all along that that should be the defining feature of the system and that any process of reform should not impair or remove those principles. I am immensely grateful to the other parties for their support and to the minister and his team for being prepared to negotiate on that front. I am also grateful to several panel members, local authority representatives and legal advisers for their assistance on the issue. Any legislation that lost the connection between the children's hearings system and local communities would have been a serious mistake. I am mindful of the views of several stakeholders who felt, quite rightly, that we were in danger of debating too much about the procedures rather than about how to improve the outcomes for our children. As we pass this bill this evening and as the convener said, we must be mindful of the need to keep a watching brief on how well we can balance the leadership role of the national convener while strengthening the local connection and delivery of a first-class service in local areas. There remains a lack of clarity about the operation of area support teams, particularly in light of recent economic troubles, which are forcing councils to review their best practice. Linked to that is accountability, whether related to how local authorities deliver their services or how they will interact with area support teams and, of course, the accountability to the Scottish Parliament of the national convener. The bill has had a tortuous passage at several points. All along, it has been important to remember that the whole system is entirely dependent on the commitment of volunteer panel members whose skills and expertise are often of the highest standard. It has been exceptionally important to ensure that the changes that we are about to make have commanded as much support as possible from those who carry out the main duties on the front line. That has not been easy, given the requests to keep the structure as simple and non-adversarial as possible, as firmly rooted in the local community and as caring as possible for the children that we serve and to deliver more consistency across Scotland. The Scottish Conservatives give our firm commitment to the bill in the belief that we have now made that balance more possible and that  there will be increased scrutiny of how well we achieve improved outcomes for our children and how well we provide panels with informed feedback about how successful their decision making has been. That will be the true test of how well we have delivered this new legislation.

The Conservative party will support both amendments. If there was any unanimity of views in the committee, it was on the need for better training. Essential to that is the quality of the feedback and that panel members should feel better informed about the impact that their decisions have made.

I put on record my thanks to the minister, to my committee colleagues and to colleagues within my party for their work on the issue. As I said at the beginning, it was not an easy task because we had to take on board the views of those with the expertise and skills who make the system work on the ground, and allay their fears about having excessive bureaucracy put on them. I am aware of lots of different views on the subject. The process has not been easy, but we have probably got the best possible compromise to ensure that we can take forward the local delivery and have new standards in training and the office of the national convener.  Amendment 110 agreed to.  Amendments 111 to 116 moved—[Elizabeth Smith]—and agreed to.

The most challenging part of the bill—certainly the one that has given the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee the greatest amount of work and has led to probably the greatest number of representations from a large number of people, including panel chairs, panel members, safeguarders, local authorities and families—is how to balance the need for better national training and more consistent standards throughout Scotland with preserving the best possible practice at local level. At the start of the process, questions were asked about whether new legislation was necessary—questions with which I had a great deal of sympathy. Were we in danger of compromising some of the best practice in the existing system at the expense of setting up a large and overcentralised bureaucracy, which would find it difficult to represent the needs of children who come from diverse parts of Scotland and whose circumstances may vary considerably? I note with interest that some of those concerns remain, especially among the panel chairs. It has been our duty as parliamentarians to take those concerns seriously. The will of the committee at stage 2, however, was that legislation was needed, particularly when it came to improving consistency throughout Scotland. Therefore, it was incumbent on us all to try to create an effective balance between retaining the best parts of the existing system and adopting new practices that would not get in the way of that effective local delivery. It was, in simple terms, a debate about how to avoid localism being compromised at the expense of increasing centralisation; how to avoid the powers of the new national convener being excessive; how to define more carefully the links between area support teams, local authorities and panels themselves; and how to improve accountability, all the while remembering that what was central to the debate was the best interests of our children rather than complex systems and unnecessary legal wrangles. At stage 2, concerns were raised by the Scottish Government about whether my attempts to preserve local autonomy at the same time as recognising the need for a national convener would encounter incompatibilities with the ECHR. Clearly, those concerns were extremely important, provided that they could be proven to be genuine rather than based upon a perceived fear that there would be a problem, when in fact none existed.  As ever, there was complex legal advice to be considered and some paring down of what was and was not a relevant consideration. I still have a few concerns that, at times, the ECHR has been driving too many aspects of the bill rather than just the essential sections where incompatibility was a real issue. Nonetheless, I put it on the record that I am grateful to the minister and his team for allowing David McLetchie and me to discuss those legal concerns with them on several occasions, and for the Scottish Government's willingness to move to accommodate our concerns about how to preserve localism in the bill. Amendments 110 to 117 are the result of those deliberations. I hope that members will feel able to support them on the basis that they help to underpin the central ethos of ensuring that there continues to be effective local delivery in local areas. I move amendment 110.

One of the most difficult issues that we discussed was what could be deemed an appropriate definition of "relevant person", bearing in mind that the representations  made by such a person could be the most important factor in deciding the child's future, and given, as the minister mentioned, the changing social trends within family structures. Concerns were expressed about the possibility of narrowing the definition so that it might exclude those persons who previously would have had an automatic right to be present at a hearing. It was put to the committee that there would be serious cause for concern if it excluded guardians, adoptive parents, long-term foster carers or grandparents. Concern was also expressed about how the proposed changes to section 80 would impact on the process of deciding relevancy, and whose responsibility that would be. In particular, it was noted how difficult it might be to come up with a satisfactory definition of "significant involvement", and for how long that would have to be proven. Some of the most technical legal aspects of the bill that we discussed relate to section 80 but, after some initial doubts, the Scottish Conservatives are satisfied that the process has been rigorously debated. Given what the minister said about improving flexibility, we are happy to support the amendments.  Amendment 20 agreed to.  Amendment 142 moved—[Adam Ingram]—and agreed to.

One of the most important messages that we received from many stakeholders in the children's hearings system was about the need for better monitoring and sharing of relevant information, particularly when it comes to the implementation of compulsory supervision orders. The minister is correct to raise concerns about overburdening panel members and the possibility of sensitive information being too voluminous. The amendments in the group, particularly amendments 98 and 98A, ensure that the process will be much more transparent and rigorous and that it will provide panel members with relevant information about the circumstances of children who have been subject to compulsory supervision orders. The provision of an annual report will also be an important part of the process. We support the amendments.

There is a simple principle behind amendment 3—namely, the assurance that there will never be any facility for any person who occupies the office of national convener or of principal reporter to intervene to direct or guide the decision-making process of a children's hearing. At stages 1 and 2, there was some debate around the definition of the legal advice that could be provided; in particular, about whether that could be interpreted as a facility to direct what ought to happen as opposed to a factual statement of the legal options and what could happen. There is, I suggest, a subtle difference between the two and it would not be appropriate for the national convener to be in too powerful a position when it comes to providing legal advice. If improving legal representation for children is one of the main objectives of the bill, it must ensure that there are appropriate checks and balances. That is why the independence that is enshrined in amendment 3 is crucial. I hope that members will support the amendment. I move amendment 3.

I began my remarks full of praise for teachers, parents and all those who are involved, so I ask the cabinet secretary not to argue, please, that I am in any way disparaging the efforts that have been made. I say again that, if the curriculum for excellence is to succeed, it will succeed to its full potential only if we address some of the other most important priorities. The Government needs to make considerable progress on those issues.

On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I am happy to congratulate all the headteachers, teachers, support staff—who are often forgotten in this process—parents, pupils and students who have been involved in the initial stages of the implementation of the curriculum for excellence. I do so with enthusiasm. Change is never easy, especially in the teaching profession. Given that that change, which involves adopting an entirely new methodology, has been extensive, people have done well. I hope that I will continue to make a positive contribution on the theme as we progress through the debate. However, I am sure I am not alone in expressing just a little surprise and, perhaps, frustration that, after just three months of the implementation of the curriculum for excellence, so much of our precious parliamentary time has been taken up by a further debate on the subject, rather than on more pressing issues such as higher education, improving literacy, teacher unemployment and delivering better-quality physical education—I could go on. I could be cynical and suggest that the motion is less about congratulating those on the front line and more about giving the cabinet secretary a "mission accomplished" moment, but I will remain my normal, charitable self and try to link together some of the debates by concentrating on two key principles of the curriculum for excellence: greater autonomy and flexibility in schools. Both principles are designed to provide an educational experience that is more carefully tailored to the individual needs of pupils and to raise standards of attainment. Although there is a strong temptation for me to enter into the realms of the school management debate, I will refrain from doing so—not least because I am sure that I would upset the Presiding Officer—except to respond to an important comment by Keir Bloomer, one of the architects of the curriculum for excellence. Earlier this week, he said: "progress is made in the modern world by releasing the creative energies of people, in this case the teacher". I agree entirely and applaud the efforts of the architects of the curriculum for excellence to do  that and, by definition, to release the creative energies of our pupils. I was interested in the second part of his comment, in which he said that the current school management system constrains teachers "far too much by direction from the top." That continues to give me and, I hope, my colleagues food for thought. When I read the initial documentation for the curriculum for excellence, I was struck by the starting point, which was to ask what education is for—a question of which we too often lose sight, but one that I genuinely believe was behind the philosophy of the curriculum for excellence. What a pity it would be if the potential of the curriculum for excellence were to be constrained by the current system of school management, which too often moves in the opposite direction from the pursuit of greater autonomy and flexibility. I note the comments of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, which, rightly, is seeking assurances that built into the system will be an effective means of evaluating just how successful the curriculum for excellence has been, both in raising attainment levels—more critical now than ever, if we are to heed yesterday's warnings from Scottish Qualifications Authority chiefs about where pupils in Scotland are falling short on basic skills—and in producing well-rounded young people. The society makes an important point about the evaluation process; the cabinet secretary may want to tell us a little more about his plans to address it. There is another important debate around applying the three-to-18 ethos of the curriculum for excellence—which will, I hope, establish better links between each stage of a child's education—to the wider developments that are required in further and higher education. Those developments are quite separate from the debate about the current funding crisis. I suggest that it is inevitable that we will see major changes in the structure of FE and HE—changes that will affect the content and length of degree courses, increase the flexibility of movement between courses and institutions, and challenge the status quo of how HE and FE institutions operate. If the curriculum for excellence does its job properly, it will make our young people more flexible and give many of them greater purpose in their academic careers. The Scottish Conservatives have long argued that the curriculum for excellence should provide more opportunities for pupils to leave school at an earlier stage to take up places in formal vocational training or apprenticeships and should reduce the pressure on too many of our youngsters to feel an obligation to seek university places when that may not be in their or the country's best interests.  The curriculum for excellence provides good scope for a radical remodelling of Scottish education at all levels, but one thing must underpin all its teaching—improvement in basic literacy and numeracy. I am well aware of the fact that the cabinet secretary and my colleagues in other parties intend to ensure that literacy and numeracy underpin the whole system, but I return to the comments of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and the issue of how we can build in effective evaluation of the process. We are all aware of the problems that we face. Although it is unhelpful to scaremonger, it is essential that we understand just how much we have to do to drive up standards in the area. We should be concerned about the fact that many teachers do not feel comfortable with teaching the basic skills, because they recognise that they may be part of the problem. I repeat my plea for the curriculum for excellence: it will succeed only when it is the agent that complements a good-quality grasp of the basics and of important subject knowledge.

Absolutely. It is an important message that underpins exactly what I am saying: literacy and numeracy must complement and underpin everything that we do with the curriculum for excellence.

Does Mr Russell want to intervene? No? The curriculum for excellence has been at the forefront of the education brief for many long months, but all too often for the wrong reasons. Much of the guidance was confused; in a few cases, it was unintelligible. There was even a false expectation among the public and parents, and perhaps even among some teachers, that there would actually be a new curriculum, whereas that was never the intention. There are continuing concerns about the lack of clarity over the SQA examinations structure, there is anxiety about the vagueness of subject matter and there is concern, as Margaret Smith said, that parents were not consulted at an early enough stage. There were also obvious concerns about resources being made available for the curriculum for excellence, many of which remain. I suggest that the best way of addressing those concerns is to ensure that we also deal with many of the other priorities in education.  The Scottish Conservatives have been supportive of the main principles of the curriculum for excellence since the start, most specifically in relation to the need to enhance education in its widest sense, so that the educational experience better reflects the needs of individual schools and individual pupils, and because of the opportunity that it should afford both to simplify and to strengthen the rigour of our examination system. If we want the curriculum for excellence to be a success—we do, and I am sure that all other parties represented in the chamber do, too—we must set headteachers and schools free: free to innovate, free to create and free to compete. As politicians, we should also embrace the spirit of free thinking that is designed to be the very hallmark of the curriculum for excellence. That free thinking should be unafraid of change and unafraid of upsetting the status quo, because there is only one thing that matters: improving the education and attainment of our young people.

I apologise for having had to leave the chamber for 10 minutes earlier, which caused me to miss a couple of members' speeches. This has been an informed and useful debate, and I am pleased to have taken part of it. Earlier, Ted Brocklebank said that some people might be tempted to see the bill as merely a technical, amending instrument rather than as anything of any great import and substance, noting that some might call it a much-ado-about-nothing bill. I dare say that that view is true with regard to some of the aspects of detail, but we must certainly not allow that to be the general reaction. Indeed, it is incumbent on all of us to ensure that it is not.  As many speakers have said, Scotland's historic environment is a precious part of the fabric of this country. It is one of the most defining aspects of Scotland and can bring enormous social and economic benefit, especially in the form of visitor income. The minister's comments about Linlithgow and Dr McKee's comments about George Square in Edinburgh, which I visited when I was at school, were appropriate. We do not understand how important our historic environment is until something happens to take it away from us. The bill matters, even if it requires some important amendments and, if Mr Macintosh has anything to do with it, some semantic changes. Also in the bill's favour is the minimal cost that is involved, which is a pleasant change from some recent bills and has, I am sure, brought some comfort to the Scottish Government in these difficult economic times. Perhaps that is one reason why there has been no serious opposition to the bill, although I would like to suggest that that is also due to the considerable passion and commitment of those who are involved at the front line, including the hundreds of volunteers to whom Margaret Smith referred who are protecting our historic environment. At stage 1, they made a powerful case for the principles of the bill and its prime objective, which is to preserve and enhance Scotland's historic environment for future generations. Their comments were extremely balanced and helpful to our deliberations. Perhaps they ensured that the atmosphere in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee was less highly politically charged than usual, at least for a short while. Ted Brocklebank made the point that the organisation of certain bodies that oversee the administration of our historic environment could be streamlined. That point was picked up by several speakers, and I think that there can be no opposition to the view that there is a need to simplify and clarify certain aspects of the management of the historic environment. Iain Smith referred to—

Of course.

I am glad that you said that, Presiding Officer. I have been called many things today, but I am glad that you got my name right. I point out to Robin Harper that I do not think that that is what Ted Brocklebank said. Mr Brocklebank and Iain Smith both pointed out the need for some streamlining and clarification of the bodies' respective roles. I entirely agree with that, and I know that the minister does too. As members are aware, there has been much debate about the provision on the defence of ignorance in section 3, in particular the possibility that it all but removes that defence. It was good to hear what the minister said in her opening remarks, which gives us some comfort in that regard. There are situations in which genuine human error occurs, and we must be conscious that the problem could be compounded if there continued to be a lack of clarity on what does or does not constitute an historic monument. We must not get into a situation in which there is a conflict between legislation and common sense, as Alasdair Allan noted when he provided the example of the proposal to preserve the plastic sheeting over a pane of glass. There is an issue with regard to the production of certain inventories; like any taxonomy, they are open to all kinds of interpretation. That point has been illustrated many times this afternoon, so I will not go back over it. A related point, which arises in section 11, is the attempt to deal with the responsibility, obligations and costs that fall at the doors of the owners. I urge the Scottish Government to provide assurances that there will be no obfuscation or scope for loopholes in that regard. The power of entry without owners' consent when a monument is thought to be at risk raises some issues with regard to the definition of what constitutes imminent damage and destruction. Again, the minister's comments were helpful in that regard. It is important for that to be crystal clear so that we can allay any fears of unrestricted entry to sites without the permission of owners. There are some concerns but, as the convener of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee said, they can, with careful handling,  be addressed without hindering the better management of our historic sites. Apart from some wrangles over definitions, liability for care and the structure of appropriate inventories, there is widespread consensus on the merits of the bill. On that basis, I repeat that the Scottish Conservatives are happy to support its main principles.

To ask the First Minister, further to the reported comment of the "source close to the Scottish Government" in The Sunday Times that the Scottish Government was in the business of controlling the cross-border flow of English students coming to study in Scotland, whether the Scottish Government plans to extend this control to Welsh and Northern Irish students. (S3F-2671)

If it is incorrect to say that that spokesman had anything to do with the Scottish Government, is it correct to say that the Scottish Government has considered plans on how to make students from the rest of the United Kingdom pay, although it is still silent on what will happen to Scottish students? Does the First Minister agree that that is a Scottish Government guddle that is in no one's interests—least of all those of our universities and students, who cry out for leadership on the issue?

On that note, is the Scottish Government pursuing any objectives to review the range and quality of examinations, and not just Scottish Qualifications Authority examinations? That might answer some of Margo MacDonald's queries.

I thank the cabinet secretary for prior sight of both his statement and the literacy action plan. I welcome the majority of the contents, particularly the commitment that he has made to the synthetic  phonics method of teaching, which has unquestionably raised standards in three local authorities in Scotland and which I believe can go a long way towards improving the disappointing statistics for reading literacy. Attainment in primary 3 is generally pretty good at 75 per cent, but I am afraid that it falls to only 40 per cent by secondary 2. I have two questions. First, what specific plans does the Government have to improve teacher training in teaching literacy skills, which is urgently requested by several primary head teachers writing in the current edition of The Times Educational Supplement? Secondly, will the cabinet secretary spell out the specific detail of what page 9 of the document states will be a better assessment process of literacy standards among primary school pupils?

I am pleased to hear that. I refer the minister to a remark made by Nora Senior, the vice-chairman of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, a couple of weeks ago. She said that Skills Development Scotland and Careers Scotland were "virtually anonymous to the business world." She hopes that the Government can involve those two organisations in that process.

Earlier this week, I received a telephone message from my education researcher to check that I had noticed one of that morning's main headlines. That headline said "Browne to unveil the most radical blueprint for a generation". My researcher alerted me to the fact that he had been so impressed by that that the information was on my desk. I hurried in to work only to find that the Browne to whom he had been referring was the one from Madingley with the additional letter, or indeed letters, after his name. Instead, I would have to content myself with "Skills for Scotland: Accelerating the Recovery and Increasing Sustainable Economic Growth". Compared with the 2007 document, that document has lost its gloss, but it is obviously destined for a much wider readership, as we are told that it is now available in eight languages. I will not presume to tell members which language it is best in. Was that document to be the most radical blueprint for a generation? Be ready to stand by for empowerment, support, simplification and strength. To be fair, the Scottish Government is right when it says that levels of employment and productivity are clearly the benchmarks by which we can most easily measure the success and growth of an economy. We must all recognise the estimate of the UK Commission for Employment and Skills, which says that a 1 per cent increase in  productivity equates to a growth in the economy of almost £1 billion. Facts like those should be keeping the minister and his colleagues awake at night. We should consider that Scotland's productivity rate is almost 5 per cent lower than the UK average. That, combined with the fact that the Scottish unemployment rate is rising three times faster than the rate in England, demonstrates how vital it is to have a skills agenda. That is why the Scottish Conservatives believe, as our amendment states, that a great deal more has to be done to ensure that the supply of skills matches what employers demand. That task is not easy. Given the pace of technological development, we have little idea of what jobs will be available 15 or 20 years down the line. However, the task is not helped if we cannot embrace a more imaginative approach. Nora Senior, vice chair of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, said recently: "There needs to be a whole-scale change to the way we talk about vocational and academic qualifications" and—as Mr Whitton has just indicated—to how we prepare our young people for the world of work. That view chimes with many other people in business and academia, and with what the Scottish Conservatives have been saying for some time. On pages 15 to 20 of the skills strategy, the Scottish Government says what it has achieved since 2007. Yes, there has been a little progress, but I see little sign so far of a fundamental change in our thinking. It is not enough to have initiatives here and there and to tinker around the edges. There has to be a radical overhaul of skills development, just as we are planning a radical overhaul of higher education. Let me set out what needs to be done and let me again tackle the elephant in the room, which is the question whether too many young people feel pressured to go to university because there are insufficient opportunities for a non-university based education. I appreciate that the skills strategy outlines 15,000 modern apprenticeship starts—that is good, but there is a strong case to be made that many of those opportunities are coming too late in life. On this side of the chamber, we are firmly of the view that there needs to be more diversity of opportunity from the age of 14 onwards and that, in terms of the curriculum, comprehensive education is not appropriate beyond secondary 2. In other words, there should be a clearly defined two-route system from age 14 onwards, in which young people are able to choose the form and type of education that they would like to continue with, be it largely skills focused or more weighted in favour of academic pursuits. That is a system  that has proven to be incredibly successful in countries such as Denmark, Germany and Finland. Germany, for example, is experiencing an export-led economic recovery, where the Bundesbank—

Schools should be able to choose. For example, at Kirkcudbright academy in Dumfriesshire there is a highly imaginative programme of curricular change. At the moment, though, the whole system is a comprehensive system, although obviously it is going through a review in terms of the Scottish Qualifications Authority. We need to diversify that system—it is instrumental in getting the skills right. There has been progress, but there has not been sufficient joined-up thinking about ensuring that schools, colleges, universities and the world of work can work together. Angela Knight, who is chief executive of the British Bankers Association, rightly recommends that we need to improve the quality of the careers advice that we give to S1 and S2 pupils, notwithstanding the excellent advice that is already around in our schools. In too many cases, teenagers are not given sufficient access to all the information that they need to make an informed choice—a choice that can, after all, make or break a career. While I am on the theme of getting it right at the earliest stage, I urge the Government—yet again—to provide leadership when it comes to literacy and numeracy. I know that we expect a statement on 27 October, but please let that include measures to address the inadequacies of basic skills in primary school and of trainee teachers, who have identified gaps in their own ability to teach those skills. If the overriding objective is to provide an economy that is fit for the challenges of the 21st century—an economy with high levels of employment and the highest levels of productivity—we must not ignore the demands of business or the concerns of employers. I move amendment S3M-7164.2, to insert at end: " and calls on the Scottish Government to fully engage employers in the process of ensuring that the system is more demand-led and that publicly funded training matches far more closely the needs of employers."

I make it absolutely clear that education involves a social responsibility and a private responsibility. We do not suggest any  system that would remove Government funding for universities—that would be bizarre. We suggest that, on top of such funding, some form of graduate contribution will have to be made to ensure that we move away from the current unsustainable system and provide greater income. As Mr McLetchie said, the contribution would be an additional source of income.

Will the member give way?

Surely the logic is about the marginal cost and the marginal benefit of having a university education. That is the key principle that underlines our proposals.

Given the principles that Claire Baker has just outlined, is she prepared to put her cards on the table as to what form of contribution, tax or whatever she thinks might be the way forward?

I hear what the cabinet secretary says about the Scottish baccalaureate, but to date no university has offered a pupil a place on the basis of it.

On my plane journey from London to Edinburgh on Sunday, what should I find on the seat beside me but a copy of Scotland on Sunday and, in it, an article by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning headed "Time for a consensus on Scottish education".

Perhaps not today. Now, I know that funny things can happen when the air is thinner at higher altitude, but I found myself having great difficulty with the article, so incredulous was I about the content. Bold as brass, in his usual modest tone, the cabinet secretary was trying to persuade the people of Scotland that the Scottish National Party was leading the debate in higher education, so significant had been the party's 2007 manifesto commitments and the SNP Government's subsequent announcements. I asked a member of the cabin crew for a strong coffee and I read on. It got worse: three times the cabinet secretary punted the line that it was only as a result of his leadership that the other parties had been forced to start talking about the right issues. I cannot speak for Labour and the Liberals on what they really think about the issue—perhaps we will find out a bit more about that this morning—but I say to the cabinet secretary that on this side of the chamber we have policies. If he really believes that he is leading the field when it comes to finding a Scottish solution to the problem, why is it that we have not heard any utterance from him as to what he will do, as opposed to what he will not do? I will cut to the chase. Two things need to happen and they must happen now, not at some undefined time in the future. First, students must be asked to make a graduate contribution and, secondly, there must be reform of the structure of the university system—one will not work properly without the  other. I will use the debate to set out our policy stance on both issues. I will be crystal clear: the Scottish Conservatives believe that four key principles should underpin any sustainable funding mechanism for the future. It is because of those principles that we have ruled out up-front tuition fees and a pure graduate tax and instead declared ourselves in favour of a deferred fees system that is facilitated through income-contingent loans. Let me articulate those four principles. The first principle is that any funding mechanism must be needs blind so that academic merit, not wealth or privilege, is the driver for a university place. We believe that that ethos has always been central to what is best in Scottish education. The second principle is that we must do everything possible to enhance the very important autonomy of our university system, something that Sir Andrew Cubie has always rightly argued must never be undermined by Government or commercial enterprise.

The member makes a good point. The Scottish Conservatives have argued strongly that there is need for restraint, but that is not the only issue in terms of who should control our universities. Sir Andrew Cubie's point is that we must ensure that universities have autonomy in their decision-making processes on how to deliver the best form of education. That is what I want to preserve. The third principle that has driven our thinking is that of income contingency, which is fundamental in ensuring that, far from being dissuaded from applying to university, less affluent students are encouraged to do so. At the heart of an income contingent scheme is the loan that is repaid by the student once a given threshold of earnings is reached at a repayment rate that is affordable to the student. In short, income contingency is a form of insurance that means that individuals repay their fees only when they can afford to. The fourth principle is variability in the fees that are charged—a variability that reflects the cost of the  individual course and the ability of the university to set the fee. I will lay out some more home truths on those points. First, the status quo in Scotland is highly regressive. Our proposals are designed to make the system more progressive, so that it better reflects both the marginal social and marginal private costs and benefits of a university education. As the former aide to Tony Blair, John McTernan, rightly posited: "Is it right that a dustman, who left school at 16, should work extra hard so that a duke's daughter can have a free education, and then enjoy the lifelong ... benefit of a university education, calculated by economists as between £200,000 and £400,000 across a lifetime?"

We will come to why we reject a graduate tax, which I think is what the member is suggesting. Secondly, and crucially in my view, evidence from other countries such as Australia, England, and New Zealand suggests that university fees have not deterred those from poorer backgrounds from attending university. Indeed, both the Russell Group of universities and Universities UK argue that being able to charge fees has provided them with more revenue to widen access to those from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. Just last week, we heard more evidence that suggests that a higher proportion of those from deprived backgrounds are making it to university in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, where fees are levied, than is the case in Scotland, where there are no such fees. Any policy recommendations that we make on higher education must work in tandem with a more flexible and efficient structure for the sector. Without addressing some of those institutional and organisational issues, we will not fully stem the tide of the financial pressures that Scottish universities face. For instance, there are 14 higher education institutions in Scotland with university status that thus far have probably not done enough to co-operate in terms of research funding and administration. Too many universities are trying to do too much in-house. Scotland, perhaps even more so than England, has a distinct advantage: the unique geographical locations of our universities, old and new. That gives us greater scope for the economies of scale and resource sharing that are a key part of my colleague David Willetts's plans in England. Also on efficiency, we agree with those in the sector who say that there is a debate to be had on the  future of the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. Co-operation should not be confined to the university sector alone. Just as in the independent budget review report, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and some of our university principals have stated the need for encouraging greater private sector investment in Scottish higher education. If we can succeed in achieving greater rationalisation and specialisation within our university sector while making degree qualifications more flexible—and perhaps a little shorter in some cases—we will have a better chance of attracting much-needed private sector investment. As some of my colleagues will say later in the debate, there is much scope for introducing flexibility into the degree system—a flexibility that can deliver better educational prospects and the potential for reduction in costs. Of course, the elephant in the room is whether far too many young people feel pressurised to go to university because sufficient opportunities for non-university-based education are not available to them. Scottish Conservatives believe that that is wrong, which is why we have policies to accelerate the pace of developing top-quality, formal vocational training and apprenticeships at an earlier age and why we have been advocating more flexibility within the Scottish Qualifications Authority examination system.

I think that I cannot; I am in my last minute.

The member makes a good point, but there is an elephant in the room: what motivates young people to go to university? Those who go to university—who should be from any background and any income bracket—should genuinely want to be there. In our view, too many people feel pressured to go to university; it is seen as the socially acceptable thing to do. That must change, because in this country we have suffered too long from a sort of class barrier, to which I thoroughly object, when it comes to whether university is better than any other form of education. That is not the case in Denmark, Germany or many other European countries. We need to address that issue. It is a difficult question, but it needs a serious answer. On top of that, we need much greater flexibility in the Scottish  Qualifications Authority examinations system, which I know that the cabinet secretary is pursuing. I could go on for much longer, but it is very clear that it is certainly not the Scottish Conservatives who are short of ideas. It might be time for some consensus—I do not disagree with that—but it is well past the time for some leadership and our universities are waiting desperately for this Parliament and this cabinet secretary to provide it. I move, That the Parliament believes that the present funding structure for Scottish universities is no longer sustainable if they are to maintain academic excellence and also widen opportunities and access for students who are from traditionally non-university backgrounds; welcomes the growing consensus among key groups both within and outwith the university sector that favours a graduate contribution toward the cost of a university education, and notes the scope in Scotland to provide a more cost-effective and flexible degree structure in universities and to enhance vocational training as an alternative to higher education.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking in light of remarks by Dirk Van Damme of the centre for educational research and innovation at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development that Scotland's education system is suffering from an achievement gap between rich and poor. (S3F-2517)

I thank the First Minister for flagging up the fact that Mr Van Damme mentioned greater autonomy and diversity. Will the Scottish Government now support Conservative plans to introduce state-funded free schools, which would provide that autonomy and diversity?

I, too, thank the minister for prior sight of the statement. I have three areas of questioning. First, the minister mentioned the fact that the Government cannot create jobs, but it is, nevertheless, in the position to create incentives, one of which has been the reduction in business rates. Is the Government mindful of the comment by Iain McMillan of the Confederation of British Industry that the private sector will be the basis on which new jobs can be created? Will the minister tell us a little more about how the Government will proceed with that? Secondly, the minister said that it is better for people to be in learning because that is the best way for them to improve their opportunities. That is usually true, but not always. The idea of insisting that people go to college or university is sometimes a little away from the truth of what some people would like to be able to do. Will the minister provide us with a little information about how schools and colleges could be better interlinked for formal vocational training at school level? There are opportunities that are not just about staying in learning institutions, which the minister mentioned in his statement, and they should be pursued further. Thirdly—

Will the minister give way?

I am tempted to say that headmasters who shout are usually under considerable pressure. If there is one issue that has dominated the education brief over many long months—obviously, it has raised the temperature—it is the curriculum for excellence. It has dominated our debates and our discussions with parents and teachers not only because it represents a major change in our approach to education in our schools but because of the extent of the difficulties that we are encountering in the lengthy and sometimes tortuous planning process. I accept that some of those difficulties are understandable and necessary, but others are entirely avoidable. The Scottish Conservatives have been supportive of the main principles of the curriculum for excellence since the start, specifically the need to enhance education in its widest sense so that the educational experience better reflects the needs of individual schools and individual pupils and because of the opportunity that it should afford to simplify and strengthen the rigour of our examination system. With hindsight, I suspect that it was never totally clear that this radical change was one of teaching methodology rather than a change to the finer detail of the curriculum. If the change was designed to help teachers to think more about the way in which they teach, how they can inspire an increasingly wide diversity of pupils in their classrooms and about how schools—primary and secondary—can be better linked into, and more responsive to, the needs of the world of work, culture and outdoor learning, then it has to be a good thing. However, the real challenge has been to ensure that much of that skills-based philosophy can be achieved without any threat to discrete subject teaching, the basic skills of literacy and numeracy and the essential knowledge that equips for life after school. The cabinet secretary knows my concerns about what I see as the threat to academic rigour in some of that process—concerns that I share with people such as Professor Lindsay Paterson and Professor John McLaren—and I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for discussing those concerns further  with me recently. I suggest that that issue is very much at the root of teachers' concerns, especially in secondary schools. The expectation among the public and parents, and maybe even some teachers, was that there would be a new curriculum, but in fact that was never the intention. The undoubted need to address issues in teaching methodology was quite properly accompanied by questions about what exactly had to be taught and, for secondary 4 to 6, what had to be examined. I am the last person in the chamber to argue that education is all about exams, but the reality is that they are vital in anyone's school career and for subsequent job prospects, and to a large extent they represent the endgame for our senior pupils. I am conscious of the hard work that is going on within the Scottish Qualifications Authority to provide the details of the new exam structure, but I suggest to members that that work has been made much more difficult because of the Scottish Government's own confusion about what it has been trying to achieve. We were told that there were to be stand-alone literacy and numeracy tests, then we were told that there were not. We were told that there was to be a simplification of the exam structure to reduce the burden of assessment, yet we heard about new exams that were to be introduced, accompanied by complaints from School Leaders Scotland that the assessment burden would actually increase. We saw confusion, much of which alarmed our employers and higher education institutions, about what was to be internally and externally assessed. We were promised more formal vocational courses for schools, but we have yet to hear how that will be delivered. On top of that, we had the extraordinary sight of the cabinet secretary having to tell the civil servants six weeks ago that much of the documentation that accompanied the guidance notes for the curriculum for excellence was woolly and vague and should be rewritten in plain English. That occurred no fewer than seven years down the road of development work that was designed to improve the literacy skills of the pupils but was largely unintelligible in its own composition. It is little wonder that teachers and parents remain so confused about what is going on. The Labour motion mentions some of those concerns, but it quite rightly also highlights concerns about teacher numbers and the resulting fears about whether sufficient resources have been made available to support the development work for the curriculum for excellence. I would add to that the specific issue of the undue pressure that has been placed on our local authorities, not  just as a result of the financial pressures of the economic downturn, but as a direct result of the overtly ambitious Scottish Government manifesto commitments: 18 or fewer pupils in primaries 1 to 3; universal free school meals for primaries 1 to 3; maintaining teacher numbers; two hours of PE per week; and five days of outdoor education, to name just some. Not only were those not deliverable, given the resources available, but in many cases they were not the priorities of local government—class sizes and free school meals being clear examples of that. The combination of huge financial pressures and the headaches of trying to deliver the Scottish Government's very rigid national targets were too much for most authorities and were a major reason why some of the focus was removed from the curriculum for excellence development work, which has been the main concern for teachers and parents. I do not believe that it is in anyone's interest to scaremonger on this issue. That is why we deplore any moves to engage in industrial action, which would serve only to harm the best interests of those we are trying to help, namely the pupils. I began my own teaching career in the 1980s and well remember the difficult environment that was created by industrial action, which took away some of the activities—many of them outside the classroom—that sought to involve children in the wider educational experience that we have all agreed is so central to the curriculum for excellence.

I do not doubt for a minute that there are issues about playing fields. That has been the case for 20 years, and I fully acknowledge that my party was involved in some of that. However, my point is that we will never be in the position to offer extracurricular activities if we cannot provide the facilities for staff. Industrial action harms nobody but the pupils. We really must take that on board. I suggest that there are many issues that we must deal with and that it is important that we are positive about doing so. The curriculum for excellence has many good points and can be delivered. However, it will not be delivered unless we have a different mindset about how we approach our schools. I have no doubt that the vast majority of parents across Scotland would agree with that. The teaching unions, which were represented on the curriculum for excellence management board, need to understand that there  is a willingness out there to make this work. However, we need clarity, vision and some kind of direction from the Government. Will the cabinet secretary himself end up as a successful learner, an effective contributor, a confident individual and a responsible citizen? There is not much doubt about the confident individual part of that—Mr Russell is not known to be a shrinking violet when it comes to schools policy, or any other policy for that matter; nor is there much doubt that he is an effective contributor, who is blessed with a way with words that could beguile many of us if we were not so wise to his political rhetoric. So, that leaves the successful learner bit. The iron chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, said: "Only a fool learns from his own mistakes. The wise man learns from the mistakes of others." I suggest to the cabinet secretary that there is still a lot of learning to be done, and that it must be done very quickly indeed. Teachers, parents and pupils are confused and concerned; they need clarity, direction and a responsible citizen as the man at the top. I move amendment S3M-6580.1, to insert at end: ", and deplores the threat of industrial action by some teaching unions, which will impact adversely on many of the extra-curricular activities that take place out of school hours and that are such an essential part of the wider educational experience for so many young people."

I have absolutely no doubt about the responsibility that we face as parliamentarians as we debate whether to proceed with the bill. It is beyond question that the children's hearings  system is an immensely important part of the way that we protect and care for our most vulnerable children. It is also beyond question that the central principles of the bill should be those that were first set out by Kilbrandon in 1964. Those principles are as relevant today as they were then. It is absolutely right that we continue to pursue those principles, whose founding ethos is the best interests of the child and the recognition that children and young people who offend and those who require care and protection are usually, but by no means always, equally deserving of being considered as children in need. However, neither do I have any doubt that the current structure needs to be modernised and made more efficient. There are clearly serious issues to do with the current children's hearings system, which need to be addressed. I have been struck by the extent of the different opinions between the different stakeholder groups and, perhaps more strikingly, within the stakeholder groups on exactly what the changes should be, which I believe has made our task as parliamentarians even more complex. What are the main concerns? A frequent message is that many children and young people do not feel able fully to express their views, nor do they always feel that their views are valued. There are concerns about unclear lines of accountability. Reporters and panel members often say that they need further support. There is wide variation in the volume and quality of in-service training for panel members. Perhaps most worryingly, there is an absence of a level playing field when it comes to the support that is provided across the 32 local authorities. That said, I openly admit that, at the beginning of the process, and in the aftermath of the Scottish Government's botched attempt at the first draft of the bill, I questioned whether we actually required a legislative process to address the problems that I have just mentioned. I wondered whether we were about to construct a legislative sledgehammer to crack a relatively small administrative nut, thereby threatening some of the best practice in the current system. I have given that a great deal of thought, and I have come to accept that some new legislation is required to ensure that there is better legal representation of children, which, in turn, will ensure greater compatibility with the ECHR and with the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. I am not yet persuaded, however, that the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill as it stands is the best possible legislation and will deliver the best possible outcomes for children. Although I share some concerns with the members who have already spoken and with other members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture  Committee, let me now outline the Scottish Conservative party's approach to the bill. We fundamentally accept the need for reform. Above all else, we want to deliver the best possible outcomes for the children involved, for their parents and carers, for society in general and for those whose hard work ensures the children's safekeeping. We want a structure that is clear, manageable, fair and acceptable to all parties involved, and that is built on the best practice that is to be found in the local environment with which the child and panel members are most familiar. In that context, I will cover three important areas of concern and how we propose to address them. First, if there is one aspect of the children's hearings system about which there is relative agreement, it is the success of local delivery. Whatever we do, we must not impair that success and undermine the principle of local accountability. The challenge is how to ensure that that is the case at the same time as providing a national framework of standards that can be applied across all 32 local authorities. We need an appropriate balance, so we worry a little bit about the moves in the bill to reduce some local involvement. I have no problem with the concept of a national body that can oversee national training and national support, but I do have a problem with legislative changes that might diminish the ability of local authorities or support groups to make decisions that are firmly based on the distinct needs of the child whose immediate environment is their home or residence within that local community. I do not believe that the Scottish Government wants to diminish that ability either, but there is an important matter to be resolved regarding the role of the national convener as it is currently set out in the bill. The role of the new national convener is unclear. For example, and as the committee convener has already said, I am not convinced that the figurehead role that is envisaged by the Scottish Government is completely compatible with the role of providing direction and leadership in recruitment, selection and so on. The national convener will also have responsibility for delegating functions to area support teams, but there is confusion about how that will impact on the role of local authorities in the children's hearings system. I flag up those concerns as I firmly believe that much of the rest of the bill is driven by what is expected of the national convener. Our party would like much greater assurance that the post of national convener is a prerequisite for a more efficient children's hearings system—something for which I do not yet believe the Scottish Government has made an entirely convincing case.  Secondly, there is concern that there is a lack of clarity about some key principles. For example, there is a danger that the phrase "legal advice", which is used extensively in the bill, at times means legal clarification—a subtle difference, I suggest. Notwithstanding my reputation in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee with regard to semantic detail, I believe that that is a very important point. There is a difference between what someone can do and what someone ought to do, and we must be careful to ensure that the language in the bill is wholly accurate. If improving the legal representation of children is one of the main arguments for legislation, the legislation must accurately describe the intention. Likewise, there is an issue about the proposed change to the definition of "relevant person" to be someone who has "significant involvement" with the child, rather than someone who ordinarily has care and control of the child, as is defined in the 1995 act. The Scottish Government's reason for making the change is to try to remove some of the grey areas in relation to responsibility for the child. However, I wonder whether the change will create too many procedural complexities, just as I wonder whether the proposed changes to grounds for referral will make the system more complex than ever. Thirdly, aspects of the bill will have unintended consequences unless we are very careful. I mentioned our concerns about the role of the national convener and about whether, in the drive for national standards of care, we are in danger of creating a bigger bureaucracy and confusion about how national standards can be delivered locally. I also talked about legal complexities that might arise as a result of a change in the definition of "relevant person". The extension of the child's right to confidentiality is regarded as essential if our approach is to be fully compatible with the ECHR. Under the current system, confidentiality cannot be offered unless the parents consent, but the bill will change the situation to one in which parents can be denied information about their child and about the reasons for decisions that were taken on the child's behalf. I have no doubt that good intentions are behind the proposal, but the change might lead to breaches of parents' rights under the ECHR. If parents are to continue to have a right of appeal, they must have a right to know the basis of decisions. We must carefully look again at section 171(2)(b)(ii). I have no doubt that the debate on the bill is extremely important and that the future of many young people will depend on what we decide. The Scottish Conservatives will be constructive in the debate. We support the principles of the bill and  we will always be mindful that the best interests of the child are what matters most. To that end, some of the proposals make sense. However, a substantial number of sections need to be amended, and we will use stage 2 to bring forward proposals on how that should be done.

Will the member give way?

How can we continue to allow the high number of students at our universities and at the same time provide a funding base at current levels and the money for academic research and excellence if we do not allow those students to make a contribution?

The cabinet secretary began his speech by expressing how strong the tradition is in our university system, and he was right to do that. That we have three universities in the top 100 in the world is a considerable feat for Scotland. As politicians, we have a duty to ensure that that tradition endures, but the Parliament should be in no doubt about the extent of the challenge that we face. Scotland is at a major crossroads on the funding issue. The latest statistics show unprecedented levels of entrants to higher education in Scotland. In the previous decade alone, the number of students attending university increased by almost a quarter. That comes at a time of the most severe budget constraints for a generation, when £17 million has been lost from the education budget following the abolition of the graduate endowment; university pension funds are in crisis; there is a growing funding gap between England and Scotland; and the proportion of gross domestic product that we allocate to higher education is less than that in nations such as the US, Australia, Korea, Japan and even China. That extent of the financial challenge is bad, but so too is the extent of the social and economic challenge. Just how can we maintain and increase levels of academic excellence and the quality of our research base as well as widen access to higher education institutions while keeping higher education affordable and competitive? From that perspective, I am sure that many members have sympathy for students' concerns, as expressed in their petition on the issue. They are right to flag up the possibility of worsening financial discrepancies between England and Scotland and they are right to be concerned about the implications for higher education in Scotland. The issue runs much deeper than that. I agree with the cabinet secretary and the Liberals that it would be unwise to make too many pronouncements on those issues of concern until the Browne review reports later this year. However, I do not accept that waiting for the Browne report should preclude the Parliament from pursuing urgent action on other matters. It is in that respect that I want to repeat our call, first made by my colleague Murdo Fraser in 2007, for a  full and independent inquiry into the future funding of higher education, and that is why we will support the Labour amendment this afternoon. I know from the cabinet secretary's previous utterances, and from his speech today, that he will reject that call outright, so let me explain why he is wrong to do so and wrong to insist that any review of higher education can be carried out from within the sector. First, we need to have the courage to address some of the most difficult and perhaps controversial questions that face the sector at large. That includes the question whether far too many people are at university. Far too many people are frightened to ask that question. Before I am attacked for heresy, let me be clear about why the question must be asked. If we are to continue to deliver the highest quality of education possible, we must make that education available to all students who are genuinely academically able and well motivated, irrespective of their background or income levels. We should never allow ourselves to be dictated to by a percentage target, such as the 50 per cent target that was a mantra of the Blair era, as such targets put additional pressure on our young people and on schools to push them towards courses for which many are unsuited. I flag up the high first-year drop-out rates in some of our universities, which are higher than those in other parts of the UK and abroad. That suggests that some of those students should not be at university in the first place. Why does that happen? It is partly because of the culture of insisting that higher education is always a more socially acceptable option than vocational professions and trades are. That myth—and it is a myth—has done a great disservice to education in this country. It is high time that we did something about it. To do so, we need to take on board the opinions of many more stakeholders than just those in the sector. Secondly, there is a need to take a much more holistic approach to education. I have heard the cabinet secretary say that several times, and I agree. We need far better articulation of higher education with schools and colleges, and with business and industry. That is another reason why we should be keen to listen to other perspectives within an independent inquiry. How ironic it would be, at a time when other stakeholders in Scotland are being fully consulted about the curriculum reforms that may underpin the new Scottish Qualifications Authority exams, and when the Browne review board in England has included representatives from all walks of life, for us to allow only the higher education sector to have an input into higher education reform. In my view, that would be extremely short-sighted. It is just another reason why the cabinet secretary is wrong.  The cabinet secretary is wrong for a third reason—because of the nature of the question that must be asked about future financing. I have heard the SNP rant on about saying no to top-up fees and that we must do nothing to lose the right to free education in this country. I am happy to say, just as my colleague Murdo Fraser has said in the past, that we do not believe that students should pay up-front fees for their education. However, I will not rule out students making a contribution to their education in some way once they have graduated, and I strongly believe that Scotland cannot afford to rule that out. Conservative members have been consistent in that view for some time. We agree whole-heartedly with key figures such as Sir Andrew Cubie and Dr Brian Lang and with those student and lecturer representatives, including the Coalition of Higher Education Students in Scotland and the University and College Union, who argue vociferously that we need a full and comprehensive debate about the financial perspective. We are no longer in a world in which we can continue to encourage more and more people to go into higher education, at the same time as maintaining and enhancing academic excellence, without addressing the funding issue, especially the growing gap between north and south of the border. Like the cabinet secretary, I began my speech with a statement of fact: that Scotland has been a proud standard bearer of excellence in university education. As a politician, I am not prepared to accept anything less, and neither should any other politician in the chamber. We need a full and independent inquiry, and we need it now.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many prison officers have been prosecuted for crimes involved in supplying drugs to prisoners since 1999. (S3O-10784)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of Policy Exchange's recent very disturbing research, which found that 85 per cent of prisoners in England and Wales reported that they could get hold of drugs if they wanted them. Almost half of all prisoners reported that drugs were easily available, with some saying that they were available from prison officers. What steps is the Scottish National Party Government taking to investigate the situation in Scottish prisons and to deal with any prison officers who might be involved in supplying drugs to prisoners?

As the convener of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee said, the 2004 act provides—this is perhaps slightly unusual—that the Scottish ministers may not publish the code of practice until 40 days after a draft has been laid before the Scottish Parliament, so that evidence can be taken from Government officials on how the code will operate. As far as my party is concerned, that is entirely appropriate, because the code of practice is perhaps the most important document that can influence the quality of support services. It is perhaps even more important than the 2004 and 2009 acts, because it provides local authorities and parents with the most relevant details on how essential support can be provided to children.  The committee flagged up—several times—concerns about how well the previous code had been implemented. It is good that the revised version should provide a much more level playing field across Scotland and an environment in which children who have special needs are identified at the earliest possible stage. I am a former teacher: I think that one of the most important things that the code of practice can do is to facilitate the identification of needs as early as possible, which will make the whole education process much more beneficial. I am delighted to support the code of practice.

I congratulate Jim Tolson on securing this debate. One wise colleague suggested that a Liberal Democrat lunchtime debate bearing the name "bluelight" might be misinterpreted in the spirit of the new Conservative-Liberal consensus, but that is not the case as far as I am concerned, and I want to put firmly on the record the worth of the bluelight initiative. There can be no better example of good quality communication at community level than that which exists between the partners who are involved in the delivery of bluelight in Fife, including Fife Constabulary, Fife Council, NHS Fife, community volunteers, Fife Fire and Rescue Service, Carnegie College and many members from voluntary sector agencies. As all parties have asserted many times in this chamber, volunteers and voluntary organisations play a vital role in ensuring that we all live in a stronger and more cohesive society. They do an outstanding job. However, to enhance that support, we believe that more can be done to promote the interaction between public and social services and the voluntary sector, with each taking advantage of each other's strengths.  The bluelight initiative has already established itself as a well-regarded youth engagement initiative in Fife and across other Scottish police force areas, working to reduce crime and antisocial behaviour through a range of alcohol and drug-free youth events and programmes, as Jim Tolson said. Drug abuse threatens the very fabric of our society. It destroys lives, tears families apart, leads to widespread and recurring crime and to the disintegration of entire communities. It is therefore essential that we must harness not only all the resources of the state but the goodwill and determination of communities to not only discourage drug abuse but to do everything possible to eliminate it. Financial resources can do only so much. What we really need is a change of attitudes, and positive youth and community partnerships like bluelight can only help to achieve this aim. The Parliament firmly believes that we can often learn from best practice in other countries; the bluelight initiative is an example of such an approach, having been modelled on successful youth programmes in Australia, New Zealand and the south Pacific. I hope such positive approaches can be developed in other policy areas too. I have long advocated the need to engage more with our young people and to develop positive youth engagement initiatives throughout Scotland in order to address what is often seen as the problem of our disengaged youth. It is easy for politicians to stand here and in other places and talk, but it is the hard work of the many thousands of youth workers and volunteers that day in and day out provides positive support for young people throughout Scotland, often in difficult circumstances. I welcome the steering group that has been set up by the Scottish Government to provide strategic direction and to ensure collaboration between the many partners that are needed to make leadership activity effective. The voluntary sector will be free to come up with innovative solutions to the social problems that face our society only if it is truly independent and autonomous of Government, albeit with crucial Government support. In my area, many smaller groups already provide additional youth and community opportunities. The youth group @spire has proved to be hugely successful and gives young people in the communities in places such as Milnathort, Kinnesswood and Scotlandwell something to do every Tuesday, in the Milnathort church hall. Youth worker Hannah Pickles provides a youth drop-in service to give support and advice for young people, especially from the rural community.  The bluelight initiative has established itself as a fine example of partnership working in the voluntary sector. I hope that we will be able to go further in the future and develop strong partnerships. The Scottish Conservatives have repeatedly called for a longer-term strategic review of social work services and how those services can utilise the expertise of the voluntary sector in dealing with some of the most profound issues in our communities. I firmly agree with Jim Tolson that bluelight is a valuable and effective initiative that should be developed further in communities throughout Scotland. Nationally, there is variability in funding for such youth services, and there is a real need to improve efficiency and effectiveness. I hope that the minister will comment further on that at the end of the debate.

The member makes an important and valid point about the role of politicians. There are certain things that we cannot do as politicians. Does the member accept that that is one reason why we should have an independent review?

I warmly welcome this afternoon's debate. I say at the outset that we will support the Scottish Government's motion and Labour's amendment. I am aware that I have some work to do to persuade members that it is worth while for them to support our amendment, too. I agree whole-heartedly with what the minister and Karen Whitefield said about social care workers. We, too, commend the outstanding work of the thousands of social care workers throughout the country who do a first-class job day in, day out, often in extremely difficult circumstances that demand a huge variety of skills. I hope that we can all agree that the overwhelming need is to provide them with support rather than blame them personally for any of the shortcomings that have been identified in various reports. We need to recognise that four out of five people who access social care are extremely happy with the service that they receive and with the idea that social care workers are often best placed to help them to lead a more independent life. Notwithstanding that, many of the statistics on the number of those who require support are deeply worrying. The statistics for children are particularly stark. Some 137,000 children have no parent in work, 200,000 children are living in poverty, 60,000 children are affected by the drug problem of one or more than one parent and 100,000 live with parents who are addicted to alcohol, therefore it is not surprising that the number of children who are looked after by local authorities has increased every year since 2001. Over the past 11 years, within that overall rise, there have been steep increases in the numbers of pre-school and primary school-age children—32 per cent and 29 per cent respectively. That is one of the most worrying features—perhaps it is the most worrying feature—that we must address. It is incumbent on all of us to take on board the serious warnings that the Social Work Inspection Agency  has issued about the implications of those increases for the future, specifically the expected growth in the number of teenage children who will require to be looked after away from home. Similarly, we cannot ignore the Social Work Inspection Agency's conclusions, which make it clear that there is all too often a postcode lottery when it comes to the quality of care. The agency found that not enough local authorities "had consistent and coherent approaches to achieve long term security for children". It found that, too often, the "quality of risk assessments was inconsistent" and that there was frequently wide variability in local authorities' funding. Those differences are simply not acceptable. I do not for a moment doubt the minister's good intentions, but we must do more to address the fundamental failings in the system, many of which relate to the unlevel playing field that exists across the country. Findings too often reveal that vulnerable children and families are not receiving the care and support that they need, and that vulnerable children and families have been left to take on an enormous burden of responsibility without adequate back-up. I turn to why I am calling for an independent inquiry. I am not doing so because any of the work that has been done previously has been harmful in any way; in many cases, that work has been exceptionally good. I am well aware of all the work that was done under the previous Executive and that has been done recently in the Parliament, and I pay tribute to those who are engaged in that work. However, as is the case with many other aspects of public services in this country, the challenges that we face from the demographics involved, which are highlighted in Labour's amendment, are significant and immense. I am talking about the number of elderly people who are expected to live much longer in the years ahead and the number of children who are expected to go through the system. On the changing culture of social work care and how local authorities operate, I am very much a supporter of the principle of getting it right for every child, which is outstanding and has in itself brought about a different culture—we look at the services in a much more integrated and holistic way. However, I am asking for an independent inquiry because I do not think that we can address all the needs of social services with the existing resources. The culture of how we approach matters has changed much recently, and it will continue to change. It is a bit like the higher education question. We cannot expect demand to continue to increase, given the level of resources that we will have. Labour and the minister have  highlighted the fact that resources will be very tight for some time to come. We must also accept that more than half of those who are in touch with social work services are not in employment, education or training; indeed, we must be clear that that figure is approaching 100 per cent in some council areas. That is why it is vital that our most vulnerable children can access proper educational support and have more input to their futures beyond school as a matter of course rather than as a matter of chance, depending on the local services in their particular area. I appreciate that all parties have worked immensely hard to improve the process, and I am sure that we will hear from the minister about that in the near future, but we need to do more to harness the support that is required right across the system. We must also engage in a much more structured conversation with the excellent voluntary sector groups that do so much to try to improve the lives of vulnerable families. The whole philosophy of GIRFEC, and its related principle of ensuring that there is a more holistic approach to care, is absolutely right, but it is also challenging and has implications for our care services. All public services, and especially social services, can benefit so much from good-quality partnerships with the voluntary sector. Volunteers and voluntary organisations play a vital role in ensuring that we all live in a strong and cohesive society. They do an excellent job and we believe that there should be much more joined-up working between social services and the voluntary sector so that they can take advantage of each other's strengths. I finish by stressing the need for commitment in United Kingdom policies to make Britain a more family-friendly nation. On this side of the chamber, we believe firmly that there is a need to support families in the tax and benefits system, to extend flexible working and to improve the structure of parental leave when families are most in need of help. We must not underestimate the enormous role that is played by kinship carers and foster parents, which was flagged up prominently in the reports. Their input is crucial, and we must be conscious of the support that they need when fulfilling a role that would otherwise be fulfilled by social services staff. The Scottish Government has worked hard in that respect, but there is still more to be done, just as there is more to be done with drugs and alcohol policies. There is much to be gained from cross-party support as we go forward. I am only too conscious of the challenges that lie ahead and of the urgent need to support our most vulnerable families and all those who care for them. Some of the challenges are enormous,  which is why I repeat my party's call for an independent review of all social work services. I move amendment S3M-6223.1, to insert at end: "also notes that the Social Work Inspection Agency concluded that there were wide variations in the level of social care service provided by local authorities throughout Scotland and therefore calls for an independent review of social work services to identify the local authorities that need more help, and, furthermore, calls for the Scottish Government to facilitate greater use of the expertise of the voluntary sector and for greater focus from the Scottish Government on tackling the misuse of drugs and alcohol, which the Social Work Inspection Agency has identified as leading to an increase in the number of children needing to be looked after."

Will the First Minister acknowledge that the main reason for concern among secondary teachers about the curriculum for excellence is not its principles but the lack of any clear picture about what will be required of teachers to meet the new demands of the Scottish Qualifications Authority's examinations structure? Can he give us a timescale for when that structure will be available?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to address indiscipline in schools. (S3O-10305)

Last week, the schools minister rightly highlighted the value of outdoor learning in helping pupils to become more enthusiastic and self-disciplined. Will the Scottish National Party deliver in this parliamentary session its 2007 manifesto commitment to five days of subsidised outdoor education for children from our most deprived communities?

From his discussions with local authorities, can the cabinet secretary say whether there has been any improvement in the process of keeping accurate data on teacher numbers in our local authorities?

To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of Perth and Kinross Council and what issues were discussed. (S3O-10159)

Will the cabinet secretary use this opportunity to put on record the Scottish Government's support for Perth's bid for city status in 2012?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it has made in reducing the regulatory burden on farmers. (S3O-10010)

I thank the minister for that encouraging response. In 2007, the Scottish Government made a firm commitment to a policy of one in, one out when it comes to regulations on farming. Can the minister tell us how many new regulations have been introduced since 2007 and how many have disappeared?

I am pleased to have secured this debate to mark the 150th anniversary of the Army Cadet Force. I warmly welcome the representatives of the Combined Cadet Force in the gallery and thank the cadets who turned up this morning to meet MSPs. In particular, I congratulate the cadets from Loretto school whose CCF celebrates its centenary this year. The Army Cadet Force is one of the United Kingdom's oldest, largest and most successful youth organisations, and Scotland has played a unique role in its history. Kirkcaldy—for which I have special affection, as the birthplace of my father—was home to the first detachment in Scotland. From that early foundation, the cadet movement has gone from strength to strength, and is now able to boast more than 47,000 cadets, who are part of the 1,700 local detachments throughout the UK. As all members who will participate in the debate are well aware, those detachments help young people between the ages of 12 and 18 to develop personally and physically by providing them with a wide range of challenging and exciting opportunities and activities, and training them in the skills that they need for later life. The Combined Cadet Force is renowned for its ability to instil a sense of discipline, leadership and community spirit in our young people. That can only be a good thing, particularly when it can help to turn around the lives of some of our more troubled young people as well as inspire thousands more to achieve their ambitions, including, in many cases, to join the forces.  Perhaps one of the greatest assets of the cadet movement is its ability to provide a positive framework for young people of all ages and backgrounds so that it provides them with confidence and self-esteem, strong social bonds and lasting friendships. Many recent debates in the Parliament have made us focus on the need to improve young people's skills. Colleges, universities and employers often tell us that we need to do much more in that respect. That is precisely why we should celebrate the success of the cadets and all those who work for them. Whether they learn map and compass skills for the Duke of Edinburgh award, perform in a military band or help with voluntary work in the community, the skills that they learn are hugely important, and they can use them for the rest of their lives. It is a testament to the cadet force's success that it has become one of the largest music educators of young people in Scotland. Some 800 young people in the cadet force are taught piping and drumming each year; one in every 14 cadets learns to play the pipes or drums. We should recognise the significant contribution that the cadet force makes in our communities. Community projects enrich local knowledge, encourage good citizenship and provide support for many community events and groups. It is encouraging to see the work that is being done in schools, where the emphasis is on citizen service for all 16-year-olds, which gives young people opportunities to play a leading role in their communities. In what will inevitably be a difficult financial period in the coming years, it is vital that we do not lose such opportunities. Jim Hume lodged a motion last week in which he rightly asked: "That the Parliament notes with concern the plans to close the Combined Cadet Force ... at Knox Academy in Haddington, the only CCF remaining in a state secondary school in Scotland". I hope that all stakeholders, including East Lothian Council and the Ministry of Defence, will enter into constructive discussions to ensure that that cadet force remains at the school. The cadet force's greatest strength is its many volunteers and instructors, who provide experience and specialist skills to develop cadets' talents. Without the support of such people, which is given selflessly and with unrelenting enthusiasm, we would have great difficulty in supporting our young people. That is why it is a matter of considerable concern that the current economic climate is forcing the United Kingdom Government to make savings of £4 million in the Army Cadet Force training budget, which will inevitably have a detrimental effect on the staffing of cadet courses. There are encouraging signs  among all parties in the Parliament that we acknowledge the need to do more to encourage and support volunteers throughout Scotland, but we need to turn our words into action. A 150th anniversary is an important milestone in any organisation's history. In the case of the Army Cadet Force, it brings a timely reminder of the strength of our young people when they are motivated to succeed. I hope that the many events throughout the UK, including the aptly named cadetfest in Glasgow in April, the cadet forces piping event in Inverness in the first week of April and the parade at Buckingham palace on 6 July, as well as the hugely important parade at Edinburgh castle on 12 June, will be widely supported by all members and will provide a showcase for the cadet movement in every part of the UK. I wish all cadets a successful year of celebrations to mark their 150th anniversary. I wish them well in the future. I hope that we can do our bit to ensure that during the next 150 years the Army Cadet Force will be as successful as it has been in the past.

I make it absolutely clear that we would not prevent anybody from setting up a school, provided that they did so according to the education legislation of this country, which means  HMIE inspections and regulation by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. I think that Mr Macintosh is confused; there are already private schools that do not make profits. The issue is about state-funded education, which the Swedish model makes abundantly clear. All that we are saying is that, within such a model, there should be diversity in schools provision.

What would the member say to the headmaster in Motherwell who has said that he does not have the freedom to choose whoever he would like when he chooses his staff? That is a classic case. He must go by what local authority directives say.

By no means am I saying that teachers lack an incentive. Some of our finest teachers are in disadvantaged areas, but they are constrained by a one-size-fits-all policy that does not allow them to do some of the things that they want to do to address the distinctive needs of the children in their schools.

I accept the member's point, but is that not critical for allowing all standards to be driven up so that that divide is not as great as it is now?

I am happy to give the member an answer on that. As we discussed earlier, the traditions of the Scottish education system are different from those in England, and as the cabinet secretary also acknowledged, we must be mindful of those differences and know what system is appropriate.

I am persuaded to look again at the Swedish model, which was cost neutral. One of the reasons for Councillor Berry in East Lothian Council raising the issue of school trusts was the possibility that trusts would give better value for money.

Will the member give way?

I was referring to average standards of education in Sweden. There is categorical evidence that they improved with the introduction of the new schools, not only in those schools but in the existing schools. I do not deny that there may have been blips in some subjects, but the average standards have gone up and continue to go up.

Education in Scotland was once rightly renowned for its outstanding quality. The Conservatives firmly believe that it can be again. The vast majority of our pupils and teachers have the potential for outstanding success, but not if we continue to pretend that all is well in the current structure of school management and to resist the need for change. The facts speak for themselves. Since 1999, successive Scottish Governments have doubled spending on our schools, yet overall standards of attainment have been flatlining and, sadly, actually declining in some cases. Each year, 13,000 pupils leave school unable to read or write properly. Only 30 per cent of pupils in secondary 2 reach the required standard in mathematics, despite the figure being 85 per cent in primary 3. Scottish pupils are now ranked below the global average in mathematics and science and, only two weeks ago, the Scottish Government's latest statistics revealed that two thirds of S2 pupils struggle with literacy. That situation is just not acceptable. It is not acceptable to parents, pupils and teachers, all of whom know that we should be doing very much better, or to the Scottish Conservative party, which is why we believe that it is time for radical change. I put on record the fact that many communities throughout Scotland are fortunate to have an excellent state school on their doorstep, but far too many are not. In too many areas, particularly in some of our most disadvantaged communities, schools underperform because the present system provides them with too little incentive to improve. However hard our teachers work, their efforts are often compromised by a system that is unresponsive to the needs of individual schools and pupils. That seems particularly ironic at a time when the principles and modern methodology of the curriculum for excellence are driving at greater diversity in the curriculum and, I hope, more fulfilling options for more pupils in Scottish Qualifications Authority examinations.  All communities in Scotland should have access to a good state school. Social and economic background should be no barrier, and nor should an arbitrary catchment area or parental income levels. However, nothing will change if there continues to be an obsession with a one-size-fits-all policy for our local authorities and the long-standing—and, I must say, socialist—love affair with comprehensive education. That approach persistently confuses the principle of equality of opportunity with that of uniformity and has created false tensions between the pursuit of social justice and the pursuit of excellence. As a result, politicians have become the controlling factor in our schools, when it should be headteachers and parents. Earlier this week, we set out why we believe that the evidence clearly shows that too many school children in Scotland do not get the education that they deserve. We also set out our plans to raise standards, which fall under three headings: breaking up the current monopoly that the state has over the provision of education; giving teachers and headteachers more control; and giving parents more choice over which type of school they want to deliver their child's education. In short, we argue that we need to take power away from the politicians and start trusting the professionals on the front line.

Very much so. If the member is asking whether I support what Michael Gove is doing down south, the answer is that I do. Obviously, Scottish education has a different tradition and structure. I am keen for us to have greater diversity and we are interested in the academy model but, at present, it would not be particularly appropriate in Scotland.

Mr Macintosh should go back and consider his socialist credentials. In 1991, Professor Howie said that there was a great need to diversify in comprehensive education, certainly beyond S4. We are attracted to that model. We are talking about the provision of new free schools that can compete with existing local authority schools. Those schools would remain state funded and would not be allowed to charge fees or become selective. Most important, they would remain subject to the same rigorous inspection processes of Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care that exist at present for all schools. The schools could be run by educational charities, not-for-profit trusts or other philanthropic bodies. There would be scope for local authorities to transfer a school, or perhaps a cluster of schools, to an educational trust. Interestingly, that is along the lines of a suggestion by a Scottish National Party councillor in East Lothian Council, who has said that the principle behind the proposal is the need to drive up standards, as well as the need to help local authorities make the best possible use of scarce resources at a time when local authority finance is stretched. Although we do not yet know the full details of Councillor Berry's proposal, we applaud that innovative thinking, unlike the Labour Party, which seems to have dismissed it out of hand. Recently, there has been an increase in the number of parents who want to exercise their legal right to choose their child's school. There has been a spectacular failure to deliver the Scottish Government's class size policy in its original format of 18 or fewer pupils in primaries 1 to 3, precisely because of the obsession with a one-size-fits-all agenda. Now, whether it is a face-saving mission or what the cabinet secretary described at yesterday's Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee as a "helpful" measure, we have a more relaxed target of 20 per cent of pupils being in such classes. However, concerns are still being expressed about councils' ability to deliver the policy, precisely because it does not suit diverse needs in various parts of Scotland.  I have no problem with smaller class sizes, but I have a problem with an overbureaucratic model that has not only created much heartache in our councils, but caused a growing number of parents to feel the need to go to court to exercise fully their right to choose different types of school. They should not be put in that situation. Some people tell me that state schools throughout Scotland already have different characteristics—I agree, and they always have done. However, where is the logic in preventing parents from taking advantage of that diversity? If more parents want the right to choose from different types of school, they should have it, and they should be able to take their child out of a poorly performing school and transfer him or her to another school where standards are better. No longer should they be dictated to by a one-size-fits-all arbitrary postcode that is unreflective of real demand. Before Christmas, I wrote to the convener of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee to suggest that the committee's 2010 work programme should include an examination of the school structure in Scotland and how we can address the current failings. I am grateful to Karen Whitefield for pursuing that request and to my colleagues on the committee who, on 3 February, agreed unanimously that we should examine the issue in detail. I hear on the grapevine that it is proving difficult to get a ticket for a flight to Sweden this weekend. I have discovered that not only are the cabinet secretary and some of his officials winging their way across to Scandinavia, but so too are Tavish Scott and some of his officials, such is the sudden desire of senior political figures to see for themselves what the Tories have known for many months, and even for many years. David McLetchie, well ahead of his time as usual, made exactly the same visit back in 2005 and, last September, we invited one of the most respected Swedish experts on education, Thomas Idergard, to Edinburgh. So I must ask Labour Party members, if even the yellow bus is making its way out to the airport, will they jump on it, too, or will they just stay at home and miss the bus? I am genuinely pleased that the cabinet secretary has agreed to debate the issue and I look forward to his response and to seeing whether he really is out to grasp the thistle, which involves asking whether Alex Salmond and his fellow Scottish Cabinet colleagues will break their deafening silence, stand up and be counted. The Scottish Tories are determined to take a lead in the debate, even if that means upsetting some apple-carts that are dragged along by conventional thinking. The polls in Scotland show consistently that the public feel that there has been a failure to deliver better quality in public  services and that the Scottish Government needs to respond more effectively to the diverse needs of different groups of people. Sweden, Finland, the Netherlands and Alberta in Canada have got that right, which is why we believe that lessons can be learned from countries in which parents have the freedom to choose between different providers in the state sector instead of being told what they must do. In those countries, the aim is to provide a good education for everyone and not just some, and to raise attainment levels—to drive up standards instead of being content with the lowest common denominator. I know that some siren voices say that our proposal is all wrong. Yesterday, we were accused of having rationing as our main aim, which was rather an extreme view. I fully acknowledge that it took eight years to convince a once-sceptical public in Sweden that the new freedoms in the state sector would work, but they did. Now, almost no one, including those who are on the left of the political spectrum—they are socialists, Mr Macintosh—wants to return to the old system, such is the conviction that the new system is much better at raising overall standards. That is true not only of the new schools but of the existing state schools in Sweden. Many teachers there liked the new system because it gave them much more flexibility and scope to concentrate on raising standards in the classroom rather than filling in far too much unnecessary paperwork. Incidentally, that is the same flexibility as we seek in the curriculum for excellence. I will dwell on that point a little longer. If the curriculum for excellence has a central message, it is about catering for the individual pupil's needs. That principle is supported throughout the Parliament. In turn, that should mean that we are serious about opening new avenues for pupils who neither wish nor are able to pursue a purely academic curriculum. We should develop formal vocational courses for middle-year secondary pupils and ensure that they have every opportunity to learn an apprentice trade, just as in several other European countries. If that means that specialist schools come into being, just as in Denmark and the Netherlands, so be it. Following the introduction of new providers in Sweden, 10 per cent of pupils attend free schools—the figure is nearly 20 per cent in the upper secondary. As for the merit value of schools there, five years after the introduction of free schools, the average attainment level was 206 points, and 226 points in free schools. However, just as important is the fact that standards rose not just in free schools but in existing schools. I stress firmly that the average of 206 points was an increase on the figure before 1991, when free schools were introduced. The Swedish National  Agency for Education highlighted that, reporting that standards improved across the board because existing schools needed to compete with the new free schools if they were not to lose pupils. The Scottish Conservatives believe that that model can work well in Scotland because it strikes the right balance between supporting the many good schools throughout Scotland where parents are very satisfied with the education that their children receive and improving schools that consistently underperform and with which parents are dissatisfied. How much more evidence is required and how many more children need to be let down before the SNP, Labour and the Liberals realise that Scottish education needs to be brought up to date so that we can keep pace with other developed countries? Doing nothing is not an option. The evidence that radical change is required is compelling, as is the demand from parents and teachers that we need to deliver higher standards across the board. We must ensure that reform extends parental choice, devolves more power to headteachers and provides far more freedom in the state sector. If we do not, the educational futures of too many young people will be at stake. I ask members to support the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament agrees with the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning that "choice and diversity are the hallmarks of a mature and confident society" in the provision of state-funded education and that it is now time to explore alternative models for delivery of school education with a view to empowering head teachers, raising standards and increasing parental choice; welcomes the community trust model for schools put forward by East Lothian Council as worthy of further examination and believes that this and other models to be found elsewhere in Europe should be the subject of detailed consideration and debate, and calls on the Scottish Government to publish an options paper on models of school organisation to facilitate this.

I have no problem in reiterating our commitment to internationalism or in praising the enormous number of schools, many of which have been included in the HMIE inspection report, that, as the cabinet secretary has pointed out, have done a fantastic job on this subject. I, too, congratulate St Ninian's high school and, in particular, its headteacher on winning his excellent award. I have certainly said many nice things about Perth and Kinross schools such as Oakbank primary school and its work on international eco-school development and several other schools that have made excellent new links with schools in South Africa, India and China. I suspect, however, that many teachers and members of the public will be a little puzzled at the SNP's insistence that the most pressing topic for an education debate this week is international education, particularly in view of the motion's very self-congratulatory tone. There always has been and always will be a whole-hearted commitment in Scotland to international aspects of education. If there was a single reason why Scottish education made such a huge impact around the world in the days when it first established its reputation, it was Scotland's concern for the international community and the role that Scotland played in the economic, social and political development of many nations around the world. The Scottish enlightenment in the 18 th century, whose benefits were felt many thousands of miles from these shores, was remarkable for its great outpouring of intellectual and scientific accomplishments, which rivalled those of any other nation at the time. They were even more remarkable because they took place in a country that was considered to be one of the so-called more backward nations in western Europe. Scotland was remarkably forward in recognising the values that underpin a good education. The achievements in philosophy, economics, engineering, architecture, medicine, geology, archaeology, law, agriculture and chemistry were extraordinary, and the contributions of Scottish thinkers and scientists of the period, such as Francis Hutcheson, David Hume, Adam Smith, Thomas Reid, Robert Burns, Adam Ferguson and James Hutton, were outstanding. The belief that a good education should be available to everyone was also extraordinary. There is no doubt that, if pupils are to become well-educated, rounded human beings, they must have a full awareness and understanding of the global community, and tolerance and respect for the many and varied cultures around the world. Today's pupils have at their disposal a huge array  of means of communication and a wide number of opportunities to visit other countries and to host visitors from other countries, which cannot do anything other than benefit their education. It is good to see that the recent HMIE report provided many examples of good practice in that respect. I would like to pursue the theme of parental and teacher priorities at a time when there is much else of pressing need to debate in the chamber. Indeed, it is only by pursuing those priorities that we can best deliver the desired objectives in international education. That requires some of the most sophisticated skills to understand other cultures, build better relations with communities that are far removed from our own, and cross the boundaries of religious and racial divisions. That is not easy, and it is particularly difficult if too many of our young people lack good-quality skills in the basics. To pick up on the point that Margo MacDonald made, how can we expect youngsters who struggle to read and write properly to be furnished with the ability to learn a second or third language or the depth of understanding that is required to appreciate the historical and economic differences of other societies? That point is well made in the Liberal amendment. To pick up Labour's theme, how can we achieve the full benefits of the international dimension of the curriculum for excellence if teachers in our secondary schools remain a little hazy about exactly what subject knowledge they are supposed to impart and how it will be examined?

That point is extremely well made. In the debate last week, the cabinet secretary said that we have lessons to learn from other countries. I am sure that he will not miss that point when he examines what we should do to improve teacher training. The General Teaching Council for Scotland has said that more teachers in the teacher training programme are asking for international education to be expanded and for better-quality training in the basics. I return to the fact that we will not be able to enhance international development unless we ensure that people are well crafted in the basics first. Labour has an important point to make. We need much greater clarity and certainly far more assurances about the nature of the new generation of exam reform. We debated that last week, and it has been debated in the media ever since. The new exams should not only be more  suited to the needs of individual pupils—it is right that they should be—but should stretch our brightest pupils, who should have the potential to follow in the footsteps of their enlightenment forefathers. If the Scottish Government is serious about pursuing the best merits of international education, it might consider debating the merits of the international baccalaureate as opposed to the Scottish baccalaureate. However, a debate on that is perhaps for another Thursday. The Scottish Government has made it clear that it wishes to learn from the educational experiences of other countries. One of the most important and pressing needs is the need to develop better vocational education. Countries such as Germany and Denmark have sophisticated educational structures that allow formal vocational training at a younger age than is possible here and they have far less of the unacceptable stigma that in this country so wrongly gets attached to many pupils who, for one reason or another, have no wish to pursue an academically focused career. Internationalism has always been at the centre of Scottish education and I am confident that it always will be. Those schools that have embraced new projects with international education are to be warmly congratulated, but I suggest that no one will congratulate the Scottish Government until it can attend to the basics without which too many children have little chance of being able to understand and appreciate the international community. I move amendment S3M-5871.3, which was written carefully by me and not by a computer, to insert at end: "; believes that the priorities for parents and teachers across Scotland are substantial improvements in basic standards of literacy and numeracy, greater rigour and greater flexibility in the SQA qualifications structure and wider opportunities for young people to pursue formal vocational training so that Scotland can strengthen its international reputation in educational attainment."

I thank the Labour Party, and in particular Patricia Ferguson, for bringing the debate to the chamber and for affording us all the opportunity to explore, in considerable detail, some serious concerns. I gave my backing to the initial consultation stages of the proposed bill in order to build on concerns, which have been expressed during the debate, and on comments that had been made by my colleague Mary Scanlon, who in September 2007 made it clear that there are too many loopholes in the existing legislation. We have heard from all parties this morning that we have evidence of situations, in more or less every constituency in Scotland, in which residents have encountered difficulties with factors. There can be no doubt that in many cases, although by no means in all cases, those residents are from older and perhaps more vulnerable groups, as both Sarah Boyack and Ken Macintosh said. Therefore, the issues deserve full parliamentary scrutiny. Before I sum up our party's overall position on the matter, I have to say that we recognise that many factors do an excellent job and provide first-class facilities across the board. Of course, that in turn means that we have to be mindful that we support those factors and do not design new legislation that would be overbureaucratic or which would restrict either them or—as important—the consumer's choice. As Mary Scanlon and David McLetchie have already made clear this morning, we want three specific concerns to be addressed: first, how we strike the right balance between accreditation, regulation and quality assurance; secondly, as Margaret Curran highlighted, the absence of effective complaints procedures against factors who default; and thirdly, the need for greater transparency in obtaining relevant financial information about the managing company's accounts. Let me summarise our position on each. We fully appreciate the calls for better quality assurance and a level playing field across Scotland. Currently, as Malcolm Chisholm hinted, there is often a big contrast between conditions in older title deeds that make almost no provision for common decision making, and newer title deeds in which such provisions are much more extensive and comprehensive. Although we understand the calls for mandatory regulation, which were made particularly strongly by Patricia Ferguson and Pauline McNeill, we need to keep an open mind about what that would mean, and we need to begin by listening to the arguments about whether the approach should  include compulsory registration or whether the problems would be better solved by a system of voluntary accreditation. I have listened to and understand the reasons behind the strong calls for the need for more than a voluntary system, but we want to explore the arguments a little more. In that respect, I echo the request that was made by Robert Brown and David McLetchie to the minister to tell us his current position with regard to seeking additional information. After all, there are arguments on both sides, but the key principle must be to ensure that consumers have effective choice, that they will not be restricted from switching and that changes will not involve unnecessary and expensive red tape. On the second point, we are absolutely clear that there must be an effective complaints procedure that leaves no scope for the difficult factor to manipulate a situation or to discriminate against the consumer. There must be clarity about the respective roles, responsibilities and legal rights of the managing company and the owners and residents body. We believe that there must be much greater financial transparency to ensure that owners and residents can see clearly what their money is being spent on, and the value for money that they are getting every time they are asked to pay a bill. On that point, we also seek clarification about trading standards and whether any related issues involve purely reserved legislation and might therefore bring into question the Scottish Parliament's competence. We note in particular the Scottish Consumer Council's concern in its submission to the Office of Fair Trading that, in too many cases, consumers find it very difficult to exercise collective choice and switch. That can act as a considerable constraint on suppliers and prevent consumers from getting best value for money. The relationship between the property manager and the owners in a shared property is defined by complex legislation, property deeds and agreements, so many consumers do not understand their rights and obligations. Likewise, consumers often fail to understand the processes that are involved in switching; in any case, there is no effective mechanism for pursuing complaints, which allows dishonest factors to play the system even more. We also note the calls to set down the minimum requirements for best practice so that complaints can be investigated against clear standards. In short, we will support measures that increase consumer choice, that provide a level playing field of quality assurance, and which weed out the bad factor. We will oppose measures that might tip the balance in favour of too much bureaucracy rather than self-regulation, and which might raise barriers  that stifle competition and eliminate diversity of provision. As I say, we have a very open mind on whether a statutory approach needs to be taken. The arguments have been very well presented from various parts of the chamber: for that reason alone, the debate has been more than worth while.

I, too, congratulate my colleague Murdo Fraser on securing the debate, and I congratulate all those who have worked so hard under the guidance of Provost John Hulbert, Brigadier Mel Jameson and Ken MacDonald, who are with us in the public gallery, to ensure that the Perth 800 bid has been so professionally presented. In the world of politics, it is not always easy to find issues that bring politicians together rather than divide us, but the Perth 800 bid is surely one of them. There is  every sign that the campaign has already done much to unite not only members, but the people of Perth, its many close communities and many businesses and institutions, which make up the fabric of Perth and Kinross. Members will not be surprised to hear that I believe that Perthshire is one of the best places in which to live in Scotland—although perhaps it is not today, with the power cuts and heavy snow. However, generally speaking, it is a fantastic place to live. Perth 800 presents an opportunity not only to celebrate the 800 th anniversary of the granting of the royal burgh charter to Perth by King William the Lion of Scotland in 1210, but to celebrate and promote the long and distinguished traditions that the city can boast in local heritage, sport, arts and culture. Murdo Fraser mentioned several of the 100 or so exciting events that will be held throughout Perth and Kinross during 2010, that will have something for young and old alike. Events such as the Johnnie Walker golf championship at Gleneagles will add the usual international glamour and, we hope, a much-needed boost to tourism and local business, but I particularly congratulate the Perth 800 team on its work to provide an extensive grass-roots sports programme, including the Perthshire festival of rugby, the Scottish orienteering championships and the Perth mini Olympics. For those who prefer a slightly more sedate sport, there is also the international grandmaster simultaneous display, a name which brings up interesting imagery. As a sports enthusiast and someone who has a strong interest in encouraging young people to become involved in sport, I think that these events have a particular importance, and I am sure that they will do much to inspire wider participation in sport and enjoyment of the great outdoors. One of the most encouraging aspects of the planning stages of Perth 800 has been the enthusiasm of the many local businesses—from the one-man businesses in Perth High Street to the large companies such as Scottish and Southern Energy—that play their parts in stimulating the local economy. Through them, we have been able to ensure that Perth 800 can engage with every part of the community, whether in Perth city itself or its immediate hinterland. That has helped to encourage a sense of civic pride as well as enhancing the national and international profile of Perth and Kinross. As Murdo Fraser said, Perth 800 also presents an opportunity to progress Perth's bid to gain official city status. I believe that that city status presents an opportunity to bring major benefits by increasing the potential to market the area as one that contains the premier city in Scotland for business, education, art, culture and sport, as well  as putting Perth on the map as Scotland's seventh city. I hope that Perth 800 will prove to be a great success—the positive signs are already pointing to that. That is welcome in what are difficult economic times in which to plan such a wide-ranging programme of events. As we look forward to the legacy of Perth 800, I hope that we will also be able to rejoice in what will be a successful bid to regain official city status for Perth, which will restore Perth to her rightful place at the heart of Scotland.

The member is right. Questions about professional development are crucial. Educational principles and professional development are the key to making the curriculum for excellence work. Margaret Smith has lodged a motion on the timescale. She is not asking for curriculum for excellence to be put off; she is asking for it to be introduced properly.

I welcome the fact that the Liberals have brought this debate to Parliament, as it affords us the opportunity to reaffirm our strong commitment to the principles of the curriculum for excellence. More important, it gives us the opportunity to address with some urgency the remaining challenges, if we are to ensure that the benefits of the curriculum for excellence are successfully implemented in our schools and in the reform of the SQA examination system. Most people know when they meet someone who is well educated—it shows in the way in which they behave, their conversation and their range of interests, as well as in the skills that they bring to their occupation. A good education is about acquiring the basic skills in literacy and numeracy at an early age, acquiring a good understanding of the world around one and the ability to gain qualifications. However, it is about far more than just passing exams—it is about the qualities that give people good judgment, self-confidence, self-esteem and a sense of responsibility as a citizen in a community. For me, the curriculum for excellence must be about striking an effective balance between improving the academic rigour of our qualifications and making learning more relevant and meaningful to each child, so that they are better prepared with the skills that they require for life after school. So far, so good. However, as other members have said, there is no doubt that serious questions remain about the implementation of the curriculum for excellence. That is why we have sympathy with the content of the Liberal motion and the timescale that it proposes. If, as I am sure the cabinet secretary has done, we listen to classroom teachers, headteachers, the teaching unions and various educational commentators, representatives of whom have appeared before the committee, we find that there is deep concern—even, dare I say, despair in some quarters—that teachers, especially those in secondary schools, do not feel that they have been fully engaged in the process of developing the curriculum for excellence, that too many of the  guidelines are woolly and vague and that insufficient time has been allocated to improving teachers' CPD training in this area. There is enough concern to suggest that it might be preferable to introduce a short delay in implementation. Six years down the line on the curriculum for excellence, the Scottish Government should be able to make a timing decision. One teacher summed up the situation well in a comment to the Times Educational Supplement that "this is the biggest and most exciting curriculum change in schools for a generation but the one for which teachers are least prepared." In other words, they were positive about the principles that underpin the curriculum for excellence but warned that time is crucial if the change is to work to best advantage. Of course, matters were made much worse by the fact that, at the same time as introducing this major reform, the Scottish Government piled substantial other pressures on our local authority education departments—expensive and, dare I say, wrong-headed priorities such as insisting on class sizes of 18 or fewer in primary 1 to 3 and universal free school meals. Those policies meant that in some cases, resources were diverted away from the curriculum for excellence. In my final minute, I turn to the question of raising standards throughout Scottish schools. Rightly, the cabinet secretary identified that as the main ambition of the curriculum for excellence, but it will happen only if there is a determined effort to provide more formal vocational options for pupils in the early years of secondary school and to restore more academic rigour to the SQA examination system—academic rigour that recognises the importance of what the cabinet secretary described to the committee as the "deepening experience" of the curriculum for excellence, involves pursuing greater knowledge and understanding of relevant subject content and enables those pupils who wish to pursue academic courses to develop sophisticated interpretive and analytical skills that are so eagerly sought by employers in this country. I take nothing away from the excellent teaching and hard work that our teachers and pupils undertake, but I worry greatly that the constant "improvement" in exam passes increasingly reflects the ability to recall key bullet points of a limited range of knowledge rather than the ability to develop more sophisticated argument and analytical thinking. On the same point, the cabinet secretary is aware of my concerns about the accessibility of the advanced higher, which I consider to be one of the best aspects of Scottish education. That will not remain the case if too few pupils are able to  access the course that they need and we cannot stretch our brightest pupils to the full. We have a huge opportunity to get this right, but we need to be much more far-sighted about promoting excellence in its widest sense. If that means a slight delay in the implementation of the curriculum for excellence, so be it. However, we must also ensure that the proposed reforms of the SQA reflect our ambitions. I move amendment S3M-5809.1, to insert at end: ", and further seeks an assurance from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning that the reform of the exam system accompanying the Curriculum for Excellence will provide sufficient academic rigour and skills-based testing so as to ensure the highest possible standards of attainment in Scottish schools."

It is very good news that the total number of exclusions has reduced, but it is not good news that there is a higher percentage of violent attacks on both pupils and staff. What is the Government doing to address that?

There can be no doubt about the importance of a skills strategy to the development of a more successful economy and more meaningful and fulfilling opportunities in the education system. It is good to hear that the Scottish Government has provided more assurances on the skills strategy than it did when the original version was overwhelmingly rejected by the Parliament for the simple reason that it did not provide a coherent policy across all sectors. I listened carefully to the minister's opening remarks and I hope that I can press him to deal with a bit more of the detail, which relates, as far as we are concerned, to two fundamental issues. I hope that we can elicit an assurance in the minister's summing up that the Government will address those issues as a matter of urgency. Two weeks ago, we had a very good debate on literacy. It would not be appropriate to go over all aspects of that debate again, much as I would like to, but I reiterate our strong belief that literacy and numeracy are the blocks upon which all else must be built. The sizeable amount of money that Scottish businesses have to spend in their training budgets on remedial work rather than on new skills is evidence of how serious the problem is. The Parliament is well aware of our views about the need for more rigorous testing in primary schools, which have been reinforced in the past 24 hours by concerns among primary teachers. I am sure that the Scottish Government has the best interests of our pupils at heart when it comes to the curriculum for excellence, but we simply cannot proceed much further until we have demonstrated unequivocally—on a basis that is both understood and accepted by employers—that standards of literacy and numeracy are improving. If we can get the balance right between greater rigour in the school exam system and the need to create imaginative and responsible citizens, which is the vision of the curriculum for excellence, we  will have a far better chance of fulfilling a successful skills strategy. However, far more than that is required. If the main appeal of the curriculum for excellence is its desire to tailor the educational experience more towards the needs of individual pupils, by definition we must allow much greater flexibility within the education system. For me, that means challenging the status quo of the comprehensive system beyond the middle years of secondary school—perhaps even beyond secondary 2—since it is clearly not working for many pupils in the last two or three years of their schooling. Professor Howie tried that in 1992 and was shot down for his unorthodox views. He has been proved right, big time, and I have no doubt that we need to make that change now. Will the cabinet secretary agree at least to examine the case for allowing pupils to engage in formal vocational training while they are still at school—that already happens in several other European countries—and for allowing pupils to leave school at an earlier age if they and their teachers agree that the pursuit of a purely academic curriculum is neither appropriate nor relevant to their best interests? One of the worst things that we can do is to force youngsters to stay on at school in academic classes in which they have little focus and on which, frankly, they waste valuable time when they could be learning a trade or a craft—that should never be seen as somehow inferior to an academic education. It is time to acknowledge fully that far more youngsters would be able to get much more meaningful focus if they could harness their talents outside the academic classroom. Such an approach works tremendously well in many European countries and it would go a long way towards solving the problem of some disengaged youngsters in our society. Another extremely important aspect of the debate, which forms the second part of our amendment, is the need to ensure that skills training is based far more on the needs of employers than on what can be provided through different training institutions. My colleague Gavin Brown will outline the main details of our thinking on that matter, which has been reinforced by much of the powerful evidence that was submitted to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. It is essential that the Scottish Government accepts that it needs to rethink its policy as quickly as possible. I say that not only because of what the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee was told by experts in the field, but because of the results of good practice elsewhere. Just before Christmas, my colleague Murdo Fraser and I spent a day in York hearing about the progress that had been made by the skills academies in England for exactly the same reason: they had ensured that  skills training was demand led. Each academy has a different business model, and they are drawn up according to employers' needs in the different industrial sectors. Each academy also has an employer-led board, and approval of training providers is based on how well they can deliver the training needs of local employers. The structure was very impressive in terms of the quality of training that was provided and the number of students who went on to full-time jobs in a range of industries, and given the fact that skills academies are financially self-sustaining within four years. The Scottish Conservatives firmly believe that we need to develop a more consistent and coherent strategy on demand-led skills training. We ask the Government to pay considerable attention to that area. Let me just summarise our position. First, if the overriding objective is to provide a workforce that is fit for the challenges of the 21 st century and which allows Scotland to develop her full economic potential such that she can compete successfully in the international community, we must not ignore the concerns that are raised by about one third of employers who say that their school leavers are poorly prepared for work. Secondly, we need to champion vocational training and provide the flexibility that will allow all pupils—not just some—to pursue their aspirations. The Scottish colleges have made huge progress on that, but much more needs to be done to help our youngsters to become career focused and to take an active part in planning their educational futures without the fear of any stigma being attached to them. Thirdly, we must ensure that we have a coherent national framework that involves all levels of training, with neither too much nor too little focus on any one part of the education sector. The national strategy must meet the demands of everyone, especially the employers who, at the end of the day, are the means by which the Scottish working population can find jobs and develop their skills. I move amendment S3M-5619.1, to insert at end: "; believes that pupils in secondary schools who wish to do so should have the opportunity to pursue formal vocational training, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that the system is more demand-led and that publicly funded training matches far more closely the needs of employers."

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is giving to help landscape partnerships access rural priority funding. (S3O-9256)

The minister will be aware of the many collaborative bracken-control projects in which several landowners are involved, including the Ochils landscape partnership in my region. Those projects often face difficulties when they apply for Scottish rural development programme and LEADER funding. Will the cabinet secretary agree to meet the Ochils landscape partnership and look into how the application process can be reformed and simplified?

This has been an engaging and entertaining debate, not least because of the overwhelming support that has been expressed for the newspaper industry in all its diversity and its ability to speak up on behalf of all communities across Scotland—even in the Himalayas. Cathy  Jamieson may be surprised to know that I, too, was once in The Himalayan Times , although I am afraid that I was confined to the back pages. As Pauline McNeill said at the beginning of the debate, we do not always like what newspapers say about us, but they are crucial to our lives and to the lives of everyone in this country. I will dwell on that point in summing up for the Conservative party, because I believe that the core argument is very much about the democratic process and allowing communities to find both a strong voice and a reliable and regular source of information and news. As many members, including Robert Brown, Robin Harper, Hugh Henry and David Whitton, have eloquently said, this is not an easy age, when the communication process is so sophisticated and highly competitive, but we must address that situation. When the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee took extensive evidence on two occasions, various witnesses made a very powerful and cogent case for concentrating much of the debate on sources of revenue and the fact that there have been significant falls in advertising for jobs, retail, property and motor cars. For a large newspaper that can mean a reduction in revenue of up to £11 million or £12 million, and for a smaller local paper it can mean a reduction of anything up to £1 million, so it is not rocket science to work out the resulting effect on journalism and jobs in the industry. It is an encouraging aspect of the undergraduate job market that many students aspire to a career in journalism, but that will not be the case if there are far fewer jobs for them to go to because of the collapse of the local newspaper industry, which is often the essential training ground for young novice journalists. The current squeeze on newspapers' revenue has resulted in staff cuts and reduced resources across the industry, but much of the brunt has been borne by local newspapers, which means that it is often very difficult for them to retain their photographers or part-time contributors and, in many cases, to maintain their premises. I would like to think that that trend can be reversed when the economy finally picks up, but it will not be easy to breathe new life into the industry, especially when there are further worries about the effect of competition from community newspapers and a growing number of local authority publications, which overlap on certain aspects of news and information. Journalists are, in many cases, having to become experts at a multimedia role, with the inevitable pressure that that brings in respect of training costs and the time that they have to devote to acquiring new skills rather than being out developing stories. As Robin Harper said, the  knock-on effect is that fewer journalists feel that they have time to develop an in-depth knowledge of their local area and to attend local events or court hearings. They therefore have less time for investigative journalism. It would be a huge pity if, as a result of local newspapers losing some of their local identity, there were an even greater collapse in their circulation. That is why the revenue return from advertising is so crucial to the sustainability of the industry, especially for the smaller newspapers, for which, frankly, it can be a matter of being in print or not. The debate is also about the process of how we receive information and news. As many members have said, it is important to remember that people in different age groups and from different backgrounds will have different preferences. Labour's motion makes the important point that 40 per cent of people do not have access to the internet, and therefore removing the legal requirement for local newspapers to print PINs will cause huge difficulty for many people and be a way of disenfranchising them. That point was fully debated at UK level, including at the Scottish Affairs Committee, and it was decided that there should not be a policy of publishing such notices solely online. Having to make a conscious effort to search the internet, and not always starting from a well-informed position, is not the same as being provided with a news sheet on which the general information pertaining to one subject is put in front of the reader—a point that has been made time and again by those who have provided evidence to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. Johnston Press made the strong remark that the Scottish Government could become "more secretive" and "less open" to "consultation or debate." That is a strong criticism, but nonetheless we have to be mindful of it, because one of the unintended consequences could be that we become less democratic. As Ted Brocklebank said, we have listened carefully to the arguments on all sides, including those of the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism in his opening speech, in which he identified the three principles that he believes underpin his policy. Frankly, I cannot accept that the proposal would work and that it would in any way improve the democratic process in this country. I again stress that public information notices are a different situation. It is not enough for the Scottish Government to say that local authorities  will be able to use a new PIN portal, because that will bring no benefit to a high percentage of households—often very vulnerable ones—who will not be in a position to access the information. We firmly believe that the Scottish Government's proposals have not been properly thought through. Like the other Opposition parties, we ask it to have a major rethink. We will be happy to support the Labour motion, and I hope that others will be prepared to support Ted Brocklebank's amendment.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's position is on the reduction of class sizes for primary 1 to primary 3. (S3F-2150)

Last week, directors of education said that the Scottish Government was wrong to set a specific target of 18 or fewer pupils in all primary 1 to 3 classes since that artificial numerical target does not reflect the quality of teaching or the different needs of individual schools. Does the First Minister accept that the quality of teaching and the different needs of individual schools are paramount and that it should be entirely a matter for a headteacher to determine the class sizes that will best deliver good education in his or her school?

What is it about the amendment that Ken Macintosh voted for last time, but which he says he will not vote for today, that he disagrees with?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the member clarify exactly what the Labour position is on the issue? I am calling for nationally agreed criteria for testing, which is exactly what Clackmannanshire did. Does the Labour Party support or reject that?

We warmly welcome this debate on a topic that the Scottish Conservatives have long believed is the most important in education. I, too, pay tribute to the work of the literacy commission, the members of which have, yet again, laid bare the true facts about Scotland's literacy levels among both school pupils and adults and produced a blueprint of recommended policy proposals. Although many of those proposals are not new—in my view, their implementation is long overdue—the breadth of the commission's membership and experience was particularly important. I have no doubt whatsoever that parents expect their children to come back from school able to read, write and count properly. Teachers and employers expect that, as does Scotland at large. I also firmly believe that people expect that competency in those basic skills should be gained in primary school, before children make the move to secondary school. For generations, as Des McNulty said, Scotland had a proud record of doing just that, so it is deeply worrying that, by comparison with other countries, we seem to have been slipping back for approximately 10 years. I know that the Scottish Government will come back and say that the curriculum for excellence will provide a major step forward in imparting literacy because, in the words of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, for the first time all teachers will be involved in teaching literacy. Just what does the cabinet secretary think that teachers have been doing for generations? Why is he so sure that the curriculum for excellence, the principles of which we support, will provide a magic wand to improve literacy when the word "grammar" appears only once in its detailed guidelines?

Cabinet secretary, I am more than happy to join in that work, but the assertion that teachers across the board have never been involved in dealing with literacy—

Forgive me, but the cabinet secretary's words indicated exactly that. Let me be clear: there is absolutely no need to reinvent the wheel. Many good things have happened in recent years on the equipping of our primary school pupils with the basic skills that they need in later life. However, speak to most primary school teachers and heads and they will say that a more structured approach to literacy teaching is required. They will confirm that the intentions of the five-to-14 programme were good, that many of the accompanying materials were good and that the system was better able to cater for the diverse needs of different pupils. However, despite those good intentions, overall standards did not improve. Why? Because the five-to-14 programme had too many escape routes. The five-to-14 programme was neither watertight nor sufficiently rigorous in testing reading, writing and arithmetic skills. There was an understanding that teachers would use the tests only when they felt that the pupil had reached a level at which they could pass them or when the teacher wanted to confirm his or her own judgment about the skills of the pupil. Therefore, it was far too easy for different approaches to testing to be used in different parts of Scotland. Sometimes that happened because heads or local authorities wanted to ensure that the timing of the tests articulated with the publication of their school performance results. Sometimes there was a reluctance to apply the tests on a uniform basis because of the perception that they would be too stressful an experience for many of the children. Critics say that formal testing makes pupils and their parents overanxious. Really? I suspect that parents will be a lot more anxious if their son or daughter becomes one of the 10,000 pupils who leave primary school unable to read or write.

If the member is referring to NAB materials within secondary schools, I think that there are deep concerns about that process—

Regarding the primary set-up, I think that most teachers are anxious that there should be considerable improvement in the testing process to ensure that pupils are tested against identified nationally agreed criteria. That is what it is all about. Much has been made—and rightly so—of the success of Clackmannanshire Council and West Dunbartonshire Council in bucking the trend. They have done so because of the highly successful—and, yes, traditional and perhaps old-fashioned—means of combining phonics spelling with rigorous testing, such as the Schonell spelling test or the British ability scales reading test. I challenge anyone, including any Labour member, who disputes that testing works or persists in the assertion that illiteracy is necessarily a problem in areas of high deprivation such that testing should not take place against nationally agreed criteria. That is why most parties in the Parliament agreed to our previous motion. It is disappointing to hear that some have now changed their mind. I do not accept that stand-alone papers in literacy and numeracy in secondary 4 are the answer, not just because of the reasons that Carole Ford of School Leaders Scotland outlined in a letter to The Herald last summer but for the simple reason that S4 is too late. I have no doubt whatsoever that, on the issue of testing, we require not to increase the number of tests but to improve their quality and to ensure that, first and foremost, they are set against nationally agreed criteria. That is why, exactly one year ago, we moved amendment S3M-3164.1, which called for more rigorous testing of reading, writing and arithmetic by the time that a pupil leaves primary 7 and which was supported by all other parties in the Parliament. That is also why I am moving an identical amendment today. Unbelievably, some argue that we do not need tests at all—an argument that I find extraordinary given what the evidence shows and given the opinion of the vast majority, which is to say 72 per cent, of employers. However, I do not doubt that other things can also help. Where schools have initiated parents advice forums and workshops that help parents to work with the school on supportive work at home, they have proved immensely successful. The high turnout at many of those workshops shows just how many parents recognise the need to address literacy issues as a top priority. Internet sites, as the cabinet secretary said, can be designed to help parents who struggle to find time to visit school to see their child's teachers by providing them with the information in their own home. The literacy commission also made an important point about the scope within the General Teaching Council teacher training programme for improving the skills of teachers in delivering the basic skills to their  pupils. I note that media coverage has suggested that the training should include more about grammar. I also suggest that some attention needs to be devoted to the skills that are required for the Scottish Qualifications Authority's examinations. Increasingly over the past 10 to 15 years, there has been a move in some subjects towards bullet-pointing of answers and more descriptive comment rather than expansive analytical answers, which allow pupils more scope to demonstrate their intellectual abilities. I suggest that that is one reason why employers so often complain about the poor linguistic skills of their employees. Anything that constrains the use of language is in itself a major obstacle to literacy. Nothing is more important than literacy, not just in advancing opportunity but in promoting confidence, self-esteem and self-discipline. Far too many people are disengaged from society and the economy because they are illiterate. It is our duty to address that, so nothing is more important than ensuring that we return to tried and tested teaching methods and introduce far more rigorous testing of the three Rs in primary schools. We will support the motion and the other amendments in addition to our own. I move amendment S3M-5512.1, to insert at end: ", and, in particular, recognises the need to ensure that pupils in Scotland are properly schooled and tested in the basic skills of literacy and numeracy by the end of primary seven and also to ensure that the qualifications structure better reflects the specific needs of all pupils, whether they wish to pursue courses that are more academically focused or more vocationally focused."

The SNP said in its manifesto that it would deliver two hours of quality PE per child per week. Will that be delivered by 2011?

The Scottish Conservatives warmly welcome today's debate on getting it right for every child and the continued programme of work to improve services for vulnerable children in Scotland. No one can deny that those issues  deserve a united approach from all the political parties. GIRFEC is crucial because it promotes certain key principles: the development of a much more local approach to policy making that better reflects the needs of the local community; improved communication between the different agencies that are involved in caring for vulnerable children; much greater consistency in the team that looks after each child; a reduction in the bureaucracy—on which the minister has given us good evidence today—that accompanies the process; and an end to the wide regional variations in the quality of care that is offered. Therefore, I am particularly pleased to welcome the report on the results of the Highland pathfinder GIRFEC project, especially the progress that has been made on measuring outcomes much more effectively, making improvements in professional practice with better multi-agency working, and developing a more holistic approach to the needs of the child—something that we all agree is one of the most important issues. There are extremely encouraging signs that those better approaches have led to a reduction in the number of children on the child protection register and an improvement in the educational attainment of the weakest-performing children. Better-integrated planning has meant that a wider range of needs can be met, with a greater emphasis on engaging with young people and more help on handling the transition from care into adult life—a process that can often be fraught with many difficulties. In turn, there are signs that parents and children feel much more integrated in the process, such that there is growing confidence in the system. As a result of the different agencies speaking a common language, people are more aware of when things are happening and what the processes are likely to involve. Perhaps the most encouraging signs are the likely reductions in cost if problems can be detected at the earliest possible point. As Karen Whitefield said, although much can be learnt from the progress in Highland, more needs to be done elsewhere, especially in areas that are showing an increase in the number of registrations. We need to pay particular attention to the harrowing cases that are referred before the child is born, and we must not lose sight of the fact that the number of looked-after children has increased every year since 2001. The GIRFEC evaluation report recognises that change will take time, but central to making that happen is ensuring that staff who are involved in the care of children are engaged in the process of change, even if that means a slight shift in the  culture of what is best practice in child care. Staff must be properly supported. I note that the workload of and burden of paperwork for health visitors and school nurses would be greatly reduced by the introduction of an electronic version of the paper record that was used in the Highland area. That is good news. Additionally, in a period when local authorities are financially stretched, the Scottish Conservatives maintain that far more must be done to utilise the work of the excellent voluntary sector, which is often staffed by people who are closest to the needs of our communities. A key part of the process will be the reform of the children's hearings system. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the Government's decision to delay the progress of the children's hearing's bill due to apparent flaws in the initial consultation process. We hope that the information that is provided by the minister in the intervening period will help us to address the issues so that we can consider ways of strengthening the system without, as Karen Whitefield said, losing the central ethos that was set out in the Kilbrandon report. Children's hearings have traditionally brought many benefits to our Scottish justice system, but it is clear that there are issues that relate to representation at hearings and the fact that panel members do not always feel fully supported by their local authority. Credibility within the system is not as strong as it should be, and much more needs to be done to enhance the public's knowledge and understanding of children's hearings and to ensure a more holistic approach by involving the various professional agencies effectively. It is vital that we respond to the main messages from the recent HMIE report that looked at inspections across Scotland. It found that around a quarter of inspections revealed serious weaknesses in aspects of child protection that increased the risk of harm to children. It is not satisfactory that serious problems were identified in 10 council areas. That shows that much work remains to be done. Improvements are needed in the quality and rigour of assessments and in planning. As we all know, the consequences of such deficiencies can be life threatening. The Scottish Government has stated that it is working with the local authorities that have been criticised to ensure that urgent action is taken. It was good to hear the minister update us on progress, and I look forward to hearing more on the community planning partners. Members are well aware that, for the Scottish Conservatives, parenting skills remain at the heart of the continuing problems to do with looking after Scottish children. Family breakdown of one sort or  another costs the United Kingdom more than £20 billion a year, and the resulting burden on society, especially on relatives, social work services and our justice system, goes much, much deeper than that. Only this week, key children's charities have produced some disturbing statistics. We are pleased that the debate is being held and are pleased to support the Scottish Government's motion and the Labour Party's amendment.

To ask the First Minister, following the most recent drop in teacher numbers, what plans the Scottish Government has to hold a national debate on the future of the education system. (S3F-2061)

Does the First Minister agree with his new Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, who said that the debate on school education should be completely shorn of ideological prejudice and should encourage much more diversity in school management?

We will leave it to others to write about the political intrigue of this dramatic week, in which not only was the SNP Government told comprehensively to tear up its schools policy and start again, but a cabinet minister was made to carry the can for the much wider failings of Alex Salmond's Scottish Government. In particular, the historic concordat, which was so trumpeted by the First Minister as representing the beginnings of a new and more mature relationship between central and local government, has been blown apart, as Peter Peacock eloquently described. Although my party is clear that the purpose of this morning's debate is to set out exactly where we think school education should be going, we have also taken the opportunity to send a strong  warning to the First Minister that he will do the greatest possible harm to our public services if he attempts to further weaken the trust within, and the accountability of, our local authorities. The debate about Fiona Hyslop's failings as a cabinet secretary goes to the heart of what is wrong with the SNP Government, for the reasons that my colleague David McLetchie spelled out, but as Aileen Campbell said, the most important thing now is to identify the way forward. It is all very well slinging mud—perhaps it is good fun—but the bottom line is that teachers, pupils and parents need and deserve meaningful action to improve our schools. They need to know that this Parliament will deliver that improvement as quickly as possible and, in the view of the Scottish Conservatives, that action must not be a decision to retain in any way the status quo. That is why one of our most important demands is for a firm commitment from the SNP that it will abide by the unanimous will of the Scottish Parliament, as expressed in a vote in January 2009, when it determined that it would undertake to ensure that there would be much more rigorous testing—not more testing, but more rigorous testing—of the three Rs by the time pupils reach the end of primary 7. That was an extremely important commitment for the Parliament to make, and it was based on the overwhelming wishes of parents and teachers, who see improving proficiency in those skills as being the key that will unlock the door to so much in the way of educational attainment. It is essential that that commitment be honoured by the new cabinet secretary. Even before the SNP took office, there were occasional mutterings from education experts about the poor rate of progress in the educational attainment of too many of our pupils, and about the fact that Scotland was being overtaken in the international league tables. In recent months, those mutterings have, quite rightly, become clarion calls. In September this year, the Scottish Conservatives ran a special schools conference, to which we invited a range of the education experts by whom those clarion calls were made—who, before anyone accuses us of any bias, by no means had Conservative views—to discuss the way forward. They included someone from Sweden, who talked about a system to which we are greatly attracted—for Mr Rumbles's information, it does not use vouchers. It was abundantly clear that, in this country, there is a serious desire for reform. It is glaringly obvious that however one tries to interpret the statistics, overall attainment levels are no better than they were at the start of devolution.

It is for the Presiding Officer to make decisions about points of order. That is not what my colleague said. We are attracted to the Swedish system of education, but we are not saying anything about vouchers, which do not exist in Sweden. At our conference, we set out our plans to allow parents to have much more choice about the school that their children attend and, more important, to give headteachers much more control of how their schools are run, especially when it comes to issues such as teacher recruitment, school budgets and discipline. I stress again that those policies are about devolving powers down to the people at the chalkface, which is exactly the opposite of what Fiona Hyslop announced last Friday, in what I think will turn out to be one of the most ill-considered Government announcements of recent times. Interestingly, the conference seemed to light a touch-paper. Experts such as Lindsay Paterson, John McLaren and Fred Forrester told us that they welcome the Conservative initiative to engage in radical thinking. That reaction was most encouraging; even more encouraging were the utterances of the SNP's David Berry, who is leader of East Lothian Council, who said that there must be much more radical thinking if we are to get schools back on a sound footing. I agree very much with that line, because our second major demand—alongside our demand that testing be sorted out—is that we need an open, objective and radical debate about how to move forward, at the end of which we will find a blueprint for schools that will restore trust among pupils, parents and teachers. Can we expect the new cabinet secretary to deliver in that respect? Given some of the evidence that Murdo Fraser and David McLetchie cited, we can probably "Russell" up a few more themes. Three years ago, in the Times Educational Supplement Scotland , Michael Russell spoke about putting all school management options on the table. He asked: "would the establishment of charter or foundation schools within some of our cities raise standards because of the benefit of competition and give children in some of our most depressed neighbourhoods a better set of educational and life opportunities?"

That is Conservative party policy. Michael Russell asked: "Could parents successfully set up their own schools?" That is Conservative party policy. He said that  "The SNP will create units for persistent offenders where they can be educated as well as be assisted to change their behaviour." That is Conservative party policy. He said: "we will make vocational education far more accessible to all S3 and S4 pupils". That is Conservative party policy. He said: "we will encourage diversity in education". That, too, is Conservative party policy. The new cabinet secretary has an excellent legacy of espousing the true values of education policy. I invite him to support the amendment in his name—I am sorry; in the name of Murdo Fraser.

I entirely agree with the cabinet secretary that many schools and teachers are doing a fantastic job. How does he react to some of the criticisms of Scottish Qualifications Authority markers, who say that there is a real problem with some of those pass marks?

I do not think that anybody is denying that, but can the minister explain why the Government has chosen to have two debates on the concept of Scottish history in schools but has not dealt with some other extremely pressing matters in our classrooms?

This has been a stimulating debate. I do not think that any member would disagree that Scottish history and its inclusion in the examination curriculum are of paramount importance. However, like Ken Macintosh and Johann Lamont, I am puzzled and more than a little alarmed by the Government's assertion that something new is happening and that debating  history twice rather than debating other subjects such as physical education is a greater priority in this session. To my knowledge, we have not had a debate on PE or modern languages; we have certainly not had the further debate on reading, writing and arithmetic in primary schools that the cabinet secretary once promised. Scottish history's rich diversity and our deep-rooted links with many other parts of the world are good enough reasons to study the subject. In addition, everyone in Scotland should learn about Scottish history, because by doing so we become much better equipped to understand ourselves, where we came from and the complexities of our cultural, economic and social heritage. Learning about Scottish history also provides us with necessary insights into many other academic disciplines. Without a good understanding of Scottish history, our understanding of our nation is at best incomplete, and at worst insular and sectarian. Tom Devine wrote that Scottish history is a subject "of enormous dynamism and relevance". He was right. He also made the valid point that the erosion of Scottish history teaching began with the insistence by some that there could be a place for history in the curriculum only if it was shared with geography and modern studies. As a result, history became no longer part of the compulsory curriculum beyond the second year, and it is not without reason that groups such as the Scottish Association of Teachers of History express deep concern about the decline in the number of principal teachers of history. Throughout Scotland, history departments are feeling that they are being continually squeezed out of the curriculum, with the result that they are forever being asked to condense the subject down to tight, simplified modules that bear little resemblance to the Scottish history courses of the past. That is regrettable. I am concerned about the replacement of knowledge with skills-based learning. People such as Professor Lindsay Paterson of the University of Edinburgh have referred to that. Modern approaches to teaching should be introduced, by all means—otherwise, we could never hope to move forward or even stand still—but it is wrong to suggest that that can happen only if some of the knowledge-based curriculum gives way. Conventional wisdom has also been challenged by people who think that history can be taught only in the context of concepts such as war, migration, industrialisation and revolution. Such an approach is perhaps fascinating for a university postgraduate degree, but how can we expect children to understand events if they are not put  into chronological context? The obsession with skills to the detriment of knowledge and the absence of chronology have done great damage to the teaching of history in our classrooms. Some of the problems that the Government has attempted to flag up this afternoon are the result of that.

I hope that it is, because the Government does not have the confidence of the teaching profession that history is a discrete enough subject in the senior school curriculum. Ken Macintosh alluded to that in his opening remarks. The teaching profession wants more help with what the knowledge content of history should be within the chronological structure to which I referred. It is important to put Scottish history in the right context and to ensure that what is taught is, first and foremost, factually correct and balanced. That picks up on many points that have been made. The Scottish National Party might in many cases be well intentioned in that respect, but let us consider things such as "Braveheart" being paraded as a cultural icon of modern Scotland. Perhaps it is in terms of box office returns and in light of the exciting imagery of Scotland's wild landscapes and swirling kilts, but never let it be said that that film is in any way an accurate interpretation of Scottish history. It is the opposite. I want to pursue that theme for a moment. Introspection is the worst possible offence that we can commit in teaching history. Scotland has always been at her best in leading the world in economics, science, medicine and philosophy when she has been at the cutting edge of the international community. We have been highly regarded throughout the world as a result, and being such an integral part of the political, economic and social networks of the wider world has meant much to the rich tapestry of the nation. Scotland has a very proud history. We need no contortion, no twist nor any attempt to alter our past. By all means, we can challenge established views—that has always been an integral part of the learning process. By all means, let our pupils be exposed to different interpretations of historical events and the different commentaries that describe them. However, whether our pupils are  being taught about Bonnie Prince Charlie or Mary Queen of Scots, they deserve to be taught evidence, not myth. Above all, they deserve their history to be well taught and from the correct perspective.

The cabinet secretary mentioned the Scottish Association of Teachers of History, which is an excellent group. I understand that its last newsletter featured complaints by a number of principal teachers of history across Scotland who feel that the subject is being continually squeezed. How will the curriculum for excellence reverse that trend?

Many speakers have made it clear that a school, perhaps more than any other institution, is often the defining character of any small community. Quite apart from delivering the crucial element of education, it binds together families and people of different age groups and is usually  the focus for a wide variety of community activities. In a rural area, that focus is even more pronounced. As Alasdair Allan and Kenny Gibson said, it is the difference between having a community and having no community. As the bill has progressed through its various stages, the evidence to support that view has been compelling. I thank all the groups that have provided members with excellent briefings. Those groups, particularly the Scottish rural schools network, have been instrumental in forming opinion and helping members become much better informed about some of the inadequacies in the existing legislation. We are delighted by the Scottish Government's response to the work that has been undertaken by many members in the chamber and to my colleague Murdo Fraser's proposal for a member's bill, which brought the issue back on to the agenda just recently. He has campaigned tirelessly on the issue, as have many others. The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill is in the best interests of our children and our families, and passing it is the right thing to do to support our communities. Of course, I could say that we are also delighted that it is another example of the SNP adopting Conservative party policies—a common feature these days—but I will stick with the original point. The Scottish Government and the other Opposition parties have done a very good job in recognising just how important it was to get consensus on this matter. It is good to see that the Scottish Government has recognised the different categories of rurality, which is vital in the context of ensuring that schools are treated according to their individual merits rather than universal structures, which can sometimes ignore local circumstances. Those definitions are also important in relation to the implications of the defining principles of the bill as they relate to all schools. One of the key principles is improving transparency and democracy in the consultation process. Margaret Smith's amendments 13 and 13A, which we debated earlier, raised important issues in that respect. There have been bad decisions about the future of schools because information was not properly made available to all parties or because it was not entirely accurate. We cannot allow that situation to continue and I am grateful to the Scottish Government and Margaret Smith for lodging amendments that allowed us to probe that matter much more fully. We have made the bill much better. I look forward to the cabinet secretary providing us with more details on the statutory guidelines for councils in due course, because tightening the regulations that govern the  consultation process is vital, as is having a more consistent and equitable approach throughout all 32 local authorities. Conservatives support the new power that will be introduced to allow ministers to call in a closure decision after it has been made, if they feel that it does not comply with the new requirements in the bill, or that the local authority has failed to take account of all the relevant information. Like other members—Ken Macintosh mentioned the important issue of cost—I raised at earlier stages concerns about consequences that were perhaps unintended but still had to be addressed. A more holistic approach should now be taken to the educational benefits statement, which will be crucial to any decision, so that we can give communities confidence that, although the economic and social aspects are being considered, the educational benefits statement will be properly weighted in the equation. Addressing that was important, as was giving a proper hearing to all the evidence at stage 1. HMIE is a hugely important stakeholder. The bill team was right to identify that the educational benefits statement necessarily includes a wide range of factors, such as the after-school facilities that are on offer to children, links in the community and the school's ethos. All that raised the question whether HMIE could cover all that work from its existing resources. Some such issues will need to be monitored, but I am satisfied that the cabinet secretary has had close discussions with HMIE and that the matter has been explored, if perhaps not yet 100 per cent resolved. Another question was whether the financial settlement might be revised in the future, which raised the unfortunate spectre that, at the very time when we are making huge progress to protect rural schools, the Scottish Government would unwittingly create a financial incentive to close them. I am sure that Opposition parties will take a robust stance on reviewing that, but the Scottish Government has again confirmed to me that it will not make such a change. Presiding Officer, time is short—[ Laughter. ] I am sorry; I did not mean that—I cancel that. Presiding Officer, time is not short, and I will take my speech a bit more slowly from now on. How many minutes do I have—six?

Perhaps we could debate some of the other Conservative party policies in which the SNP is engaging. That would take much longer.

Time is very short. I reiterate the Scottish Conservatives' unqualified support for the bill. As I said, my colleague Murdo Fraser has campaigned long and hard with the rural schools network, as have many other people. We owe them all, and the cabinet secretary, much credit. I am grateful to play my part in—I hope—the bill being passed this afternoon.

On amendments 13 and 13A, I have listened carefully to the comments that Margaret Smith has made at stage 2 and today. I thank her for raising the important question of how we maximise the transparency of the information process, which is a crucial component of the bill.  Too often, bad decisions have been made regarding the future of schools on account of information's having not been made available to all parties or because the information was inaccurate—a point that was made forcefully in the evidence that was presented to the committee, particularly by the Scottish rural schools network. All members of the committee and the cabinet secretary were persuaded of the need to do something about that situation: rightly so, or the bill would have been found wanting. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for listening to the concerns and for lodging several amendments at stage 3 to address them. However, Margaret Smith has made the case at stage 3 that her real concern is with respect to the amount of time that is available to parents to assimilate information at the start of the decision-making process, rather than later. She feels that local authorities are sometimes in an overly powerful position at the beginning of a process, given that they effectively have a head start over the other stakeholders, especially parents, and therefore could be in a position to manipulate the process to their advantage. That was an important point to consider, and I have taken a great deal of time to do so. Having examined the existing legislation, and given the guarantees that the cabinet secretary has provided, I am satisfied that Margaret Smith's concerns can be addressed without recourse to additional amendments. That is why we will not support amendments 13 and 13A, although I record my thanks to Margaret Smith for starting this important debate.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Scottish Futures Trust will be able to demonstrate the level of savings it has achieved in procurement costs. (S3O-8458)

The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning said in a debate on the school buildings programme: "The SFT is expected to make savings of at least 3 per cent over the span of the programme".—[ Official Report , 8 October 2009; c 20371.] That implies that there is scope for further savings in procurement costs. Will the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth therefore confirm that meeting a target of at least 3 per cent savings is the criterion by which the success of the SFT will be judged?

It is a pleasure to support Jamie Stone in this members' business debate and I congratulate him on bringing this important, yet sometimes overlooked, subject to the Parliament. It is never easy to ensure that our talented sportsmen and women from our rural areas, particularly the most remote areas, have a level playing field when it comes to the pursuit of their sporting talents. It is a matter not only of geography and the related travel issues, but of available coaches and facilities, plus the inevitable additional expense of finding accommodation when people are away competing. When we hear stories circulating that Moray Council is considering closing all its local authority swimming pools in the mornings and that Highland schools are complaining that some pupils' Duke of Edinburgh awards are in jeopardy because of the closure of the outdoor centre at Muir of Ord, we should be under no illusions about the potential problems that such issues can create for anyone from our rural communities who wishes to participate in any sport, particularly competitive sport. We should also acknowledge that too many of those people miss out on the opportunities that are afforded to athletes in our more populous areas. Sportscotland is very aware of the issue—indeed, I am having a meeting with two senior representatives of sportscotland in a few weeks' time to discuss it further. The issue has also been raised by Margo MacDonald on the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on sport. I take up the theme of both Rob Gibson and Jamie Stone that this is not about party politics. What can we do to help? One of the most important issues is to promote genuine recognition and understanding of the challenges that rural athletes face. This debate can be part of the process, but there is no doubt that real action is required to improve both the quality of facilities that are available and the ability of rural athletes to use them. In relation to school events, in  particular, we need to be aware of the central belt mentality when it comes to staging competitions. Some sports in Scotland have made a conscious effort to use locations in the Borders, the north-east and the Highlands, but other sports seem totally wedded to the central belt, which means that some competitors must regularly travel hundreds of miles just to participate. From my experience of 30 years of taking a variety of sports teams to events across Scotland—I still do it from time to time—I believe that some organisations would help matters a lot if they provided participating schools with as much notice as possible of their calendar of events, so that rural communities would have a much better chance of planning ahead to organise family life around someone's athletic interest. Likewise, if an extensive training programme is in operation, it must be accorded practical timings. We cannot expect a young athlete from Oban, Mallaig or, as Rob Gibson said, Orkney to make a long journey to Glasgow every weekend simply to find that their training session lasts only an hour. On the subject of better information, I am keen that local authorities should encourage their schools to publish details of the facilities and competitions that are available in their areas. Sometimes children are left out because their families were unaware of the facilities that were available; that is not good enough. Of course, we have the benefit of the 2014 Commonwealth games and the welcome announcements of new facilities, which will provide a lasting grass-roots legacy. That is good news, but we must remember that a great deal of grass-roots work takes place in facilities that are not necessarily state of the art. Across Scotland, especially in many rural communities, there has been a deterioration in facilities such as pavilions, changing rooms and pitches, which is sad. However, there are communities that, through their joint efforts, have provided new goalposts, painted their changing room facilities, fixed the leak in the roof and, in some cases, built a new clubhouse. I am well aware of the fact that funds are tight and that there is not an endless pot of gold, but I like to think that the percentage share of national lottery funding that is spent on sport could be increased, so that we can be more helpful when it comes to assisting community trusts to look after the best interests of their grass-roots sports. Nor should we forget the excellent work that has been undertaken by many outdoor pursuits bodies to improve the diversity of sports facilities in areas such as the Highlands. I refer to the mountain bike tracks at Laggan and Aonach Mòr, the cycle tracks on the west coast, the geological trails in Assynt and the John Muir Trust's work at Loch Ossian. Such bodies are crucial to allowing youngsters to  develop a love of the outdoors and to providing better outdoor experiences on their doorstep. However, the bottom line is to encourage more people to help to run and coach our athletes. That is why the volunteering theme is crucial, in an age in which volunteering is threatened by health and safety, a fear of litigation and an increasing unwillingness among adults to put themselves through the disclosure system. I suggest that that is the biggest area of concern. I have no easy answers, but I believe that our grass-roots policy must be the strict focus in that regard. I reiterate my congratulations to Jamie Stone on bringing this extremely important issue to the Parliament. We must not forget about it.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to take forward the recommendations of Her Majesty's inspectorate of prosecution in Scotland and Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland in the "Joint Thematic Report on the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002". (S3O-8364)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that informative reply. Does he agree that one option that could help to establish a more effective approach towards the gathering of intelligence on the financial assets of criminals would be to amend the 2002 act to ensure that the onus was on the criminals rather than the Crown to demonstrate that their excessive assets had not been obtained as a result of criminality?

rose—

Will the minister take an intervention?

On 24 September, in Labour's debate on child protection measures, the Scottish Conservatives submitted an amendment that made abundantly plain our firm belief that the family is the most important building block in society. That amendment received unanimous support, so the importance of the family unit to helping our young people through a loving, caring and supportive environment clearly struck an important chord with every party in the Parliament. From the Scottish National Party, we heard that children do best in a strong and supportive family environment; from Labour, we heard about the need for a coherent strategy to enhance the quality of life for our families; and from the Liberals we heard that it is no doubt the best option to support children living with their own families. So there is cross-party agreement, but just as was the case in the drugs debate, the next stage will be the real test. That is when we will find out whether we can lift the debate to another level, away from warm words and into meaningful action, however difficult and challenging it might have to be. As with the drugs debate, the problem that we are considering is hugely complex and pervasive and there will be many pitfalls along the way. My party would never pretend that we have all the answers—it would be grossly naive and arrogant for anyone to assume that they do. However, we have the courage of our convictions that we cannot stand by and do nothing. This morning, we issue a challenge to every member of the Parliament to stand together to address a matter that threatens to further destabilise the broken society that exists for far too many people and which costs the United Kingdom more than £20 billion a year, while the resulting burdens on family relatives, social work services and our justice system go much deeper than just the money. The extent of the breakdown was never more obvious to me than on the day in 2002 when I was  present when lain Duncan Smith made his first visit to Easterhouse. Like him, I heard for myself the harrowing accounts of the broken relationships, poverty, substance abuse and psychological turmoil that affected some of the families whose lives were described by Bob Holman and Sandy Weddell from the Easterhouse community. I saw the emotion on lain Duncan Smith's face and I heard the conversation in the car thereafter. In his words, it was a political journey that had hurt. We saw a community that was so remote and so far removed from any hope that it was tempting—so very tempting—simply to cross the road and walk away. lain Duncan Smith committed himself that day—no one can doubt that that commitment is real—to the fact that the issue goes well beyond party-political boundaries and that it will never be addressed by a simplistic solution or in the absence of consensus on the way forward. I will set out some of the things that we have to do, beginning with the most important issue, which is parenting. Although it is right to acknowledge that the majority of parents in the country provide caring and effective support for their children, we must also acknowledge that there is a growing minority of parents who genuinely find it difficult to pass on parenting skills to their children because they are the children of parents who did not possess those skills. That is not their fault, but neither is it acceptable simply to say that they are a sad reflection of modern society. Those parents, particularly those whose problems stem from alcohol or substance misuse, need our help and they most often need that help from within their immediate communities. That is why it is important that we make more effort to support those who work in the voluntary sector—the unsung heroes who are often best placed to change lives for the better. Our voluntary sector is outstanding, but at present many groups are under threat, partly because of funding issues, but also because they feel that their future is uncertain. I appreciate just how tight budgets are and the pressures that that brings, but we cannot accept some of the hindrances that are placed on the philanthropists and charitable foundations that are potential donors. An example is the crippling effect of the change from advanced corporation tax to tax on revenue income, which has reduced the available funds for some of Scotland's biggest foundations by £0.5 million a year. Another example is the gift aid system, which is plagued by expensive and time-consuming bureaucracy that diverts resources away from good causes. The Conservatives are determined to solve those issues with new policies that will remove the barriers, improve the uptake of gift aid from its very low take-up rate of 34 per cent and enshrine the principle that charitable giving should be made  out of untaxed income. We will also reform the national lottery, so that it returns to its roots as a supporter of good ideas from within communities, rather than being a vehicle for directing voluntary income into Government priorities and one that is often disproportionately skewed towards the public sector. We have plans to put in place a voluntary action lottery fund, which will replace the Big Lottery Fund and be completely independent of Government. Beside that, we will put on the table policies that will end the perverse financial incentive against couples who choose to marry and end the part of the benefits system that penalises married couples. As other countries have done, we must structure our tax and benefits systems to end any financial disincentives and an overdependence on the state. A large part of that is about creating better employment opportunities and a single back-to-work programme for everyone who is on out-of-work benefits to replace the complex and inefficient current system. The Scottish Conservatives have got major commitments out of the Scottish Government—on lowering the burden of business rates, a town centre regeneration fund and the freezing of the council tax—but we also want a business dividend fund to encourage local authorities to be better placed to support new business start-ups. We want far more flexibility on child care and the provision of nursery school facilities. We must also provide help in the home and at school. The Scottish Conservatives have made a £20 million commitment to begin the introduction of a universal health visitor service for under-fives, so that parents get regular professional help with looking after their children's health and welfare from the earliest possible stage. Nothing could be more important than trying to break down some of the health barriers that exist in the lives of too many young children. Those barriers often mean that the children encounter other social and educational difficulties. In many schools, pupils learn about the social and financial responsibilities that come with being a parent, and we are keen for that good practice to be developed in all schools throughout the country. I return to the main reasons for the debate, which are that 137,000 children have no parent in work; that 200,000 children in Scotland live in poverty; and that 60,000 children live with parents who are addicted to drugs and maybe as many as 100,000 live with parents who are addicted to alcohol. It is not rocket science to recognise the extent of the problems. We are setting out on a difficult and probably tortuous journey, but not to make that journey would be to deny our responsibilities as elected members and to deny many of our young people the right to be part of a  loving, caring and supportive family. We have no choice, so I will move the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament considers that the family is the natural building block of our society; notes the significant pressures facing families in Scotland today arising from relationship breakdown, poverty, unemployment and substance abuse; regrets that one in four Scottish children is growing up in a single-parent household and that 137,000 Scottish children have no parent in work, and believes that action is required to improve parenting support, to expand the role of health visitors, to fully harness the voluntary sector in this work and to recognise marriage in the tax and benefits system.

Did the work that the cabinet secretary mentioned regarding the Federation of Small Businesses and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce include discussions about improving apprentices' literacy and numeracy?

I congratulate my colleague Ted Brocklebank on securing this debate. I cannot claim to be the girl from Madras, despite having played hockey against the school many times when I was at school. As a former teacher, I am only too aware of the positive impact that a school can have, not only on the education of its pupils but on their families and the wider community. Indeed, in some areas, the school becomes the central focus for the community. In debating the motion, we must think to the future and not the present. Accessibility is a key component, not only in facilitating travel to and from school but in giving greater opportunities for pupils to take part in after-school activities. In my opinion, the latter is as important to the development and wellbeing of our young people as classroom learning is. It is clear that parents are focusing on the issue.  Like many communities across Scotland, the population of north-east Fife has seen significant growth in recent years. That is set to continue. The school estate statistics for 2009 predict an eventual increase in school rolls in the area as a result of demographic trends. We must be mindful of that in planning ahead. By national standards, Bell Baxter high school is already a large school—last year's roll was 17 pupils over the given capacity. We must also take account of the projected local developments that are set out in the St Andrews and East Fife local plan, particularly those that relate to local employment patterns. The projected long-term changes that will come on line in 10 or 20 years' time must be added to the current level of secondary pupils who reside in north-east Fife. That has convinced Scottish Conservatives that a new secondary school at the Tay bridgehead is essential in addition to the new development for Madras college. When one looks at what other politicians in the local area have said, the only conclusion that one can draw is that there is cross-party consensus on the matter. I say that despite the fact that that consensus has been broken this afternoon. Building a new school at the Tay bridgehead would not only create that new community facility but would allow pupils to identify more easily with the area from which they come. At present, they are commuters—sometimes over substantial distances—sitting in buses for a considerable length of time on either side of the school day. I do not agree entirely with Claire Baker that that is not the only consideration; it is a significant one. I think that I am correct in saying that it formed part of a debate in the local press and that 67 per cent of parents argued that a new school in the area would be appropriate.

That is only one example. I understand that there are several other media reports in which local parents were questioned on the subject. Local parents are the main stakeholders in this whole business: they should have the choice and they should determine which school they want their children to attend. The substantial feeling of the vast majority of parents in the area is that some of the distances that their children are being asked to travel are simply not acceptable. On that basis, we have a strong case. A new secondary school at the Tay bridgehead is very much on the cards. Indeed, there is growing support in the local community for the idea. We must take note of what people are saying in any discussion of a development programme for  the local economy. It is not acceptable that Liberal Democrat and SNP councillors are dragging their heels on the matter. Scottish Conservatives will continue to make the case for a new secondary school for the Tay bridgehead area. The basis for doing so, to which Mr Smith alluded, is the best educational interests of children and families in the area. Elections in the next three years will give voters in north-east Fife the opportunity to ask their elected MP, MSP and councillors where their priorities lie. Do they want to spend just under £1 million each year on bussing children to school or invest in a new secondary school and community centre for the Tay bridgehead that will bring long-term educational, economic and social benefits to the area? This time next year, the choice that they make will be an interesting one.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it has made with its commitment paper that outlines work to support military personnel through improving access to housing, health, transport, education and training. (S3O-8256)

Can the minister confirm that the information that will be issued tomorrow will include details of access to further education and job opportunities?

Page 9 of the cabinet secretary's statement says that she accepts "that the system of student grants and loans should now be examined more closely, to see what further changes can be made and what scope we have to spend our existing budget smarter", which is an interesting phrase. What is the timescale for that review and when can we expect the cabinet secretary to report back to Parliament?

I was about to moan about the fact that yet another Thursday morning in Parliament was being taken up by an education debate, but I have to say that the entertainment is getting better and better. The member who said last week that he was on the point of holding constituency surgeries on a Thursday morning because he knew that that was when debates on education, rather than on a subject for which he had responsibility, would be held—I will not embarrass him by naming him—had better come to the chamber. That is not to belittle the importance of this morning's subject debate. Given that it remains the case that almost a third of our schools are in poor repair, with almost 200,000 pupils being educated in substandard accommodation, there is obvious concern, and parents rightly expect members of this Parliament to debate the issue as a matter of urgency. We are pleased to join Labour in putting that on record and will support its motion, but I believe that it is incumbent on members to submit alternative proposals. No one doubts that it is not easy—and probably not possible—to solve the school buildings issue even in the medium term, particularly given the economic circumstances that we face, but we need to be realistic, pragmatic and consistent in our approach. Before I indicate some ways in which I believe that we can do that, I will outline my two main concerns about the Scottish Government's stance on the Scottish Futures Trust.  My first concern is that the SFT has been sold as the only alternative that is on offer for the school building agenda, despite the fact that many PFI and PPP contracts have a well-proven record. We do not accept that line, on the basis that it restricts some potential sources of finance. Secondly, I am concerned about the Scottish Government's lack of clarity on the criteria that it wants the joint approach between national and local government to use when deciding which schools merit a new building. That confusion is revealed by the difference in the answers that the cabinet secretary provided to me and to Rhona Brankin when we asked, on separate occasions, what the criteria would be. To me, the cabinet secretary said that "special consideration would be given to those schools in categories C and D" and to "where there could be an impact on the greatest number of children", although she clarified that by saying that she was concerned about the nature of the research that had been used to define categories C and D. The cabinet secretary's reply to Rhona Brankin indicated that the criteria would depend on schools' suitability to deliver the curriculum for excellence, additionality—whatever that means—and local authorities' plans and readiness to proceed. I have two points to make about those answers. First, they lack consistency. I do not doubt that some of features that the cabinet secretary identified are vital, but can we be totally clear about which ones are vital or about the importance that is attached to each of them?

I find that slightly strange, given the reaction of some local authorities. My second point is that if the priorities are related to the readiness of local authorities to proceed, why is the Scottish Government so wedded to the ideology of the Scottish Futures Trust, which is a Government-funded company  that would eradicate any private sector involvement in procurement and which, we are now being told, is not only the funding body but the advisory and co-ordinating body? If the Scottish Government really believes in local democracy, it has a strange way of showing that. The Scottish Conservatives' overriding concern is to ensure that there is best value for taxpayers' money when it comes to delivering top-class education for our children. That means getting more out of the existing budget through better procurement, asset sales when it is possible to generate more income and plans to make more effective use of school campuses by the local community or other public services. To date, the SFT has not been able to do any of that. Yet again, there has been a distinct lack of clarity and leadership in relation to this major plank of the Scottish Government's education policy. We agree with Labour that the current situation is not satisfactory, but in our criticism we must be mindful of putting in place more options and ensuring that we are able to get more out of the very limited resources that are available. I move amendment S3M-4988.1, to insert at end: ", and believes that the school building programme should be funded so as to deliver best value for money and that all sources of finance, including those in the private sector, should be considered."

As exemplified by the main motion and the three amendments, this debate has been very constructive. Members right across the chamber have shown a widespread recognition of the  increasingly vital role that our colleges play not only in the economy but in the education and lifelong learning sector. As David Stewart said in his remarks about UHI, colleges have a great diversity and flexibility that other educational institutions lack. That reflects the fact that the labour market is increasingly demanding such features and, in many cases, much stronger links have been built between colleges and the workplace and between schools and colleges. That can be only a good thing. As Claire Baker said, the fact that colleges make no distinction between adult and young learners and their ability to provide more educational opportunities to those from deprived backgrounds are important in upskilling and motivating both groups. However, we must also pay heed to the comment made by employers, including many members of the Confederation of British Industry, that too often in the past our workforce has not had the right skills, particularly in literacy and numeracy. As a result, it is good to hear that the Scottish Government is concerned about the matter. Like many people, we feel that the valuable role that Scottish colleges can play in the development of apprenticeships must be a priority. In recent years, there has been excellent progress on that front. Indeed, on Monday, Murdo Fraser and I had the pleasure of meeting three outstanding college apprentices at Vector Aerospace in Almondbank and hearing about their future aspirations. Their technical skills and motivation were plain for all to see, and there is no doubt in my mind that this must be the way forward. At long last, we seem to be getting over the unfortunate myth peddled by some that college apprentices are somehow lower class citizens because they are not interested in attending university or do not have the ability to do so. Anyone who has been persuaded of that view should take the time to visit companies such as Vector Aerospace or some of the state-of-the-art technology companies that are forging ahead as a result of existing top-class college apprenticeship schemes. As Professor Harvie said, we should take note of the highly successful dual system in Germany, where a combination of formal curriculum learning and work-based experience is the basis for teaching vocational courses. Indeed, that is often a recommended, and sometimes a mandatory, part of a university degree. As a result, competition for apprenticeships is strong, which is far removed from the idea that they might be a last resort. We must be absolutely clear that the reform of the Scottish Qualifications Authority exam system provides the opportunity to realign the qualifications structure, which forms the basis for  the choices of our young people. We should not repeat the mistake of 1992, when Professor Howie's excellent paper on reforming the secondary school system was ignored because of political dogma and a failure to recognise that comprehensive education did not best serve the needs of pupils in secondary 4 to 6. I think that, 17 years on, we all regret that. Professor Howie's recommendations for a two-route system beyond S4 were eminently sensible, and colleges have a huge role to play in delivering just that. If apprenticeships are the way forward, so too are business bursaries that are similar to those in the US. The system allows an employer to set up a contract with a college and receive a weekly allowance for releasing an apprentice. At a time when colleges are rightly pointing to the additional demand that is being made on their resources, extra money from the private sector can provide an important boost for the employment chances of many people. On resources, I reiterate the important plea that my colleague Murdo Fraser made in his opening remarks when he identified discrepancies in the support for colleges that serve rural communities. That is surely not acceptable. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has accepted the specific request from the Scottish Conservatives. Let us be clear that those colleges do a first-class job and that they should not in any way be the victim of financial discrimination. Successful colleges are all about matching up the incentives among the student population with those around the economy. It is good to hear that the Scottish Government recognises the need for better local interpretation of national and regional data, the lack of which has been a major issue for teacher recruitment in schools. I hope that the Scottish Government means business in that respect: students will have a far greater chance of success if they are provided with clear routes into employment opportunities and a good knowledge of what is on offer in their local community. A major part of that is whether the student feels that he or she has adequate support in tackling hardship and, as the Liberal Democrats have highlighted, in accessing child care. The Scottish Government has finally come to terms with just how urgent that matter is and with the need to produce policies that provide better support for those who are most in need so that our students are offered much greater flexibility whatever their personal circumstances. How sad it would be if Scotland had to sacrifice any part of its economic potential just because a large number of students could not find the means to support themselves throughout their studies. As with everything in education, there are no easy answers. Success in the future will depend  largely on careful analysis of how the economy tomorrow can work and on harnessing the rich potential of all whose motivation and enthusiasm directs them towards a college career so that they are better prepared to enter the workforce. Our part in the Parliament is to help to implement policies that will make that process much easier than it is for many people in 2009.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government intends to respond to recent criticisms that have been voiced by teachers, academics, business leaders and unions concerning the curriculum for excellence. (S3F-1903)

Yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning published the strategic vision and key principles for assessment for the curriculum for excellence, which says: "Teachers in schools will assess children's progress in literacy and numeracy using the experiences and outcomes and the guidance in the relevant Principles and Practice papers and further guidance which will apply to standards." Will the First Minister explain what that means for testing?

This debate sits in the context of two main issues. First, there is the growing number of reports into child protection services, which, as Labour has rightly identified this morning, have too often been found seriously wanting when it comes to looking after the best interests of the child. Secondly, there is the crisis—I use that word advisedly—in parenting skills. While each of the three speakers so far has identified the first issue as extremely important for the Parliament, the second issue must be a priority for debate in every corner of Scotland. We want to use this debate to pursue that theme in order to help deal with the root causes of the problem. After all, a substantial number of child protection cases, though not all, would never occur if more parents were better able to harness the appropriate skills. Let me deal first with the question of child protection procedures and the fact that, earlier this month, 23 per cent of local authorities were rated as "weak" or "unsatisfactory" in relation to their child protection services. That is a deeply worrying statistic, particularly for local authorities such as Dundee City Council, Moray Council, Aberdeenshire Council and Midlothian Council. On top of that, we have had deeply disturbing high-profile cases, such as the death of little Brandon Muir. There has been consensus across the chamber about how to improve child protection procedures in line with national legislative changes. The Scottish Government has made good progress in some areas through simplifying structures, such as those that surround disclosure procedures, and trying to end the culture of crisis management that has often been the result of too much buck-passing of responsibilities. In addition, the more carefully targeted inspection programme will bring benefits, as will the determination of all parties in the chamber to support earlier intervention strategies. However, it remains the case that the lives of far too many young people have been blighted by incompetence within the system. It will be important that the Scottish Government gets the forthcoming children's hearings bill right. Ministers have been forced into a major rethink because they did not consult fully and because some of their initial proposals were rightly seen as  a challenge to the traditional ethos of the children's hearings system. The Government has said that it will ensure that that ethos is looked after. I hope that that happens, because that system is vital to children in Scotland and we must get it right. For me, the issue of parenting skills lies at the heart of the debate. It is a hugely difficult and complex issue, which is similar to that of drugs and substance misuse, but that is no reason to shy away from it or be reluctant to take bold and radical action. Indeed, as Annabel Goldie made very clear in her recent speech to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, there is no option to be anything other than radical. Family breakdown from one cause or another costs the UK over £20 billion a year. The resulting burden on society, especially on family relatives, social work services and our justice system, goes much, much deeper than just the money. We do not pretend that our party has all the answers—we do not—but neither do we believe that there is any time to waste in bringing the matter to the top of the political agenda. We totally accept the Scottish Government's focus on the early years, but why can it not also tackle child protection within education spending? Why must we spend £30 million a year on providing free school meals to those who do not need them? That money could go into providing better support for the very young children who are the victims of irresponsible parents, providing universal health visitors for all young children, or providing support for the hard-pressed voluntary sector, which does such a fantastic job for so many children. It is also time we had a major reform of the UK tax and benefit system to end the perverse financial incentive against couples who choose to marry, and to end the benefit system that penalises married couples. Last week, the Conservative party received from lain Duncan Smith and the cross-party Centre for Social Justice a three-point plan to help more households into work and tackle the penalties that work against constructive parenting. A very large number of parents in society genuinely find it difficult to pass on parenting skills to their children because they themselves are the children of parents who do not possess those skills. Those people need our help because they have also been let down in some way or another. I understand the call to remove children from parents whose behaviour puts them in danger, but we must not delude ourselves about the numbers involved. Children's panel members will be the first to tell us that not even using multistorey tower blocks in each area of Scotland, which would  involve prohibitive costs, could cope with all those suffering from parental neglect. This debate is not easy, and I fully agree that there is an issue about child protection. However, there is a much bigger issue about parenting and engaging parents in their responsibilities and their child's education and about ensuring that the welfare state supports rather than penalises them. I hope that all parties will be able to sign up to my amendment. I move amendment S3M-4911.1, to insert at end: ", and further calls on the Scottish Government to acknowledge the concern about the growing number of parents in society who lack the necessary skills to bring up their children responsibly and to address this issue as a matter of urgency."

Malcolm Chisholm made the point that few jobs are more important in defining the future of this country than being a teacher. That is why this morning various speakers—with considerable passion—have been right to identify the current disgrace of a large number of teachers, both new and experienced, being unable to find a job. If headteachers were free to comment on the matter, I doubt that one of them would be prepared to accept that situation. Like every parent and pupil, they know that a good school depends on the headteacher's ability to recruit the best staff. They also know that, at present, they cannot do that job properly because of local authorities' ability to restrict the labour market. That makes it exceedingly difficult for headteachers to ensure that there is stability in teacher appointments, with the result that far too many classes have to put up with a change of teacher during the school year. Of course, difficult economic circumstances mean that more of the older generation of teachers are postponing their retirement, but there are also far too many constraints in the teaching marketplace, not least those that are imposed by the Scottish Government's disastrous class size policy, which becomes more chaotic by the day. Workforce planning has been dealt a severe blow by the fact that local authorities, many of which are geographically large and diverse, operate a centrally controlled recruitment policy that pays little heed to the needs of individual schools. We all know headteachers who are told from which employment pools they must appoint staff. The Herald newspaper has reported that newly qualified teachers across the country are finding it difficult to find permanent jobs because of a worrying trend—the fact that some local authorities are deliberately preventing new teachers from getting jobs because they have stronger employment rights than probationary teachers, who are a cheaper option. What became of the 12 key recommendations of the teacher employment working group report, which the cabinet secretary told us in June 2008 would remove some of the rigidities? It is ludicrous for any Government to assert that it can find every qualified teacher and probationer a permanent job. That is simply not in its power—we would not expect it to be. However, it is in its  power to carry out a complete reappraisal of the recruitment process to allow much greater flexibility within the demand structure so that it better reflects supply and to prevent the situation of 564 unfilled posts, which was the case in the previous two sessions. Rigid central control has failed, and it is time to let headteachers make more of the running. They should be free to choose the best staff, instead of being hide-bound by the bureaucracy of local authorities, many of which do not even keep a good record of data on teacher numbers, and the disastrous central diktats of a failed class size policy. Thanks to the excellent progress that the GTC has made in recent years, the standard of teacher training is improving all the time. That also has the effect of raising standards among older, more experienced teachers. What a waste it is that so much talent is currently consigned to the sidelines. It does not take a genius to see what effects that will have on those who are currently at college and university and may be considering teaching as a career. Worse still—if that were not enough—teachers look at the SNP's flagship schools manifesto pledges and its subsequent school report. On class sizes, the SNP said: "We will reduce class sizes in Primary 1, 2 and 3 to eighteen pupils or less"— I would still rather that it had said "or fewer". That is now a chaotic policy, which finally bit the dust yesterday. On physical education, the SNP said: "we will ensure that every pupil has 2 hours of quality PE each week delivered by specialist PE teachers." That is an important policy, but only two councils say that they can achieve it. On outdoor education, the SNP said: "We will work towards a guarantee of 5 days outdoor education for every school pupil." That is another important pledge, but no councils are delivering it. On teacher numbers, the SNP said: "We will maintain teacher numbers in the face of falling school rolls", yet we have 1,000 fewer teachers. On raising standards, the SNP said: "We will pay particular attention to raising the achievement of the poorest performing 20 per cent of school pupils", but we find that many standards are declining. What a catalogue of failure, and what a massive turn-off to anyone who is either in or considering the teaching profession. I hope that the Parliament will support the amendment in Murdo Fraser's name.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can you confirm whether you have received any request from the Parliamentary Bureau for the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to make a statement to the Parliament on the change to class-size regulations? A major policy announcement has been made today; will Parliament have the opportunity to scrutinise it in the normal way?

Does the minister reject the fundamental evidence from Sweden that pupil attainment has gone up by a considerable amount simply because parents have a great deal of choice over where their children are educated?

Will the member take an intervention?

How much progress does the minister expect to be made by the 29 councils that are not delivering on the targets?

I am grateful to Christine Grahame and the Health and Sport Committee for their extensive work on one of the most important issues that the country faces in improving health. It is ironic that, in an age in which the diversity of sports on offer and the media coverage of them have never been greater, there are fewer active participants in sport and fewer physically fit youngsters per head of the population. For all the allure of sport on the big stage, there are deeply worrying signs at the grass-roots level about the lack of activities that are undertaken because of pleasure rather than because of competition, especially in schools. Gone are the days of compelling virtually all schoolgirls to play hockey and all schoolboys to play football or rugby. I was never one to worry about unfashionable kit or freezing cold winters spoiling my hockey, but I do not want us to return to those days. That said, they carry a strong message, as do the lifestyles of a generation that was in general much fitter and leaner than the current generation. I read the Health and Sport Committee's report with great interest. As Ken Macintosh rightly pointed out, many good things are happening, but it is abundantly clear that pupils are not getting two hours of PE in far too many schools. Indeed, as Mary Scanlon pointed out, even the intention of providing that does not exist in far too many schools. It is clear that, in their varying degrees, certain issues are seen to be having a detrimental effect on PE in schools. Those issues are: the lack of an integrated strategy for sport and PE; concern about the availability of and access to sports facilities; the lack of specialist PE teachers in primary schools; a lack of focus when it comes to HMIE PE inspections; concerns about the health and safety bureaucracy and the accompanying litigious society; curriculum pressures; budget pressures; the aggressive and ugly behaviour of some key sportsmen and some sections of supporters; and the changing nature of teaching jobs. The story is not very happy, but what can we do about it? I want to pick up on some of the key themes. What struck me most about the Health and Sport Committee's report was its comments about the lack of an integrated structure. One of the biggest difficulties has been confusion about definitions, although perhaps that is not a valid excuse. I share Sandra White's and Margo MacDonald's concern about the term "physical literacy", which is pretty meaningless, but it is important to come up with meaningful and accurate definitions of the terms "physical education", "physical activity" and "sport" because,  as Margo MacDonald and Ian McKee said, those terms are far too readily confused. That was clearly shown when the Scottish Government got itself into deep water about whether walking to school was PE. We are talking about two hours of good-quality physical education, which I am sure should mean two hours of PE instruction in normal curriculum time by a professional teacher with the relevant skills. East Renfrewshire Council and Clackmannanshire Council have been praised for their pathways into sport programmes. One reason for their success is the fact that they have had an understanding of the overall strategy, which has involved not just schools but clubs and bodies such as SwimScotland that have done a huge amount to push forward innovative programmes and youngsters. I also mention Cricket Scotland. That might upset Sandra White, as it is not a body that appeals to her, but it too has done a huge amount and extremely well to get far more people involved in a short time. Those local authorities have not taken a piecemeal approach that lacks clarity and vision, but the committee notes that such an approach is far too prevalent throughout Scotland. To me, what is essential is a willingness to make structural changes to the school timetable. Although I fully acknowledge that that is not easy, particularly in this day and age when so much presses on the curriculum, it can be done with willpower, as Richard Simpson and Mary Scanlon have said. There is also the issue of facilities. It is important that up-to-date facilities are available, and I hope that the new school build programme is on the way to helping that. However, it is a question not just of the availability of the facilities but of their accessibility and cleanliness. In my view, local authorities and local communities could do a lot more to improve those aspects. I also believe that an important lesson to be learned from East Renfrewshire is the importance of getting commitment at teacher-training level and harnessing volunteers. Those are, sadly, among the most difficult tasks that we face. It used to be the case that the majority of teachers in Scottish schools—of whatever type—would willingly take on extracurricular activities. They do not do so now, as the job demands so much paperwork and more teachers feel heavily under pressure about health and safety issues. It used to be easy for volunteers to gain elementary coaching certificates from schemes such as those that were run way back in the 1970s by Green Shield stamps and the Prudential—coaching schemes that were designed specifically to ensure maximum grass-roots participation rather than to develop sporting  superstars. We have largely lost those schemes, and we are failing a generation because of it. The Health and Sport Committee's report is extremely important, but what is even more important is how we react to it. To put it mildly, the current Government is sleepwalking on the issue and needs to wake up to the reality of the stark message that the committee has sent out.

I regret that we have got to this state of affairs. I agree with Robert Brown that there were some unedifying performances throughout the proceedings over the past two weeks. It is extraordinary that there has been such an inexcusable lack of clarity on key points. It is also extraordinary that, given that some of the related tribunal issues were first flagged up back in 2001, we have had to wait eight years for another very important case in the sheriff court to create such a major headache. To put it bluntly, just why does the Scottish Government find itself in this position? What is most important, however, is the question of the legal imperative, which is the central issue with which we must deal. Is it definitively the case that the Scottish Government has no other option, and no option in this particular timescale? As we understand matters, the Scottish Government conceded the case because the overwhelming weight of legal advice to it was that it was in breach of ECHR requirements. We also understand that, even though there is not yet a Court of Session decision, any failure to sanction representation is now open to challenge and may have serious consequences for the validity of decisions that are taken by children's panels. In short, we are told that there is a legal imperative to act and that the SSI must remain as an interim measure, pending the passing of the forthcoming children's hearings bill. That being the case, we will, with reluctance, vote against annulment at decision time.

I do not doubt for a moment that it is one of the principal duties of the Parliament and its Government to uphold the principles of the ECHR as they scrutinise relevant matters of justice. It is also their duty to uphold the principles of the Scottish justice system, including those that underpin our different tribunal processes. For the past week, members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee have been asked to scrutinise the arguments of the Scottish Government and of Ken Macintosh on his motion to annul the statutory instrument. At the end of that process, which involved a vote at yesterday's committee meeting, I chose to abstain on the ground that I did not have sufficient information to judge whether the instrument should remain in force or be annulled. I will be very specific. First, and most important, the matter hinges on a ruling in the Court of Session that is yet to be made. Voting in favour of the instrument would pre-empt that legal ruling, and would mean that the Scottish Government was asking a committee of the Scottish Parliament to scrutinise a proposal without the benefit of the certainty of the ruling. The minister assures us that that is not the case, because he has been formally advised about what the legal ruling will be: namely, the Scottish Government will lose its case. The minister argues that both the Court of Session and Scottish Government ministers have a duty to ensure that the principles of the ECHR are upheld, which undoubtedly is the case, but I challenge the Scottish Government to produce the unequivocal evidence that the legal opinion that it has presented to the members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee and to Parliament this afternoon is correct. It is incumbent on the Scottish Government to explain fully exactly why it has conceded the case  prior to the legal ruling being made. I understand that in at least one other case when a Scottish Government predicted the outcome of a Court of Session ruling, it was in fact wrong. On that basis, is it right for the Scottish Government to attempt to force committee members into believing that the outcome of the appeal is certain? Past experience suggests that that is not the case. Secondly, there is the issue of conflicting legal advice. The minister clearly asserted that if members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee voted to annul the instrument, various individuals—including members of children's panels—could find themselves in breach of ECHR regulations. However, my impression, having sought legal advice, is that that is simply not true: only the Scottish Government can be in breach of ECHR regulations. I am disturbed that other committee members may have received conflicting legal advice on what I would have thought was a very straightforward matter of fact: either those bodies can be in breach of the ECHR or they cannot. The time that has been spent on establishing the truth of the matter has not been helpful, especially for those who do not have the privilege—or should I say the curse—of a legal background. Thirdly, I have had great difficulty in assimilating some of the minister's responses to questions at committee sessions. At the committee meeting on 1 September, I asked him to confirm whether or not there would be implications for the conduct of children's hearings if the instrument were approved. He replied: "Clearly, the instrument will have a significant impact in that a parent in the circumstances defined by the criteria will have legal representation, which they do not have at present."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 1 September 2009; c 2619.] However, in the next breath he cautioned me that the instrument was a separate matter from the children's hearings bill, which is designed—and is about to be redesigned—to change the procedures that govern children's hearings. Likewise, the minister said in his opening statement at that meeting that there would be an "interim route" and that a "permanent scheme" would be proposed at a later date. That implies that changes are to be made. I believe that all members of the Parliament, including the minister, wish to protect the central ethos of the children's hearings system—a system that has served Scotland well and which enshrines the principles of the Kilbrandon report. That ethos is clearly at the heart of the representations that we have received. I ask all members to think carefully about the matter.

I apologise on behalf of my colleague Murdo Fraser, who is absent from the debate because his wife Emma has just given birth to their second child, Lucy Elizabeth. I think that is a very good choice of name. As members will be aware, Murdo Fraser has a strong personal interest in the bill. It was good to hear the cabinet secretary paying tribute to him and giving him credit for taking some of the initiative on this front. I know that he is genuinely sorry to miss the first stage of the bill's parliamentary process. The school is, perhaps more than any other institution, often the defining characteristic of a community. Quite apart from delivering the crucial element that is education, it binds together families and people of different age groups, and is usually the focus for a wide variety of community activities. In rural areas, that focus is even more pronounced and is, indeed, often the difference between there being and there not being a community. We are therefore very pleased by the Scottish Government's recognition in section 12 of the specific concern about closure of rural schools, not least because of the much wider implications for sustainability of their local areas and the fact that—as was put very strongly to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee by the Scottish rural schools network—in the case of several rural school closures, the combination of increased travel costs, increased overheads at the receiving school and the possible loss of revenue from grant can result in additional costs, rather than savings. It is also good to see that the Scottish Government recognises the different categories of rurality. That recognition is vital to ensuring that schools are treated on their individual merits rather than as universal structures, which can sometimes ignore local circumstances. Those definitions will be important when we debate the principles of the bill as they relate to all schools. The second principle—tightening the regulations that govern the consultation process—is also important. It is a matter of concern that there has not always been a consistent and equitable approach across our 32 local authorities. The Conservatives will support the new power that will be introduced to allow ministers to call in any closure decision after it has been made, should they think that it does not comply with the new requirements of the bill, or if a local authority  fails to take account of all the relevant information. Accurate information is essential in the process. We have seen too many situations in which inaccurate and misleading information has been presented as justification for a school closure. The legal requirement to challenge any inaccuracies is therefore crucial. In general terms, we fully support the principles of the bill. However, in case the Scottish Government thinks that it is in for too easy a ride, I suggest that clarification is needed in some areas. First, the educational benefits statement, which is essential to any decision, needs to be balanced with a more holistic approach so that we can give confidence to communities that the economic and social aspects have been correctly identified and properly weighted in the equation. I think that we all agree on that, but the cabinet secretary knows that opinion was divided among those who provided evidence on who is competent to comment on each of those aspects. Unless an attempt is made to clarify fully which factors will be contained in the educational benefits statement, I foresee a little difficulty. I still think that there is a little concern about the role of HMIE, which is a hugely important stakeholder. The bill team rightly identified that the educational benefits statement should necessarily include a wide range of factors, such as the after-school facilities that are on offer to children, the links with the local community, and the school's ethos. Indeed, HMIE's role is paramount—probably in the minds of most parents, too. I ask the Scottish Government to reflect again on whether HMIE's new role is possible, given the available existing resources. I understand from the cabinet secretary's full reply in committee on 3 June this year that the main difference between the role of HMIE as proposed in section 8 of the bill and the current situation is that it will be involved in every proposal from the beginning, even if the case is not called in by ministers. That could mean quite a lot of extra work for it, especially if the educational benefits statement continues to include more and more factors. Members would like an assurance that HMIE has the resources to cope with that change, both in respect of the number of available staff and relevant experience. There is a question of whether the financial settlement's terms might be revised in the future—Ken Macintosh referred to that. Currently, local authorities receive a revenue grant for the percentage of pupils who are educated in rural schools with fewer than 70 pupils, which means that if those small schools close, the local authorities will lose that financial entitlement. Obviously, that will mean a loss of revenue. There has been some discussion about possible future changes to those financial arrangements, but that  might be just rumour. It would therefore be helpful if the Scottish Government clarified its position. As Ken Macintosh said, it would be unforgivable if, at the very time when huge progress has been made on protecting our schools, the Scottish Government was unwittingly to create a financial incentive to close them down. I reiterate the Scottish Conservatives' strong support for the bill. As I said in my opening remarks, my colleague Murdo Fraser has campaigned long and hard with many other people for such legislation. We believe passionately that it is needed. It is good that the Scottish Government has taken up the cause on the same basis.

Will the Scottish Executive acknowledge that one of the main difficulties that it faces in implementing the policy is the lack of precise definitions of PE, outdoor learning and outdoor education? Will it agree to tighten up those definitions so that we can make progress on the strategy?

The cabinet secretary stated that she will be in a position in September to announce which authorities will be in the first tranche of investment and that that decision will be based on the most urgent need as defined by regularly collected national statistics. What statistical measurements will be used to make that important decision?

Thank you for giving us early sight of your statement. You say that you have set out a clear policy, but I do not think that I am alone in being thoroughly confused. You said that the new literacy and numeracy qualifications will involve external marking by the SQA, but that once national standards have been widely shared, understood and verified, the intention is "to reduce the amount of external marking that is required". Will you please explain what that means? Secondly, you said that you are intent on reducing the current complexity of qualifications and making them "more streamlined and understandable for parents and employers." I hope that you meant to mention pupils and teachers as well. You said that an announcement is to be made about highers and advanced highers, but there is no such announcement. Are you still intent on adding a Scottish baccalaureate award in science and languages but not in the arts and social sciences? In the light of your comment on 27 November 2008, when you said that the Government and the SQA had been "overwhelmed" by the interest that had been shown in the Scottish baccalaureate, can you confirm how many local authorities and schools have agreed to introduce it in 2010? Finally, what action is your Government taking in the local authority concordat to ensure that as full a range as possible of higher and advanced higher courses is open to all our brightest pupils, to deal with the concerns that exist in some parts of Scotland that the career choices of pupils are being compromised because of cutbacks?

The First Minister will be aware that the general secretary of the SSTA has expressed concern about the small minority of violent pupils who are being allowed back into mainstream education before they have demonstrated that they can behave properly and pose no risk to other pupils and staff. Does the First Minister share that concern?

As my colleague Murdo Fraser made clear, we are pleased to support Labour's motion this morning. In my summing up speech, I want to dwell on three main issues. First, there has been a distinct failure on the part of the Scottish Government to prioritise appropriately the financial problems that are faced by students today. In the current economic recession, increased numbers of people want places at college and university as they seek to retrain for a very difficult job market. The statistics that were released last week show just how difficult that job market is, as do the tertiary education sector's statistics on the number of applications that they receive that are not from school leavers. If we add in the fourfold increase in student bankruptcy in the past 10 years and the increased number of applications for university hardship funds—the University of Abertay Dundee has already run out of such funds twice this year—we can see why the student body is so desperately concerned. Secondly, in our opinion, the Scottish Government has made a fundamental error of judgment in seeking to increase the level of grants, rather than loans, that are available to students. That is not good value for money and does not widen access to university education, which the SNP election manifesto claimed was such an important commitment.

There are complexities, but I believe firmly that loans are a much better option than the grants system. We must recognise that the problem is now acute. Before the economic downturn, many students could supplement their student loans with income from part-time jobs, but such jobs are now more difficult to find, so students are left with no choice but to borrow from credit card companies. That is a major issue for students. As Murdo Fraser and Claire Baker both said, a much better use of the £30 million of available funds would be to target the poorest students. The money could be used to help about 19,000 students who currently receive the full young students bursary and a further 15,000 students who receive part of that bursary. On top of that, we propose providing a £200 increase for all students by increasing the amount that is allocated through the non-means-tested loan, which in turn would help about 78,000 students. We would also provide close to £2 million in discretionary funds. Those measures would go a long way towards relieving the current pressure on child care and hardship funds, although it is good to hear the commitment that the cabinet secretary gave on that issue. We believe that our proposals are the first step to addressing the urgent need to support our poorest students. Our proposals would tackle student hardship and help students to move away from a situation in which they become permanently trapped in debt. By supporting the Labour motion, we have shown that we are ready to engage with other parties in order to progress the proposals. They are affordable, achievable and fair and could be delivered within the £30 million that is already available. Finally, let me say a word on the on-going debate about tertiary education. Our universities and colleges are to be warmly congratulated for their success. As George Foulkes said, their qualities are vital to ensure Scotland's continuing success in the future. They should not be compromised by political dogma or hollow rhetoric in an election manifesto. Unfortunately, that is a very real fear if the Scottish Government continues to fail to understand properly the dilemmas—both academic and financial—that provide major headaches for our tertiary education institutions as they struggle to maintain their competitive  advantage and the international reputation that they have spent hundreds of years establishing. Students, by definition, are caught up in those dilemmas. It is wrong that students are unable to rely on Parliament to address those fundamental problems, many of which have been eloquently expressed by student groups both privately and publicly. No one doubts that the questions that surround the future of tertiary education, its staff and its students are complex, but they will not be answered if we do not recognise the true extent of the problem that we face. That is why we need a new approach, and that is why we are pleased to support Labour's motion.

Let me say at the outset that the Scottish Conservatives fully support the principles of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill, not least because its ethos is designed to ensure that adequate and relevant support is provided to all children, no matter what their specific learning needs are. It is vital that we get the process right and take every step possible to address some of the loopholes that exist in the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004. There has been no disagreement that we need to ensure that each child with ASN receives the appropriate help in an efficient and timely manner and that that support must extend to the home and local community as well as to the teaching environment. It was good to hear the assurance that the Minister for Children and Early Years gave on that when he expressed his desire to ensure that support is both holistic and fully co-ordinated across social, health and education services.  Specialist care means the provision of specialist services, which in turn means that we must recognise the importance of the out-of-area placing requests that are made when, for one reason or another, a local authority is unable to deliver the appropriate support. The bill will be important in improving access to such services, extending equality of opportunity and of treatment before the law, and recognising the respective responsibilities of parents, of the host and home local authorities and of support carers. Throughout the parliamentary process, we on the Conservative benches have fully supported the Government and other parties in their intentions behind the bill: to reduce the complexity of the legislation; to speed up the decision-making process; to ensure that the various parties are fully aware of their rights and responsibilities; to provide better mediation and advocacy; to provide better transition after school; and to do much more to support the vulnerable and most excluded children. I believe that we needed to focus on two things. First, we needed to make the legislation as watertight as possible by reducing the loopholes in the existing act. Secondly, we needed to ensure that the bill could be complemented by reducing the wide variation in local authority interpretation of the code of practice. That second obligation was just as important as the first, in particular because we needed to reduce the scope for buck passing and to address the perverse financial incentives that sometimes lead to the wrong decisions. Having listened carefully to the extensive range of evidence that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee considered, I am in no doubt that professionals and experts in the field felt a considerable degree of frustration. They felt let down because the existing legislation does not provide them with the necessary support to deliver the best services to families whose children have additional support needs. In particular, I am mindful of the need to identify additional support needs at the earliest opportunity and to ensure that the relevant support is given from day one. As well as the educational, health and social benefits of doing so, huge costs could be saved in the long run through a reduction in the number of cases in which families find themselves in difficult and adversarial circumstances. That was one of our principal concerns in dealing with the bill. We have worked hard to improve the provisions on representation and advocacy and on the workings of the tribunal process. We have also worked hard to clarify the responsibilities and duties of local authority education departments because we wanted to reduce the scope for buck  passing that has enabled some local authorities to hide behind the complexities of the existing legislation. If there is a proper, graduated response to the needs of the child in the first instance, if there are proper relationships between parents, school and partnership officer and if there is much greater clarity surrounding the process of what should legally be provided in a support package, the best interests of the child will be promoted through an holistic support mechanism that gives people the best possible chance in the future. As the convener of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee has just said, the bill should not have become a party-political issue. It could have been better. Indeed, it is deeply regrettable that, during its passage, debates sometimes became so highly charged that they even raised questions about parliamentary procedures. That aside, the bill is about our commitment to the future of children with additional support needs and the families and carers who support them. That is why the Scottish Conservatives will support the Government in agreeing to the bill.

The Scottish Government has confirmed since stage 2 that the existing legislation provides clarity about the right of recovery of costs when one local authority provides support to a child who is resident in another local authority area. It has also confirmed that section 23(2) of the 1980 act allows for the authorities in question to agree the appropriate costs, rather than have an imprecise definition of reasonable costs imposed upon them. I fully acknowledge some of the difficulties that have been experienced between the two local authorities that Mr Macintosh has referred to, but I do not consider them to be of a particularly legislative nature. The Scottish Conservatives will therefore support amendment 14.

Throughout the evidence sessions in the committee and during the passage of the bill, it has been abundantly clear that, although some local authorities are exceptionally good at providing relevant support to children with additional support needs, some are not. Sadly, in some parts of Scotland, children's support services fall woefully short of the expected standard—or, in some cases, are non-existent. In those areas, parents have little assistance with regard to what support services are available or what procedures they should follow when things go wrong. In those cases, it is all too easy for a local authority to make a token reference to what  is available and hope that parents and families have the good sense to know automatically where to look for help. There is a clear need to provide a level playing field in that respect and to ensure that we are doing everything possible to identify all the cases in which there are additional support needs, to correctly diagnose the problem, and to ensure that the relevant support is provided. It has been my intention—and, I believe, that of Margaret Smith and the Labour members—to ensure that parents are physically given the necessary and relevant information so that they are better informed and, therefore, better able to supply the appropriate support to their child. That should be a statutory obligation on local authorities. The Scottish Government has argued that that is the case under section 26 of the 2004 act, and that by lodging amendment 4 it is seeking to ensure that only a summary of the necessary information is provided, because the placing of the word "any" before "information" would mean families being provided with all the information that was relevant to any form of additional support needs, which inevitably would mean them ending up with far too much information. I do not accept that argument, but I made it clear that I was willing to consider a Scottish Government alternative, which we see in proposed paragraph (i) of amendment 4. Sadly, that has come at the price of accepting proposed paragraph (ii) of amendment 4, which would oblige local authorities only to flag up where information is available rather than ensure that families are given it. For me, giving families information is a crucial part of the bill, as it provides them with greater assurances about and knowledge of their child's needs, rather than leaving them to navigate their own way around the rather daunting current system. Despite section 26 of the 2004 act, giving families information clearly has not happened. For that reason, the Scottish Conservatives will be opposing the Scottish Government's amendments 4 and 8. Finally, given that this matter is so important, it is disturbing to note that lobbying is still going on in the middle of the debate.

As was the case with the 2004 act, the ethos of the bill is to provide adequate and relevant support to children with additional support needs. It is not the intention to provide that support where no such need exists or to introduce legislation the consequence of which would be to leave out certain categories of children who have additional support needs but whose disability is not covered by a specific legislative definition. Since stage 2, various legal issues have arisen in that connection. Amendment 2 addresses those issues and the possibility of unintended discrimination, and seeks to preserve one of the fundamental principles of the 2004 act, which is why the Scottish Conservatives will support it.

I very much welcome the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill. The minister is right to say that Perth and Kinross Council has full responsibility in the sense that she indicated. However, are discussions taking place between the council and the Government about speeding up progress to allay concerns that not very much is happening in Kinross-shire about flood prevention?

Did the recent joint working party on workforce planning formally discuss the effectiveness of the collection of data on how each local authority is filling teaching vacancies?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I totally accept that, but does the Government accept that pupils who carry out such physical attacks should not be in a mainstream classroom until they learn how to behave?

At the outset of the debate, I make it clear that it is my firm belief that the vast majority of pupils in our schools in Scotland are well behaved, well motivated and keen to succeed. However, it is sad that some pupils and their teachers have to put up with a small but nonetheless growing minority of persistent troublemakers who make life impossible for everyone else. It is a source of considerable concern to me that groups such as the Educational Institute of Scotland, the Scottish Secondary Teachers Association and the General Teaching Council for Scotland regard indiscipline in the classroom, particularly violent indiscipline, as an increasing problem for their members. The acting general secretary of the SSTA, Jim Docherty, said just a few months ago that the figures released by the Scottish Government bear no relation to the real situation in classrooms. Ronnie Smith of the EIS has said: "the issue of pupil indiscipline is seldom far below the surface of the educational debate in Scotland ... the evidence is that the problem is getting worse and consuming more and more of each teacher's time." It is even more concerning that there is such indiscipline in primary schools. We know that around 40,000 pupils are excluded from Scottish schools each year and that almost half of the exclusions involve the same pupil on more than one occasion. The most worrying thing of all is that physical attacks with weapons increased from 286 in 2006-07 to 366 in 2007-08. However, the Scottish Government still refuses to allow the publication of the full facts. That is a little surprising, because the now Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning said in a debate on a Conservative motion on education in 2005: "At First Minister's question time on 20 January, I raised the serious issue of the proposal to end the publication of  annual indiscipline statistics and to replace them with a three-yearly survey. A couple of weeks later, the Conservatives woke up, smelled the coffee and realised that the matter should be taken up—I applaud them for doing so. If we regard indiscipline as a serious issue, it is important that regular statistics be produced so that there can be accountability. The production of statistics every three years is not good enough."— [ Official Report , 17 March 2005; c 15444.]  Does the cabinet secretary still agree with that? The statistics are bad enough, but the fact that in 85 per cent of exclusions there is no proper educational provision while the pupil is away from school is worse still. That is staggering and unacceptable by any standards. It is little wonder that many in the teaching profession despair about what can be done. It is not for me or any other member to comment on the details of specific cases, but the sad events surrounding the Mike Barile case in Dundee threw up a major outpouring of public concern, anger and discomfort because of our inability to tackle the problem. There was a host of articles in the Daily Express , The Courier , The Daily Telegraph and The Scotsman —I have them in front of me—in which former teachers, former headteachers and former pupils said that indiscipline is the biggest problem that we face in Scottish schools. The Scottish Conservatives do not believe that any pupil who is guilty of such behaviour should be allowed anywhere near a mainstream classroom until they learn how to behave. We should learn lessons from the highly effective second chance units that have worked well in several states in America, in Northern Ireland and in Scandinavia, and we should pay strong attention to groups such as the Scottish Police Federation and our armed services personnel. Such groups believe that such policies can go a long way to sorting out persistent troublemakers and getting them to refocus their lives in a positive manner. To those who think that I am being too harsh and that I have not signed up to the concept of inclusion in Scottish education, I say that inclusion should mean that all our pupils are able to work and learn in a disciplined environment without the fear of the bully or of retribution. If some people do not like that idea, that is tough. We should not forget the huge range of voluntary sector groups that do much to help troubled youngsters make good. We have a wealth of talent in Scotland in Fairbridge, the Prince's Trust, the eTEN project and in private sector groups such as Spark of Genius, for example. Those groups are often the unsung heroes when schools are unable to find a solution, and we need to do far more to support them. That is why we will support the Liberal Democrat amendment.  That takes me to another issue. Every member knows that the best form of discipline is self-discipline and that that comes when pupils feel fully engaged and supported by a loving and caring family—my colleagues will develop that point—and when they pursue courses that they see as relevant, enjoyable and constructive in respect of what and how they learn. The curriculum for excellence should be well equipped in that respect, but its success will be compromised if there is not also a more extensive co-curriculum for all pupils, no matter their background or academic abilities. Evidence that was given in the recent inquiry by the Health and Sport Committee into health, physical education and sport issues laid bare the postcode lottery that exists with regard to the ease with which pupils can access a range of extra-curricular activities, which are taken for granted in many schools. The Government claims that it is keen to do something about that, but under its watch we are already seeing cutbacks in staffing in music, drama and outdoor education. Those staff are often crucial in running extra-curricular activities, and we should not underestimate the effects of that. If we can harness a child's interests in and outside the classroom, we will go a long way to channelling self-discipline in the right direction. It is wrong to get too prescriptive about discipline in individual cases, because it should always be a matter for headteachers to decide what discipline procedures should operate in his or her school. However, they must be able to do that without fear of compromise or contradiction from either an overburdensome local authority structure that tends to assume that the one-size-fits-all approach suits everyone or excessive red tape. It should be the duty of national and local politicians to stay out of interfering in headteachers' jobs, but it must also be our duty to debate the barriers that stand in their way and to give our fullest support to the teaching profession in its desire to remove those barriers. I look forward to the Government's response and to the statement of a coherent strategy that says what needs to be done to tackle the bullies in the classrooms. The Scottish National Party said that it would provide that back in 2005. I move, That the Parliament deplores the rise in the number of exclusions from Scottish schools attributable to weapon attacks by pupils; notes the growing concern expressed by teachers and parents that serious and persistent offenders are not being punished appropriately; calls on the Scottish Government to publish detailed information at regular intervals on the level of reported physical and verbal attacks in schools, as called for by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning when in opposition, and believes that the Scottish Government should devolve more power to head teachers to deal with indiscipline in schools.

Education debates in this chamber currently seem to fall into two categories. There are those that are led by the Opposition parties, as we systematically expose the catalogue of broken promises in the SNP election manifesto, and there  are those that are led by the Scottish Government, which seeks to select the appropriate spin that will most conveniently divert attention away from the extent of those failures. I am not surprised by the Scottish Government's tactics, but even a Government that has used every opportunity to hide behind the convenient excuse of the historic concordat—which, as Margaret Smith said, shifts the blame on to local authorities—cannot ignore the facts. On class sizes, school meals, teacher numbers, nursery staffing and school discipline, there have been huge let-downs for the Scottish electorate and—more important—for parents, pupils and teachers. It is desperately sad that that comes at a time when so many good things are happening in Scottish schools and when there is huge potential for exciting new developments within the curriculum and the examinations structure. It is simply unacceptable, as is the evidence that each of the local authorities supplied in response to two freedom of information requests that the Scottish Conservatives commissioned last month. In response to the first request, the answers from local authorities exposed the true extent of the postcode lottery in determining which higher and advanced higher courses are on offer in different schools. In response to the second, there were shocking statistics about the lack of accurate data held by local authorities on teacher numbers.

I am sorry, but I do not accept that. It is true that the presentations of highers and advanced highers have increased, but there is a postcode lottery with regard to where certain subjects are on offer. The point is that there is no level playing field. The response to the second FOI request flagged up a huge amount of inaccurate data on teacher issues. I have a great deal of sympathy with the section of the Liberal motion that flags up our concern about teacher recruitment, especially as the cabinet secretary assured us that the joint working party on workforce planning would address that issue. Broken promises are broken promises, but positive action is important now, so I turn to the amendment in my name. The Government amendment states the need for "further and faster improvement ... on standards of attainment and achievement".  We all agree with that sentiment, but it is time to take full responsibility. Every party in the chamber agreed—and confirmed by a unanimous vote—in the first debate of this year that no issue is currently more important in education than ensuring all our pupils are properly schooled in the three Rs. I want to hold the Scottish Government to its duty to do something about that.

Many aspects about the testing issue are concerning, but when I canvass opinion among the teaching profession—and particularly among secondary level teachers—I find that they are adamant that we must have more rigorous testing: end of story. I suspect that virtually every member agrees that, when parents send their children to school, the one thing that they expect them to do when they come back is to be able to read, write and count. Parents rightly expect us, as members of Parliament, to ensure the teaching of the three Rs is at the top of the schools agenda. They know, as we do, that it is completely unacceptable for only 30 per cent of secondary 2 pupils to have a competency in maths when 85 per cent had that competency in primary 3; and for 10,000 pupils to leave Scottish schools each year unable to read, write and count properly. They see the unfortunate slide in Scotland's position in too many international league tables, and they know as well as we do that we should be doing so much better. It is the depth of that concern that makes every party in the Parliament deeply anxious about what the future holds if we cannot improve those outcomes and rebuild confidence in our system. That is why we voted for better testing of primary school pupils. We did not vote for more testing, or for tests that are applied only when a teacher thinks that the child is ready to cope with them or when the league tables are about to be announced, but for more rigorous tests that are conducted against nationally agreed standards and that truly reflect the ability of the pupil by the end of primary 7, before they move on to secondary school. There are two important facts. One is that far too many Scottish pupils are leaving school without competency in the three Rs, and the second is that the Parliament voted unanimously to introduce more rigorous, nationally agreed tests by the end of primary 7.  I move amendment S3M-4007.1.1, to insert at end: "and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward detailed proposals by the start of the 2009-10 academic year as to how it will implement amendment S3M-3164.1, which recognised the need for the Scottish Government to ensure that pupils in Scotland are properly tested in the basic skills of literacy and numeracy by the end of primary 7 and which was given unanimous support by the Parliament on 7 January 2009."

Aberdeen City Council is one of the councils that could not reply with accurate data on how many teaching vacancies have been filled by supply and probationer teachers. What plans does the minister have to improve the collection of data on that issue?

I am pleased to support the motion, which welcomes Mr Tam Baillie to the post of children's commissioner. Mr Baillie's considerable experience working as a practitioner with children and young people—most recently as a director of policy at Barnado's Scotland and as chair of the Scottish Alliance for Children's Rights—will bring enormous benefit. The role of the children's commissioner is a difficult job at the best of times, but especially at a time when children, parents and all those who care for children face many challenges, particularly in relation to child protection issues and the neglect and abuse that affect far too many young people. The horrific cases of neglect that have featured widely in the press and, I am sure, in the public mindset over recent months have emphasised the need to ensure that we work together to provide the best possible security for children in Scotland, particularly our most vulnerable children. We simply cannot afford to get that wrong. Likewise, the children's commissioner inevitably has to work hard to articulate legislation that bridges three different Parliaments. That is no  easy task, and nor is dealing with the public scepticism about the job, especially when people feel that there is already too much intervention, which challenges the individual responsibility of parents and children. With those not inconsiderable challenges in mind, I once again wish Mr Baillie very well in his new role and wish Kathleen Marshall all the best for her retirement.

The minister will acknowledge that there has still not been an announcement on the chief executive of Creative Scotland. In his statement, the minister mentioned that a further appointment has still to be made to the transition board. Does he agree that such circumstances do not help to dispel the disquiet in circles about the leadership of Creative Scotland? Can he confirm when he expects those appointments to be made?

In light of that answer, will the new framework for assessment include a specific recommendation on the type of literacy and numeracy testing that will be introduced in Scottish primary schools by the end of primary 7?

Both the cabinet secretary and Ms Brankin are absolutely right to say that Scotland should be proud of a very successful history of scientific invention and innovation, and I am sure that we all share the desire to see that tradition continue. Science is profoundly important, both in its level of  academic inquiry and in its ability to help us to extend the frontiers of our understanding of a complex world. We should be under no illusion about the increasing importance of science subjects to our economy and wellbeing. On this side of the chamber, we warmly welcome the strategic approach. I am sure that we also look forward to the cabinet secretary explaining the triple helix and reporting back on her trip to China. However, I want to use the debate to point out why we believe that the strategy cannot be fully successful until the Scottish Government's line of thinking is more consistent. First, there is the basic question of the science curriculum in schools. I say to the cabinet secretary that I do not want to scaremonger on this issue, which would be inappropriate to both staff and pupils, but it is a matter of considerable concern that there are signs in a growing number of schools that higher and advanced higher science courses are being cut or are undersubscribed, although I accept that some schools are reversing that. On 22 February, The Sunday Times highlighted quite a serious situation in Glasgow. I await the full results of a freedom of information inquiry—they will arrive on 30 March—but results so far indicate some cuts in advanced higher science subjects in Midlothian and the city of Edinburgh. I regret to add that a result came in today that suggests that the picture for highers will be bad, as well. If we consider the period from 2001 to 2008, we see that although the total number of presentations for highers rose by 10 per cent in Scotland, the total number for science subjects fell by 6 per cent. Physics and technology suffered most. I have the statistics in front of me; I went through them extremely carefully and they are worrying.

I acknowledge the concern about the report on Govan high school, which I do not think was particularly accurate. However, I suggest to the cabinet secretary that the trend for presentations for highers and advanced highers is worrying. The FOI inquiry will perhaps shed more light on that by the end of the month. Another concern is that people coming out of universities with science degrees are not necessarily finding science-related employment. I know that everyone has concerns about ensuring  that pupils at school—dare I say it, girls in particular—have the best opportunities to take up science subjects. I share the Liberal Democrats' concern about that. That is even more important in 2009, but it simply will not be possible if schools feel that they cannot staff or resource the science subjects. I note the comments of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, which highlights its concerns and its request that the Scottish Government, along with the General Teaching Council in Scotland, do more to improve the quality of CPD training for science teachers. Ms Brankin made a very good point about that being extended in primary schools. The RSE report also highlights the need for a slightly more American approach to how we take on board advice from the many scientific bodies that present to the Government. There is a feeling in some of our specialist science areas that that process is sometimes just a mechanism by which the Government will operate something, rather than being about presenting information on key issues. We should consider that message. The Scottish Government believes that the twin approach of the curriculum for excellence and the introduction of the Scottish baccalaureate exam—a group award based on highers, advanced highers and an interdisciplinary project—can resolve the science problem in schools. That is fine, up to a point. The curriculum for excellence brings the potential for much greater innovative work in science in primary schools, but there is a fundamental issue about the Scottish baccalaureate. I have absolutely no problem with the principle of a baccalaureate; in fact, I am strong supporter of the international baccalaureate exam, because of the breadth of its approach and its compulsory units in the theory of knowledge and community service, as well as the academic disciplines. However, if the Scottish baccalaureate is really to be made to work properly, we need to address the specific issue that its component parts have to be available in schools. I am referring especially to the advanced higher element. If, to use the words of Brian Lang, universities are to continue to believe that "university places must continue to be awarded on academic merit", we need to ensure that we retain that strength in our university system. In recent times, it has been good to see the upgrading of the tariffs for the advanced higher, but that will mean something only if we know that pupils have the opportunity to take the advanced higher. I believe that, within the Scottish baccalaureate, the advanced higher will matter more than the higher and the interdisciplinary  approach. That is something for the cabinet secretary to think about. As I understand it, we are still waiting for the University and College Admissions Service to look at the tariff points. That is crucial, because they matter to youngsters who are about to make their decisions. The more we can speed that up the better. A science strategy is extremely important, but it has to be consistent right through primary school, secondary school and into tertiary education and beyond. There is a lot of scope for development within business and industry and to have partnerships and more teachers and pupils on exchanges. In ensuring consistency, it matters that the Government has an approach on science. If it is going to introduce science baccalaureates, we have to know where they sit in relation to the arts and social sciences. If youngsters—and their parents—want one thing, it is to know what their qualifications from school mean in terms of their continuing on to university. There is huge vagueness about that at the moment, so I hope that the minister will address the issue when she sums up. We will be supporting the Labour amendment and the Liberal Democrat amendment. I move amendment S3M-3728.3, to insert after fifth " Science for Scotland ": "further notes the concern that some secondary schools in Scotland are reducing the availability of SQA Highers and Advanced Higher courses in science subjects".

To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of the potential impact on jobs, what representations  it has made to the United Kingdom Government regarding the closure of HM Revenue and Customs offices in Scotland. (S3O-6160)

It is good to hear that. I recently met staff at the HM Revenue and Customs office in Perth, who have great concerns about the impact of the closures on the local community, particularly pensioners. Can the cabinet secretary confirm what support the Scottish Government can give to help limit the impact on those pensioners?

As several members have made clear, the Government in its 2007 manifesto made an unequivocal promise to dump student debt. The campaign cry gained considerable student support at the time, but, along with other key pledges on class sizes and local income tax and in view of the SNP's reputation for failing to deliver, it now looks completely hollow. I have no doubt that, 18 months on, the same students feel disillusioned and betrayed by the same Government. The cabinet secretary will tell us that an extra £30 million has been put aside for 2010 and 2011. Although she is right about that, it does not solve the fundamental problem of how we can support the more and more people whom we are encouraging to attend university and college. It is a very harsh economic lesson, and I do not think that the Liberal Democrats have quite taken it on board. As Murdo Fraser said, we fully agree with the motion's references to the incredible importance of the tertiary sector and—as Karen Whitefield made clear—the need to involve all stakeholders in future discussions. However, we reject the call for a minimum income guarantee of £7,000. The idea is attractive in principle, but politicians have to deal with reality, especially during an economic recession, and, as Marilyn Livingstone pointed out, a more effective solution would be to target the money at the most vulnerable students.

Forgive me, but I do not think that the motion actually says that. No matter what party we belong to or what view we take in this debate, we cannot get away from the fundamental—and harsh—economic lesson that needs to be learned. Can the number of people whom we are encouraging to attend courses in the tertiary sector actually be supported, either to look after themselves or in teaching time? We need to think about what we are saying to students about their approach to the tertiary sector. As my colleague Murdo Fraser has pointed out a number of times, the danger lies in accumulating a commercial debt and the  associated—and massive—level of repayments. Credit cards and bank overdrafts have very high interest rates and can leave students mired in bad debt for a very long time. In conclusion, Presiding Officer—I know that you are short of time—the Scottish Conservatives firmly believe that the best way of addressing the problem is to target the very scarce money that is available in the budget at the most vulnerable students and that the most effective method of doing so is through a system of student loans and grants. There are great benefits in possessing a degree, not least in financial recompense, and if that is to be set alongside the ambition of widening access—which we all support—we must be doubly sure that we are putting resources in the right places. If we ignore the benefits of increasing student loans, we will let down our students very badly, not just today but for many years to come.

Will the member give way?

Is it respectful to put before Parliament a policy that is not costed, and for which the Liberal Democrats cannot identify the source of the money?

I thank the minister for his encouraging answer. I have no doubt that he is aware that many rural church and community halls throughout Scotland with private water sources will face annual water testing by local authorities, which will add to their limited budgets a considerable burden that many of them cannot afford. Will he investigate the situation and consider what support the Scottish Government and local authorities can give Scotland's church and community halls?

The First Minister will be aware that, this week, the Kinross-shire cashmere mill, which is a vital employer in the area, has been forced to introduce a four-day week for its 205-strong workforce. What action will the Scottish Government take to help the textile industry throughout Scotland?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I think that voters look for three things in election manifesto commitments on schools: they want our children to be able to read, write and count properly; they want good classroom discipline; and they want our children to have a well-rounded education, which goes well beyond what happens inside the classroom. What is the reality of the SNP's school report card? Remarkably, the SNP's manifesto made no mention of the words "literacy" and "numeracy". Notwithstanding that glaring omission, we have been reassured in Parliament on countless occasions that improving literacy and numeracy is at the heart of the Government's schools strategy. So it should be, not least because of the vast number of academic studies that have identified that Scotland should be doing so much better, especially in the later years of primary school. That point was clearly agreed in our very first debate of 2009, when the Parliament unanimously supported a Conservative amendment "to ensure that pupils in Scotland are properly schooled and tested in the basic skills of literacy and numeracy by the end of primary 7" After that debate, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning said that she was particularly pleased by the consensus that had been demonstrated throughout the debate about the need to maintain a strong focus on improving literacy and numeracy skills from the early years. Good. However, as a result of Parliament's resolution, the cabinet secretary has an obligation to take action on testing literacy and numeracy by the end of primary 7. We do not need more testing in terms of quantity: we need more rigorous testing that cannot be misinterpreted, held back, pushed forward or diluted as the political mood suits.

I can provide Margo MacDonald with an article that I wrote for The Times Educational Supplement , in which I deal with that matter. On school discipline, the SNP said clearly that it did not believe that Labour had tackled the issue effectively. In opposition, Fiona Hyslop made strong pleas for regular publication of statistics showing the levels of serious indiscipline in schools, but in government she will not hear of that because, she claims, it is far too difficult to get comparable statistics.  Well—let me give the SNP some comparable statistics: physical assaults with a weapon increased from 286 in 2006-07 to 366 in 2007-08; physical and verbal assaults on school staff rose from 6,398 in 2006 to 9,121 in 2007; 126,000 school days have been lost to exclusions and, in a staggering 85 per cent of cases, it seems that no other educational provision is made. However, there has still been no SNP-led Parliament debate on school discipline. Despite the fact that discipline issues are at the very top of the agenda for teachers and teaching unions, nothing has been done to tackle the problem. "Never mind," says the SNP, "because smaller class sizes will be a far more effective way of addressing both the 3Rs and discipline issues." This is the SNP's great flagship policy: "We will reduce class sizes in Primary 1, 2 and 3 to eighteen pupils or less"— although I think that it meant to say "or fewer". What happened? Only four local authorities said that they could deliver the policy with existing resources. The Association of Directors of Education in Scotland said that the policy, which the SNP costed at £40 million, would cost more like £422 million. In 15 of the 32 single outcome agreements, no mention is made of class size policy. Worse, this week it was revealed that the rate of progress was precisely 0.9 per cent, at which rate the policy would take 22 parliamentary sessions to be delivered. That makes a complete mockery of the SNP's policy and its concordat. If that is not enough, there are similar stories to tell about failures to deliver on crumbling school buildings, teacher employment numbers, school meals, physical education—which I see is being called "motivation" this morning—and access to a full-time nursery teacher. That is a shameful record, for which the Scottish Government should apologise unreservedly to parents, pupils and teachers.

When it comes to election manifesto commitments on schools—[ Interruption. ]

First, I put on the record how much we support the principles of the bill. It is absolutely vital that we get it right. At a time when so much of the media is focusing on the other aspects of the Government's education policy, it would be a great tragedy if we took a back seat on the issues in the bill, because it is one of the most important issues that we face and we must get it right. There can be no disagreement about the need to ensure that each child with ASN receives the appropriate help in an efficient and timely manner, and that that support extends to the home and local community, as well as to the teaching environment. It was good to hear the minister's assurance on that. Support must be holistic and fully co-ordinated across social, health and educational areas. We must acknowledge that specialist care also means the provision of specialist services. It is not always possible to ensure that those can be provided in every local authority, so it is important that there is a facility for out-of-area placing requests. At the same time, we must ensure equality of opportunity, equality of treatment before the law and recognition of the administrative and financial responsibilities for parents, for the host and home local authorities and for the support carers. We fully support the Government's intention to reduce the complexity of the legislation; to speed up the decision-making process; to ensure that the various parties are fully aware of their rights and responsibilities; to provide better mediation and advocacy; and to provide better cover for those who are at school but who may be over 18, and for those who are the most vulnerable excluded pupils—for example, looked-after children or  young carers. We must not forget them in this process.

Ms MacDonald asks a good question. I am not satisfied—there are issues that go well beyond differences in age. It is always difficult to provide clear definitions, but the issue extends well beyond those people who are in a school environment. We need to focus on two things. First, we need to ensure that the bill is as watertight as it possibly can be with regard to reducing the loopholes in current legislation. Secondly, we need to reduce the wide variation in local authority interpretation of the code of practice. I make it clear that the second is just as important as the first, particularly with regard to reducing the scope for buck-passing and addressing the perverse financial incentives that sometimes lead to the wrong decisions being made. With regard to the bill, it is essential that there is legislative tightening up of important definitions, not only of the term "significant", but of the term "complex needs". There needs to be a clearer understanding of the difference between long-term and temporary needs. Evidence from HMIE, West Lothian Council, the City of Edinburgh Council, the Scottish Government schools directorate and Consumer Focus Scotland—and from the Minister for Children and Early Years—makes it clear that the lack of tight definitions often cloud the issue of whether a CSP is required, which can be crucial in providing the correct support. That is one of the most important concerns that we face, and the minister has promised that the working party on CSPs will further inform the later stages of the bill process.

The member is right—the issue concerns not only CSPs. If we were to get the situation right, we would not, in an ideal world, have quite as many CSPs in the beginning. If earliest intervention took place, there would perhaps be no need for some of that. I turn to some of the detailed evidence that was given to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. It is clear, as the committee's  convener said, that the current legislation is too complex in relation to establishing who is responsible for what, specifically with regard to the costs that are involved. That was one of the strongest pieces of evidence that we heard, and came from groups such as Govan Law Centre, School Leaders Scotland, Barnardo's Scotland and Sense Scotland. Those organisations made it clear that there are issues about responsibility and costs. Three other aspects of the legislation need improvement. The first concerns the issue of representation and advocacy. Throughout the process of evidence taking, we heard several times that, under the current situation, children are often not well represented, both because their parents do not have access to good advocacy—partly because they do not always have the right information or financial resources—and because section 11 of the 2004 act does not confer on them a statutory right to advocacy. When that is set against the situation for local authorities, which often have the ability to pay for representation, there is a problem. It is appropriate at this stage to flag up the fact that the child at the centre of a placing request is currently unable, in a legal context, to express their own views, which is very much at odds with other aspects of Scots law. The second issue is that the tribunal process is viewed as unnecessarily adversarial, which can be a disincentive for parents to come forward. We heard worrying accounts of that, and I hope that we can address the matter. Thirdly, we heard compelling evidence from Children in Scotland, the Royal National Institute for the Blind and Sense Scotland that the current legislation should be amended in order to ensure that the responsibilities and duties of local authority education departments continue beyond the time when the person reaches 18, so that there is an affirmative obligation to develop a transition plan for the older student to pursue into the post-school environment. It is all very well to improve the current legislation, but we must also ensure that its interpretation within the local authority code of practice also improves. From the beginning of this debate, it has struck me that there is presently far too much scope for buck passing and for local authorities to hide behind some of the complexities of the legislation instead of facing up to their true responsibilities. Let me be quite clear—and this might go back to the point that Robert Brown raised. If there were a proper, graduated response to the needs of the child in the very first instance, and if there were a proper relationship between parent and partnership officer from day 1—as there is in many local authorities in England and in countries such  as Australia—then there would not be quite such a need for so many CSPs to be brought in, especially when the problem is already too far down the road. We should not forget that the cost of tribunals—of around £8,000 or £10,000—could instead pay for 20 hours a week of classroom support for the child. That is a strong message for us to hear. During one evidence session at the committee, I was appalled to hear that some local authorities do not provide comprehensive information to parents about their rights and the support available. Such information was lacking, so it was good to hear the minister's comments about raising the profile of that information.

Ms Brankin makes that point clearly. It is true, and we must address it. The playing field is not level. In other countries around the world, the situation is a bit better than it is in Scotland. There are lessons to be learned. It is unacceptable that wide variations exist in local authority provision. As I say, we can do something about that. I said in my opening remarks that this bill is one of the most important before Parliament. I firmly believe that to be the case, because of the enduring principle of promoting the best interests of the child in providing them with the holistic support mechanism that gives them the best possible chance in the future. As the convener of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee said, this is not a party political issue—for once. It is about our commitment to the futures of those children and of the families and carers who support them. That is why the Conservative party will support the Government.

I welcome the debate and echo the concerns that members expressed about the amount of work that has to be done. It is all too easy for our words to sound slightly hollow, given the commitment that so many carers give in an entirely selfless and humble manner. As the minister said, their commitment often goes undetected. The debate has highlighted a considerable number of challenges and sends a strong message to us all. I will concentrate on three areas. First, Carers Scotland has collected worrying evidence that 40 per cent of carers find that their access to services is poor and that the services that are available do not always meet their needs. The situation often means that the carer must make a personal sacrifice: for example, many carers are forced to stop working, to reduce the hours they work or to move to a more junior position. The problem can be more acute in rural areas, where fewer resources are available and the cost of accessing centralised services is often higher. Carers Scotland has raised an important issue. Secondly, in an age in which we are witnessing a huge increase in the elderly population, it is essential that we consider young carers. None of us knows how many young people are involved in caring for elderly grandparents. They face problems at school because of the time that they have to give up to care for another person—that gives cause for concern about the qualifications that they are undertaking—and there are emotional and social issues. Such problems can lead to truancy, neglect and the development of hostile relationships. The issue is sensitive, and it is extremely important that we take it seriously. Thirdly, the work of carers in the paid sector could be seriously undermined by members of the European Parliament in certain parties who have  voted to abandon Britain's opt-out from the 48-hour working week. If Labour and the Liberals get their way on that, it will be the end of caring arrangements as we know them in the formal sector. We must think carefully about what that would mean for people in the unpaid sector, because there could be serious repercussions for shift workers and continuity of care. That is a very serious message for Scotland and for those MEPs. I have argued in previous debates that far more must be done to use work that is carried out by voluntary sector organisations. During a debate a couple of weeks ago, I said that the sector is a "gold nugget" as far as provision is concerned. That message also emerged strongly from the committee's consideration. Good projects are happening, but there is not enough such activity. Members have made plain exactly what we must do. Margaret Mitchell talked about the increased media attention that carers have received, particularly as a result of John Suchet's comments about Alzheimer's disease. Carers experience great pain and suffering; they can be left feeling utterly isolated and unsupported as well as emotionally drained. Carers save the Scottish taxpayer billions of pounds each year, and we are indebted to them for that. It is crucial that we recognise the sacrifices that they make every day to provide a future for the person in their care. I hope that the Government will take away the message that this is a serious debate, which deserved much more than an hour of parliamentary time.

I begin by congratulating Alasdair Morgan on securing the debate. I warmly welcome the huge amount of work that has already been done on constructing a network of core paths around Scotland, and particularly the concept of a Scottish coastal path. History proves the success of walks such as the west highland way, the southern upland way and the Cape Wrath trail, of which I had the privilege of walking approximately 80 miles last year, in fairly treacherous conditions, a bit like those of today. That tested my Gore-Tex clothing and map-reading skills to their fullest extent. Those routes are well known in Scotland as excellent facilities. It goes without saying that some of the most magnificent scenery in Scotland is on the coastal edges—a fact that, for many centuries, has drawn our artists, photographers, musicians, authors and, of course, tourists. There are also many benefits to be enjoyed by local people, and I have no doubt whatever that, by securing a well-mapped and well-marked Scottish coastal path,  we would be providing much greater incentives for people to enjoy their immediate environment and the best resource that Scotland can provide, namely her scenery. Who can deny the outstanding beauty and solitude of being at one with the elements in locations such as Sandwood Bay, with its extraordinary mixtures of Torridonian gritstone and Lewisian gneiss? Those sites are testimony to the rich geological, archaeological and cultural history of Scotland, and it is little wonder that they have become a Mecca for tourists from all over the world. In John Muir, we have the perfect example of a pioneer in the field of ecology and environmentalism, who showed why it is so essential that we ensure that everything possible is done to preserve and enhance our natural world. Members are aware of my lifelong passion for outdoor learning and the benefits that it can bring, particularly to young people as they learn more about themselves and how to cope with life in a different environment and acquire the essential life skills that they need when they move away from school. There has been a very encouraging growth in the number of schools participating in the John Muir Trust, and I have no doubt that a Scottish coastal path would bring more opportunities and an enriched learning experience to a wider school community. If the Fife Coast and Countryside Trust is able to report an increase of 100,000 visitors between 2005 and 2006 on 90 miles of coastline, what numbers might appear if all 2,300 miles were opened up. I got that figure from the 11 th edition of the "Encyclopaedia Britannica", incidentally. Although the prime interest must be in making best use of Scotland's outstanding natural resources, there are many other dimensions to the issue, not least of which is the benefit to the economy. There are obvious benefits in terms of the revenue from visitor spending, but there are other benefits that might be less obvious but are nevertheless hugely important, and they concern the use of many places of accommodation along the routes. This week, I was passed information by one of our top-class outdoor education experts, who told me that two local authorities have been in contact with him to tell him that they might no longer have the resources to use his centre because of budget cuts. That concern is shared by many other outdoor education centres. How tragic it would be if excellent work were done to ensure that Scotland has a coastal path but some people were not able to get there because of inappropriate accommodation or, in some cases, a lack of expertise in staffing. Once again, I appeal to all parties in the chamber to ensure that our outdoor  facilities are used to the best possible advantage, especially now when there is so much economic uncertainty. There is also a marketing issue. We should learn from other tourist attractions about how we can improve marketing methods. I agree with what Alasdair Morgan said about focusing on articulating the best interests of neighbouring communities, as well as of those who are likely to benefit directly from the new amenity. Scotland needs some joined-up thinking in that respect. Perhaps we should look to best practice in countries such as Switzerland. There is also the issue of the much needed marine bill for Scotland. A coastal path would be crucial in raising public awareness of our precious marine environment, and allowing us a better understanding of why it is so important to future generations that we look after that environment better than we have done in the past. When the nation's health is under intense scrutiny, and more of us are being advised to take regular exercise, the motion could hardly come at a more important time. With our rights to enjoy Scotland's natural resources must come an even more important sense of responsibility, which must be to the fore when planning Scotland's coastal path. For bringing the motion to Parliament and into the public domain, I congratulate Alasdair Morgan.

This is not only an important debate but a highly topical one, given the extensive and sometimes controversial coverage that the issue has generated in recent weeks. No one disputes the need to get the approach right in children's very early years but, on this side of the chamber, we believe that there is an important debate to be had about exactly where the main focus should be, and for us that concerns support for parents, which is reflected in our amendment. It is a given assumption that children will invariably fare better when they grow up in a loving, caring and well-balanced environment in which family life is the centrepiece. The problem is that there is no ready-mix version of those factors. It is important to recognise that success can never  be prescribed merely by the actions of any Government. Of course, a Government can put in place a raft of policies that can help to create a more conducive environment in which parents and their children can thrive, but there must also be greater support for parents to recognise and adopt their full responsibilities when it comes to fulfilling their challenging role. As has been identified in many reports, the growing number of negative statistics on childhood is worrying. For example, family breakdown now costs the United Kingdom more than £22 billion a year, and one in four children is being raised in households without a resident father. A particularly sad statistic is that one in five young Scots believes that they cannot and will not make a success of their life. What needs to be done? First, parents need to be able to enjoy and feel inspired by the experience of being a parent. Two reports that were published in the past week expressed grave concern that, for too many parents, that is not the case, and although I appreciate that some of the more controversial aspects of the Children's Society report raised the hackles of some people, I share that organisation's basic concern that the modern pace of life and the obsession with economic materialism and individualism are part of the root cause of the high levels of family break-up. Too often, there is an unwritten expectation that the modern way of life, with all its slick technology, allows parents to access more diverse social and economic opportunities than ever before. That might be true for some, but I suspect that it is not true for many. Being a parent is not easy, and it is inevitable that there will be stresses and strains if both parents feel the need to work long and tiring hours as well as providing the necessary good management in the home. We need to recognise those strains and alleviate that pressure. I have been criticised in the chamber before for stating that reform of the UK benefits system can help to address the issue, but I strongly believe that it can and should. Whether we like it or not, financial resources are important. There is no reason why we cannot change the focus of child benefit to greater assist those with particularly young children. Nor is there any reason why we should ignore the warning of the Civitas report of last month, which identified that married couples can be up to 20 per cent worse off than parents who live apart. Secondly, to take up Robert Brown's point, it is essential that we extend health visits to all families with young children so that we are more responsive to the needs of individual families. It is interesting that that view is increasingly supported by general practitioners. Very early advice on  health and lifestyle is usually the single biggest factor when it comes to giving a child the best start. If there is a second given, it is the strength of the correlation between those who have poor prospects and live in deprived areas, and children who do not make progress. Many children who live in difficult economic circumstances feel disengaged from school, their families and their community. Indeed, I am amazed by the amount of public money that is spent on telling us that well-known, long-established fact. In my book, it would be far better for that money to be put directly into supporting the excellent voluntary sector groups throughout Scotland that do so much to help disadvantaged groups. Often, they are prepared to take on work that is difficult for local authorities to do within their limited scope and resources. The voluntary sector is a gold nugget when it comes to the services that it provides. I know that every party in the chamber shares that view, but I have a specific request for the cabinet secretary. The Scottish Government should fulfil its responsibility to help local communities to harness and better co-ordinate the available voluntary sector resources, especially when it comes to help with parenting skills.

That is an excellent point. I have given a lot of thought to that. As well as discussing the issues to do with children and improving parenting skills, we need to debate how we can improve educational opportunities and ensure that young people in schools have self-esteem and confidence. That is a matter to be addressed in other aspects of education policy. I hope that the Scottish Government will urgently open discussions with the Westminster Government about the tax legislation that affects philanthropic and charitable trusts. Following the abolition of advance corporation tax and its replacement with a tax that is imposed on the income revenue of the trusts, many potential charitable donors are facing the loss of much-needed financial resources that would otherwise be available for good causes. In Perthshire, for example, a large, experienced and long-established trust is facing a drain on its resources of up to £600,000 a year. That is a not inconsiderable sum, and the state of affairs does  not help to persuade more benefactors to come forward. Finally, I come to the most sensitive part of the debate, which concerns the attempt to change attitudes. I agree with the Children's Society that we need a significant change at the heart of society so that adults, be they parents or teachers, are less embarrassed to stand up for the values without which a society cannot flourish, and that includes standing up for the family. Children need and want stability, and it is what happens in a child's earliest years that provides the biggest influence on their life. There is a fine balancing act between, on the one hand, the Government standing aside to allow society to place its full trust and faith in parents and the family and, on the other, its legislating, when it has to, to provide better welfare. Like many other social debates of the modern era, the debate is highly emotive and complex, but it is one from which we must not shy away. If we do not get parenting right, we will not get the future right. I move amendment S3M-3385.1, to insert at end: "which should include greater emphasis on the development of parenting skills and harnessing the excellent work of voluntary sector groups that provide these services."

Like all other members in this debate, I warmly welcome the motion and the amendment. It is essential that we recognise the importance of the Gaelic language and culture in Scotland today. However, unlike all the other members who have spoken so far, I am not going to attempt to speak any Gaelic. Despite my passion for Scotland's Munros, I have never mastered Gaelic and it would be purgatorial for members to have to listen to my attempts to speak it. I come from a party that, as Ted Brocklebank rightly said, has given considerable support to Gaelic in the past. The Scottish Conservatives have always understood that Gaelic is an essential part of our heritage and, indeed, our social fabric.  If nothing else, it is important to reassure the 58,000 or so people who speak Gaelic that they have the Parliament's full support. That number is very close to the figure of 50,000, which is regarded as the minimum number of speakers who are needed to sustain a language. In the light of the decline that took place in the 1990s, they need that reassurance for the reasons that Johann Lamont set out in her thought-provoking speech. It is also important to congratulate all those who have been involved in preparing the draft Scottish Government Gaelic language plan consultation paper—that is as difficult for me to pronounce as the Gaelic—which has been launched today. The plan will join others from various public bodies to ensure that the recommendations of the national plan for Gaelic are met. It is good that the Gaelic board is making such progress. I understand that the next tranche of public bodies to be asked for their Gaelic plans will be the national education organisations. I am pleased about that because education is so important for the future of the language. On such an occasion it is important to mention the progress of Gaelic-medium education and of Gaelic education in general. The growth in the development of Gaelic-medium education is one of the great success stories of Scottish education in the past 25 years. More than 2,000 children throughout Scotland are now taught through the medium of Gaelic, and the exciting development is the fact that so many of them are in primary schools. We welcome the development of new Gaelic schools in Glasgow and Inverness. Research has shown the benefits of bilingualism in the intellectual development of young people, and it is critical to the survival of the language that growth continues. The fact that it has taken place largely in the nursery and primary school sectors is a reflection of the marked improvement in the facilities that are available in schools such as Sleat primary school in Skye. That is a perfect example of what can be done. As members have said, the worry is that, with budget cuts and times of economic uncertainty ahead, that progress will not be continued, so we must ensure that the children who have been taught through the medium of Gaelic at primary school can develop their language skills at secondary school. Much effort has been made in the recent past to recruit more Gaelic-speaking teachers. Although that has been relatively successful at primary school level, we desperately need to attract more teachers into secondary schools, not just to teach Gaelic but to teach other subjects through the medium of Gaelic. We must not lose the momentum that has been built up in the primary school sector; it would be a great  shame if we could not continue it in secondary schools. That is a major area to be tackled, which will depend heavily on improvements in local authority workforce planning. The Scottish Government's draft education plan mentions its commitment to the adoption of Murdo Fraser's proposal to introduce a legislative presumption against the closure of rural schools. That is very good news for the schools and communities where Gaelic has been a traditional feature. The Scottish Conservatives are hugely supportive of the Government's ambition to support Gaelic speakers and to promote Gaelic in schools and in our arts and culture. Although it can never be right to force any language on a reluctant community, we believe firmly that parents should have the right to educate their children in the language of their choice. That is why we fully support the motion. I look forward to more success in Gaelic education in the future, and I am pleased that we can lend our support to the minister.

Will the First Minister commit his Government to having a full-scale debate on school discipline in this Parliament?

Would that problem be allayed if the General Teaching Council in Scotland considered assisting the training of new probationer teachers in outdoor education as well as in specialist PE activity?

The Government has rightly acknowledged the important role that outdoor education can play in citizenship. What is the timescale for the strategic group that is working on the outdoor education programme? When will the group report on its deliberations?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects an announcement from UCAS about the tariff points that will be awarded to the new Scottish baccalaureate when it is considered as part of a university application. (S3O-5351)

Does the cabinet secretary expect that the tariff points that are to be awarded for the science baccalaureate will be the same as those awarded for a modern languages, social sciences or arts baccalaureate?

Will the minister take an intervention?

It is true that any teacher has always been involved in teaching literacy and numeracy; there is nothing new about that. We are arguing that there should be some criteria for testing literacy and numeracy. That is the crucial point.

It is fitting that the first parliamentary debate of 2009 is about the future education of our young people. I would be the first to argue that a good education is about far more than examinations, but we cannot get away from the fact that they are a crucial part of the process, so we have an obligation to get the reform process right. We face three challenges. First, we must retain the successful parts of the existing system—yes, it has some, despite what some people think—while removing or reforming the parts that are not working, so that the qualifications structure is fit for all pupils, whether they wish to have a predominantly academic focus or to be more vocationally focused. Secondly, the reform must have the confidence of the teaching profession, of the further and higher education sectors and of employers. It is imperative to recognise that whatever reform takes place must articulate fully not only with changes in the school curriculum but with the tertiary sector. Our colleges and universities face demanding times ahead economically, financially and academically, as Duncan Rice eloquently laid out in his outstanding principal's report to the University of Aberdeen, which was published last month. Qualifications reform must be debated in that context and not in a vacuum. Thirdly, we must not repeat the mistakes of 1992, when Professor Howie produced what was widely regarded as a top-class blueprint for reform, but political dogma—chiefly, the obsession with comprehensive education in late secondary school—got in the way and we ended up with a halfway house that did no one, least of all our pupils, any favours. The Scottish Conservatives fully support the Government's desire for reform, and I will use the debate to outline three specific proposals. First, it is abundantly clear that far too many pupils in Scotland do not meet basic standards in literacy and numeracy. Too many pupils leave school without being able to read, write or count up properly. The Government has acknowledged that problem, and I am sure that it is why the cabinet secretary proposes stand-alone exams in literacy and numeracy in S4 or perhaps in S3. I have no problem with more rigorous testing of the three Rs in S4 or S3, but that should happen within whatever new exam succeeds the discredited standard grade and the intermediate level. That would be similar to the previous situation with parts of the old O grade, but S4 or S3 is too late. If we examine the evidence that the schools, teaching unions and Her Majesty's Inspectorate of  Education prepare so carefully, we see that many primary school pupils have problems grasping the three Rs. Indeed, it is far too easy for pupils in Scotland to progress through successive years in primary school without ever gaining competence in reading, writing and arithmetic. Understandably, such pupils have difficulties when they enter secondary school; it is often why they lack confidence and can become disengaged. My specific demand is for a set of nationally recognised tests against which a primary 7 pupil's ability to read, write and count up can be measured properly. That does not have to be done by way of formal exams or certification, but it must be done in a way that meets national criteria, perhaps as a key component of the new curriculum 3-18 programme. The second proposal concerns pupils who wish to pursue a more vocationally focused education. Frankly, at the moment, too many of them are given a raw deal. As a result, they often face the stigma of being lower-class citizens, which is a totally unacceptable state of affairs. I remind Parliament of what Professor Howie said in 1992, which was that the comprehensive system of education had failed pupils in the upper years of secondary school because of the insistence in its one-size-fits-all approach to course work that all pupils pursue some form of academic qualification. Howie recommended a two-route system from S4 onwards, with clearly differentiated curriculum options for those who want to enter higher education as opposed to those who want more vocationally focused opportunities. This time round, 17 years on, we need to learn that lesson and provide many of the opportunities that our European competitor states offer. Thirdly, the new structure must ensure that the system caters properly for our brightest pupils by stretching their academic potential and ensuring that they can access their courses of choice. I hear the argument for greater flexibility in allowing bright pupils to take S4 exams in S3, but my line on greater flexibility is to let those bright pupils bypass S4 exams altogether. Instead of the hated two-term dash for highers in S5, bright pupils would have two years in which to study for those exams. Such pupils get a good group of highers and advanced highers in any case; their S4 exam passes become irrelevant to universities and employers alike. It goes without saying that the advanced higher is a first-class exam—in most subjects, it is superior to the A level. Indeed, it is now more widely recognised as such by a good cross-section of universities north and south of the border. That is as it should be. Is it not therefore sad that some of our brightest pupils cannot access advanced higher level courses because  their school has had to make budget cuts? Sadly, for reasons of political dogma, pupils are not allowed to take advantage of facilities in the private sector where subjects at that level are taught. Similarly, why cannot private sector school children go into the state sector? We must enter into a different ideology on the sharing of resources. Too often, people have subscribed to the fallacy that bright pupils will achieve in any environment—that the system does not matter for them. I beg to differ, and if the Government really wants to create a much better alignment between education and developing Scotland's economic potential—Scotland's education system was once renowned across the world for that very feature—I suspect that it does, too. We have a golden opportunity to improve the structure of our SQA examination structure so that it better reflects the needs of all our pupils. The current structure is far too complex and has lost much of its rigour. We need to ensure that all pupils grasp the basic skills and go on to develop their potential. I move amendment S3M-3164.1, to insert at end: "and, in particular, recognises the need to ensure that pupils in Scotland are properly schooled and tested in the basic skills of literacy and numeracy by the end of primary 7 and also to ensure that the qualifications structure better reflects the specific needs of all pupils, whether they wish to pursue courses that are more academically focused or more vocationally focused."

Will the member take an intervention?

This time last year, the Scottish Conservatives welcomed the Government's statement on fostering and kinship care and the publication of "Getting it right for every child in kinship and foster care". We welcome this opportunity to review the position one year on. During last year's debate, the minister said that we must do better and assured us of the Government's commitment to providing much better-quality care for the most vulnerable children in Scotland. I believe that that was a genuine commitment, but I cannot find evidence to support the view that the Government has managed to move things forward since December last year. In her opening speech, Rhona Brankin provided evidence that she believes shows that there are serious discrepancies between what was promised in December 2007 and what is being delivered in December 2008—namely, 14 councils are not delivering the policy. It is also true that many people who find themselves in kinship care circumstances perceive that they have been badly let down by the Government; I am sure that members have been on the receiving end of complaints in that respect. The current state of affairs is particularly unfortunate given the belief of all parties represented in the chamber that kinship care often offers the best option when children are unable to live with their parents, and our desire to see foster care and kinship care allowances placed on a much more equitable basis. Last year, we agreed that kinship care placements usually give children the best chance of overcoming the disruption and stressful circumstances that they have faced and of developing new confidence and self-esteem. Surely it is important that policy commitments reflect that objective. I share the concerns of Labour and the Liberals when they criticise the minister and the First Minister for the language that they used in December 2007. It was easy to read into that language that the Government believed that it could address the discrepancies in support for kinship care in April 2008. In particular, the language that was used implied that there would be parity between kinship carers and foster carers, because the minister said clearly that the cash settlement within the concordat covered the payments due to kinship carers "as it covers payments for foster carers."—[ Official Report , 5 December 2007; c 4085-6.]  That was an unfortunate statement. The fact of the matter is that it was slightly disingenuous because it was perfectly clear then—as it is now—that there were other obstacles in the way. What the minister meant to say was that payments to kinship carers would be phased in over the period 2008 to 2011. Just as important, the minister should have been much more up front about the issue of UK benefits. That is a genuine problem that has nothing to do with the terms of the concordat—which is not a legally binding document and, frankly, is not worth the paper it is written on. The Government should know by now that it was very dangerous to place any flagship commitment in the concordat at the same time as allowing councils to have discretion about which priorities they chose—class sizes, school meals, school buildings and teacher numbers all tell that story. Ironically, the Government's main failing on the issue has been to put far too much emphasis on a concordat deal that becomes shakier each day. It would have been much better if the focus had been on addressing the anomalies that result from the fact that kinship carers can claim child benefit, which means that, technically, they lose that amount when they are compared with foster carers, who are unable to claim child benefit. Those are the issues that will determine whether real progress is made in the area and help to eliminate the substantial discrepancies between different local authorities in Scotland, which are one of the main reasons for complaint among kinship carers. We should not forget that the overall growth in demand for these vital services means that the problem could get worse, rather than better, if we do not address the inconsistencies in the child benefit system. What matters most are the best interests of children and their carers and the need to achieve a workable and effective balance between family and state support. By definition, that means that we must establish greater consistency between Westminster and Holyrood legislation, especially on where the final responsibility should lie. We should tighten up the definition of "looked-after child" and the legal status that is accorded to the various categories. No one doubts that the area is complex and that it has suffered from a lack of clarity on the part of the Scottish Government, which is acknowledged—albeit too late in the day—in the Government's amendment. Labour's motion has forced the Government's hand. The Government has had to acknowledge the extent of concern among Scotland's kinship carers, who expected more progress to have been made by now. However, it is not reasonable to put all the blame on the concordat, because even if it worked better, many issues would remain that leave kinship  carers at a disadvantage. The Parliament must address those issues.

I welcome the ministerial statement, which commits the Government to a comprehensive review of child protection services and which details the progress that has been made in Aberdeen City Council. Let me restate the Conservatives' willingness to work with all parties to secure measures that will improve the protection of our vulnerable children. The statement is timely, given the research that was published yesterday in The Lancet , which found that one in 10 children in the United Kingdom faces some form of physical, mental or emotional abuse and, just as worryingly, that teachers, general practitioners and paediatricians have concerns about some support services. The inspection report on Aberdeen highlighted the fact that the quality of child protection services was unsatisfactory in key areas, referring particularly to some instances of high risk. I have two specific questions. First, what is being done to improve the risk and needs assessment processes and the information-sharing process? It would be reassuring to parents to know about that. Secondly, what specific measures will the Government urge Aberdeen City Council to pursue to increase the number of safe places for children who are at risk of significant harm—not only those who are facing significant harm but those who are at risk—so that there is earlier detection of potential problems?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the level of support services available to people with multiple disabilities in the Perth and Kinross Council area. (S3O-5059)

Over the past few weeks, I have been contacted by three sets of parents and carers, from across the Perth and Kinross Council area, who have expressed concerns that the provision of some support services—principally in the Bridge of Earn and Gleneagles areas—has been unsatisfactory. Will the minister agree to meet me to discuss my constituents' concerns so that they can be addressed as soon as possible?

I hope that it is clear from Scottish Conservatives' speeches that we warmly welcome Ofcom's second major review of broadcasting in Scotland, which provides an exciting opportunity for Scotland to contribute to the debate on the future broadcasting model for the UK. We have no doubt that public service broadcasting needs to be reformed before the licence runs out in 2012. I hope that we have also made it clear that there needs to be a healthy and competitive Scotland-based television programme-making sector outwith the BBC. The fact that surveys constantly show that Scottish audiences want a choice of channels for watching Scottish news reflects the quality of the regional news that is offered to them.  That is significant given that 85 per cent of the Scottish population use television as their main access to news and information. The public undoubtedly place considerable importance on the portrayal of Scotland in broadcasting. They believe that coverage should be inclusive and should provide for all audiences in Scotland and reflect Scotland's character. I am sure that it is a source of considerable concern to Parliament, and maybe even to Lothian and Borders Police, that Lord Foulkes has daily trouble with the radio knobs in his car as he seeks the mellifluous tones of Jim Naughtie and John Humphrys. However, he is right to point out that the BBC and other broadcasters face a fast-changing political and technological environment in Scotland. As Pauline McNeill said, there has been a decline in Scottish programming and funding for Scotland, which is damaging to our creative industries.

Margo MacDonald, too, has mellifluous tones. There are exciting opportunities for programme makers who choose to make the most of our strong independent sector. Scotland is the second-biggest production base outside London, with approximately 100 production companies. As my colleague Ted Brocklebank rightly said, we welcome the BBC's decision to allocate an increased share of network production to Scotland, but we hope that the target will be reached by 2012 rather than by 2016. We also hope that the increase in Channel 4's share of productions from Scotland and the introduction of BBC Alba will help to provide work for the excellent independent production sector. We must recognise that it will become increasingly difficult for PSBs to provide and improve the services that they offer. Ofcom's review highlighted the fact that public service broadcasting is at a crossroads, and John Lamont flagged up some of the implications for the Borders. Audiences might value competition for the BBC, but we need to monitor carefully the underlying economic challenges that public service broadcasting faces. Audiences might place a high value on UK-made public service programming from a mix of providers, but Ofcom makes it very clear that the costs of making programmes is going up while their main financial benefit—privileged access to spectrum—is going down. For example, if ITV is to  retain its PSB licence, the cost of having two STV licences will exceed the benefits probably by 2009-10. As a result, the Scottish Conservatives believe that the evolutionary method of reforming public sector broadcasting has most merit, even if that view is not shared by the minister. Under such an approach BBC, ITV1, Channel 4 and Five would continue to provide public service programming as they do at present, with either reduced commitments or extra public funding. As Ken Macintosh said, competition is vital if the media are to maintain transparency. As UK broadcasting history shows, Conservative Governments have largely been responsible for plurality of provision. For example, we licensed ITV way back in 1955—just before my time—and oversaw the launch of the new satellite Channel 4 in 1982 and Channel Five in 1997. I have to say, without wanting to sound too modest, that that is why we are championing a new Scottish digital channel. Such a move would give a welcome boost to smaller independent production companies to provide local news and documentaries. I once again emphasise our commitment in that respect. Mr Blair Jenkins has made it clear that there is a greater need for accountability within Scotland for the programmes that are run, and for greater influence on policy in responding to demand for different types of programme. The public are concerned about the variety and quality of the programmes they watch, so we must ensure that a workable future for public service broadcasting is developed. As the executive summary to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission Report says: "Broadcasting is important to the economic, cultural and democratic health of the nation. At its best, it has a unique power and impact which can enrich ... our thinking", our discussion and our society's knowledge. I hope, therefore, that a solution will be found to secure the future of public service broadcasting. We welcome the debate and I commend the Scottish Conservative motion to the chamber.

Throughout this entire debate, I have been persuaded of two compelling pieces of evidence. First, there is absolutely no doubt that a substantial number of children in Scotland receive neither regular nor sufficiently nourishing daily meals. For that group, where there is a clear link between poverty and unhealthy eating, it goes without saying that there should be proper financial help. Secondly, despite the evidence that has been presented by local councils being very varied in its content, there was one common theme: councils want a pragmatic approach. They want to have the freedom to use their own limited resources as they deem appropriate in their own local areas. That is very much in keeping with allowing local authorities to decide on their own priorities. At the same time, the Government is trumpeting a universal policy approach, because it says that there will be a level playing field approach to all pupils in primary 1 to 3. Let us pursue that theme. The Scottish Government assures us of three facts. It says that there is £40 million, signed, sealed and delivered, for the policy to be rolled out in Scotland; that there are 118,000 additional pupils who will be helped by the policy; and that a quarter of Scottish schoolchildren are in poverty. The minister did not seem to get his sums right, but even simple arithmetic—and perhaps even logic—tells us that the substantial proportion of those 118,000 additional pupils are not in poverty. Is spending precious resources, perhaps up to £30 million, really the fairest and most efficient way forward? I think not, and I would not mind betting that parents across Scotland would rather see the money going to more deserving cases. For example, £4 million could be spent on building a new primary school, and there would not have to be any arguments about using private finance initiative, public-private partnership or Scottish Futures Trust funding sources. It would be an easy option.  Whether we like it or not, one of the given laws of economics is that choices must be made on how best to spend limited resources. The SNP proposal promised faithfully that it would deliver free school meals to all P1 to P3 pupils. Incidentally, that is despite much of the dietary evidence suggesting that the money would be better spent on the under-fives. The historic concordat clearly says: "Assuming the legislation is passed, local authorities will provide free school meals to all P1 to P3 pupils". The truth is that that promise is based on a false premise. In relation to the Scottish statutory instrument, we are debating councils being given powers, not an obligation, to provide free school meals across the board. If this is such a flagship policy, why was the Scottish Government not prepared to legislate? Is not the real truth that it knows that this policy, just like the policy on class sizes, cannot be delivered? I move amendment S3M-2958.1, to insert at end: "but in doing so, calls on the Scottish Government not to impose any financial penalty, directly or indirectly, on any local authority that exercises its discretion not to provide school meals free of charge to all pupils in primaries 1 to 3."

Is the Scottish Government able to confirm whether it is having regular discussions with voluntary sector groups that are involved in providing support for young parents with children in the early years?

I thank the cabinet secretary for prior sight of the statement, and I assure her that the Scottish Conservatives will support the overall objective of boosting the number of specialist science and technology graduates in Scotland. That objective builds on the previous Executive's plans, and it is in line with ensuring that educational research and economic objectives are pursued in parallel. It also overcomes some of the doubts that colleges, universities and employers have had about the future in the area. I welcome the determination to provide more practical work and related experience for our top school leavers, but I note that the cabinet secretary believes that that can be achieved primarily in the school set-up by the introduction of a new Scottish science baccalaureate. I have three specific questions on that. First, does the cabinet secretary agree with the academic who said this morning that, because of the restrictions in many schools on offering advanced highers, perhaps only 200 pupils in any year group would take the Scottish science baccalaureate? If she does not agree, how many pupils does she estimate will end up with the award? Secondly, can the cabinet secretary provide details of how the Scottish baccalaureate will be viewed for university entrance? Most specifically, will a pupil with the award gain advantage over pupils who do not have the award but who perhaps have better qualifications across the curriculum? Finally, will she provide a reason why only some subjects are deemed worthy of inclusion in a Scottish baccalaureate system?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many schools it envisages will be built under the Scottish Futures Trust in this parliamentary session. (S3O-4866)

Can we now assume, then, that the cabinet secretary expects each local authority in Scotland to bring forward proposals for new schools? Will he encourage councils such as Fife Council, in my region, to bring forward a new school at Taybridgehead, which the Liberal Democrats promised but never delivered?

It would be a very dispassionate human  being who could remain untouched by recent events related to child care and looked-after children, so let me say unequivocally that we support the Government and the other political parties when it comes to taking this matter very seriously indeed, and especially when it comes to finding a more joined-up approach between the professionals and carers who are involved in the lives of Scotland's looked-after children. Last week's television images were a stark reminder of just how vulnerable some children are, and of the difficulties that we face in adopting policies that can deal successfully with cases in which the child's voice is never heard. Members will be aware of the vast array of reports on the subject. I thank people from the huge array of public bodies who regularly provide members with informative briefings. The Centre for Social Justice estimates that family breakdown now costs the United Kingdom about £22 billion a year, not including costs to the care system. That speaks volumes about the scale of the task that is in front of us. The centre makes it clear that our current care system is overloaded, that too much is demanded of our social work services, and that morale can, at times, be very low. Naturally, none of that is helped when serious mismanagement occurs, as was revealed last week both north and south of the border. Members will also be mindful of the fact that the number of children and young people who come under the "looked-after" heading has been increasing year on year for the past two decades, as has the number of child protection referrals. I have no doubt whatever about the Government's commitment—or, indeed, the commitment of the other political parties—to addressing the matter, including the very difficult and sensitive issue of child protection legislation. Such commitment was evident in the cabinet secretary's swift and honest response to the publication of the damming report on the state of children's services in Aberdeen City Council, to which Karen Whitefield referred. In addressing all such matters effectively, I hope that the Government will be mindful of the following important principles. First, it would be totally unacceptable if the large number of financial commitments that are being placed on councils at present—a time of economic downturn—were to mean that there will be a squeeze put on the funds that are available to support children's services. It is to be hoped that councils and the Government will, via the regular concordat discussions, recognise just how important this area of support is. We need to be sure that councils are able to provide a structure that is both secure and transparent, and which represents best value for money.  In that context, it will be important to make the most effective utilisation of the services that are offered by the voluntary sector, which in so many cases is able to provide vital support and expertise to local authorities in providing quality care. Just last week, I was told by a charitable trust that because of tax changes in the past few years—principally, the fact that advanced corporation tax was replaced with taxes on income revenue—the trust is more than £500,000 less able to support good causes each year. That area of policy needs urgent attention. There is also the question of educational provision for looked-after children. The recent publication of the HMIE report on improving education provision for our looked-after children makes clear what was already known—that, overall, looked-after children face a bleak outlook when it comes to educational opportunities, particularly in the tertiary education sector. The report recommends that a number of improvements be implemented, including a clear vision for councils on the specific educational needs of looked-after children; increased support for children leaving care who are beyond the school-leaving age; and better methods for assessing the needs of looked-after children, especially in regard to access to the wider curriculum. That is why the Scottish Conservatives also believe that better educational support must be offered to children who are excluded from school, so that they can be provided with a more focused and disciplined approach that allows them to gain more confidence and self-esteem. We have a wealth of expertise in many voluntary sector bodies—whether in groups such as the Prince's Trust, Fairbridge or eTEN, or in private sector groups such as Spark of Genius—and we need to ensure that they are fully supported and known about by the communities that wish to make use of their excellent support. It is simply not acceptable that some of our children are excluded and have nothing to do or any means of feeling they have something worthwhile to contribute. We welcome the pilot schemes that have been conducted across 18 council areas in Scotland, and have examined a variety of techniques to provide direct support to help youngsters become the major stakeholders in planning their educational and employment futures. The outcome of those pilots saw improvements in attendance, advancement in assessment levels, faster and more effective educational progress, and indirect improvements in the level of support for parents and carers. As Karen Whitefield and Margaret Smith said, those areas require considerable attention. However, as the minister said in his opening remarks, perhaps the most important issues to  tackle in the longer term are the problems with parenting. I hope that we in Parliament can agree that the problem is among the most acute social difficulties that face this country. In far too many cases we are now witnessing a third generation of parents who lack basic parenting skills—parents who no longer know how to pass on the skills because they themselves were children of parents who did not possess those skills. Although the Government can help—as it is doing in improving kinship and foster care, in reforming the children's hearing system, and in developing legislation that is presently under consideration—it cannot be expected to bear the entire burden of the problem. As Margaret Smith said, parents are the most effective means of bringing up children, so we need to ensure that we have social policies that address that issue, and that we have tax policies that create much greater incentives for families to stay together and which help a parent to stay at home in the earliest years of a child's life. Care at that early stage is vital. We will work with the Government and, more important, we will work on a cross-party basis to improve the outcomes for our looked-after children and for all those who are such vital links in the human chain. However, we also believe that we have to do more in other policy areas in order, we hope, to reduce the numbers of children who are placed in care in the first place.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to address the decline in breeding seabird populations. (S3O-4761)

Is the minister aware that the number of breeding puffins on the Isle of May in my region—they are one of our most popular and iconic seabirds—has dropped by a staggering 28,000 pairs in the past five years, after almost 40 years of rapid population growth? In light of their tremendous value to the ecosystem and to tourism in north-east Fife, will the minister take action to address, and hopefully reverse, that deeply worrying decline in puffin numbers?

It goes without saying that it is the moral as well as the legislative obligation of any Parliament in the democratic world to ensure that we protect our children, both in relation to their inalienable human rights before the rule of law and as looked-after individuals who have not yet arrived at adult independence. No one who bases their politics on democratic ideals can fail to recognise the importance of that obligation or the principles that underpin the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. We should not underestimate the scale of the task of implementing the principles or the difficulty of dealing with situations where they are wilfully ignored or misunderstood. Who can argue about the plight of the many thousands of children who find themselves the innocent victims of social and economic injustices? That is why we will do everything that we can to support the Government in its aim to address those injustices, be that by improving support for looked-after children, young carers and disabled youngsters or by reforming children's panels. As we agree today to do our best to protect our children—as I am sure we will—not just in the usual spirit of consensus but because we know that it is right, I firmly believe that it is our duty to maintain perspective. I agree entirely with the children's commissioner when she says that we need to set out where the priorities lie, given that some of the recommendations are much more fundamental than others. Part of the debate is necessarily about the role of the state—whether it is acceptable to expect the state to legislate on all the issues cited in the report and whether there is either a political or moral obligation to adopt every recommendation. Therein lies the philosophical challenge, which means accepting the principles of the convention, but allowing states the freedom to interpret its articles in ways that do not undermine the judgments of sovereign or devolved Parliaments. I go further: there is also the philosophical challenge of ensuring that, where possible, parents can get on with the job of being parents without fear of the nanny state or interventionism,  which are in direct conflict with personal liberty. There is a very fine line between ensuring that the law is measured and protective but not intrusive and autocratic, especially in a country such as Scotland, where the relevant laws often cross international, European, Westminster and Holyrood boundaries. Furthermore, let us not forget that along with the long list of rights comes just as long a list of responsibilities. We want to inculcate those responsibilities in our children as they grow up, but as adults we also have responsibilities to ensure that we protect the physical and mental status of childhood, which is a distinct phase of development in a young person's life that is not adolescence or adulthood. Too often these days, we are guilty of expecting the young, and sometimes very young children, to think and understand like adults, and in some cases to have views on some of the most complex and sensitive matters. I do not know the answer to this, but while being a parent has never been easy, I suspect that there is some justification these days for believing that it has become increasingly difficult. For example, there is the modern obsession with rights and how they can be used to challenge almost every aspect of our social, political and economic lives. The more we legislate, the greater the danger of making bad and inappropriate legislation and stifling human freedom. The five-yearly audit report that we are required to submit to the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child is intended to be a check and a balance when it comes to how we protect our children. It is designed to ask searching questions, as it should, and to help us take stock of how far we have travelled and how far we still have to go to make improvements. While on the Conservative benches we accept most of the recommendations, we feel that the legal and libertarian implications of some should be the subject of more extensive debate. However, I welcome any report that makes us think carefully about what we do in this hugely complex area. I will finish by addressing education and health policy. Perhaps the greatest gifts that we give children are health and education, but, sadly, those are denied to far too many children throughout the world. The many submissions that I and other members received prior to the debate made it abundantly clear that effective policy making in education, health and economic development, rather than more and more legislation, is far more likely to deliver improvements for our vulnerable children.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it can provide details of the likely timescale for publication of the results of the recent consultation process on SQA exam reform. (S3O-4682)

In light of that answer and of the cabinet secretary's announcement of a one-year delay to the implementation of the new structure of the Scottish Qualifications Authority, is it still the Government's intention to introduce a Scottish baccalaureate in science and languages and, if so, what will the timescale be?

I, too, thank the cabinet secretary for prior sight of the statement. Does she accept, though, that the fundamental problem here is the so-called  historic concordat between central and local Government? The cabinet secretary came into office on flagship policies such as reducing class sizes, increasing nursery places and introducing free school meals—all centrally directed targets—but at the same time she told the local authorities that they would have far more freedom to set their own priorities. Local authorities are now thinking that, because they do not have the right resources, they cannot deliver on those targets. I agree with the cabinet secretary that we are talking about people's jobs and livelihoods, but the fundamental flaw is that we cannot have central Government targets and, at the same time, expect local authorities to set their own targets. Is it time to admit that the historic concordat will not work and that we should allow head teachers to have far more control over the employment of their workforce?

It would be foolhardy of anyone to ignore the huge opportunity that is presented to Scotland as a result of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's report, which, as Ted Brocklebank said, we Conservatives support warmly, because we believe that it offers Scottish media a new lease of life and an important new market in which to operate. At a time when the cultural and economic life of Scotland is under huge financial pressure, with all the uncertainties that that brings to the organisations concerned, it is incumbent upon the members of this Parliament to ensure that there is light at the end of the tunnel and, in particular, that a new public service Scottish digital channel can provide new scope and harness the undoubted talent in the creative industries. In a world in which there is increasing interest in local news and documentaries, the new channel ought to provide a new framework for developing the coverage of some of the smaller companies—which are often some of our most creative companies—which are often left out in national coverage. Perhaps it will even attract some cricket coverage in Scotland, which would suit the passion of at least some of us in the chamber. It is also important to recognise the key role that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee will be expected to play in promoting the best interests of Scottish broadcasting in the new digital age. Although we, unlike the Scottish National Party, cannot be persuaded of the arguments for devolving broadcasting to Holyrood entirely, for the simple reason that Scottish interests are best served by the financial economies of scale and international reputation that come of being part of the UK network, we believe that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee has a vital role to play in ensuring that there is a fully collaborative approach within the industry—a point that Blair Jenkins made in his submission to the committee on 24 September. Shared objectives and well-structured links with industry and educational establishments will be paramount, as will ensuring that creative Scotland has what Blair Jenkins described as a "muscular" role. Perhaps we can encourage the Government to be specific about what the roles will be, particularly in relation to paragraphs 28 and 30 of what the First Minister delivered, because there is still confusion about the roles that creative Scotland and Scottish Enterprise will play. We also share Mr Jenkins's view that there is a need for greater accountability in Scotland for the programmes that are run and for greater influence  over policy in responding to the demand in Scotland for different types of programme. If that means extending the debate and including it in the remit of the Calman commission, we would have no problem with that. Members of the public are concerned about the variety and quality of the programmes that they watch. We must ensure that we have a workable structure. There is a balance to be struck in ensuring that Scotland gets her fair share of funding but also retains the advantage of sharing a network that is renowned world wide. The new Scottish digital channel will not be able to maintain that balance on its own, but it will be a major contributing factor. When the Scottish Broadcasting Commission concluded its report, it spoke of optimism that the industry had turned a corner. Mr Jenkins made it clear that things had been allowed to slip back badly in recent years because there was an absence of collective determination. It is my belief that this debate is crucial in setting out the principles by which this Parliament can support the Scottish media and that it should be the clearly defined role of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee to monitor that process in the years ahead. Scottish broadcasting has a real opportunity in the months ahead. That is why I am pleased to support the Conservative amendment.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the merits of its economic strategy in relation to the Council of Economic Advisers' recommendations on education, skills and lifelong learning. (S3O-4121)

The Council of Economic Advisers referred to the need to ensure that students regard education as a personal investment and to the importance of closer links between universities and the business sector. Therefore, does the cabinet secretary agree that it would have been sensible for the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to have allowed the business sector to be represented on the Government task force that is reviewing the future of our universities?

In 2006, the GTC's probationer programme was described as world class, as were many of the methodologies that are used in the continuing professional development programme to increase incentive and professional standards. Personally, I do not think that there is any doubt that the quality of aspiring teachers who are moving into the profession is as good as it has ever been. It is ludicrous to assert that any Government must be able to find every qualified teacher and probationer a permanent job. That is naive in the extreme and pays no heed to the nature of the teaching profession. Nonetheless, the current situation, as outlined by Labour this morning and by many reports in the media, is totally unacceptable. I will spell out what needs to be done and will focus on two slightly different issues. The first is the lack of certain jobs; the second is a mismatching of skills. In my opinion, those two issues require different solutions. In talking about the lack of jobs, especially in some urban areas, let us be clear about what has happened. Councils such as the City of Edinburgh Council and Glasgow City Council, which have the potential to employ a large number of teachers and are often seen as attractive areas in which to teach, are under huge financial pressures in their education budgets. Those pressures arise from the class size policy, from uncertainty in the school building programme for the school estate, and from curriculum change.

I am very aware of that fact. I want to concentrate on the fact that the financial strictures are causing part of the problem. The financial strain on councils is enormous. Although, in theory, the class size policy ought to provide more jobs in primaries 1 to 3, it is abundantly clear that the financial pressures are far too great to permit that. They create the potential for cutbacks in other year groups—indeed, many councils have said that. Last week, I was strongly critical of the rigidity of the Government's class size policy, and I will be so again this morning. Indeed, I will ask for the abandonment of the policy as a directive from central Government. Having spent a great deal of time listening to evidence in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee and to the parliamentary responses that have been given to my colleague, David McLetchie, I am utterly convinced that the cost of the policy to the rest of the education service—especially in respect of teaching jobs—has not been properly thought through. If, on one hand, we try to free up the market by allowing COSLA, through the historic concordat, to have more say in the placing of teachers yet, on the other hand, we fix one side of the market, we will end up with two incompatible economic systems. Given Alex Salmond's recent conversion to Thatcherite economics, I would have thought that the Government could work that out for itself. The rigidity of the policy manifests itself in other ways. Yesterday, I listened to a headteacher telling the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee that, if he wants his school to advertise a vacancy, three things can happen. The vacancy can be advertised in the newspapers; there can be a transfer of a surplus teacher from another school; or a commitment can be made to take on a probationer, once they are fully qualified. However, the decision is not his—it is the local authority's, and he has to go along with it even if he has interviewed some very good candidates. Because of the barriers of the situation, he is in a difficult position. That cannot be right. There is a complete inconsistency between the aspirations in the teaching profession and what councils will allow because of red tape and budgetary restraints. We need a much more flexible approach that is properly driven by the demand for jobs as opposed to the artificial targets that the Government is trying to impose. Above all, headteachers must have far more power.  Another issue is the mismatch of skills, and I find it especially worrying that the Government is not spending enough time on the matter. I appreciate that the cabinet secretary has given £9 million to create 300 more jobs, but are those jobs the right ones? Is some of the problem not down to geographical immobility or a poor knowledge of the marketplace?

I simply hope that the cabinet secretary appreciates that the issue is very important. It goes without saying that we cannot have excellent schools unless we have excellent teachers. Scotland has the potential to have just that, but not under the present structure. Government needs to understand the nature of the problem, to address the right issues and, above all, to abandon its unworkable policy on class sizes, which is doing so much damage to everything else in education. I move amendment S3M-2525.1, to leave out from "show leadership" to end and insert "make a ministerial statement on this subject as soon as practicable following receipt of the report of the Teacher Employment Working Group."

Let me make it clear at the outset that the Conservatives fully support the need to improve services for vulnerable children in Scotland and the need for a united approach throughout the chamber. Although the focus of this debate must necessarily be the scrutiny of the accompanying documents that set out the Government's proposals to improve services—two documents, one of them substantial, which incidentally did not appear on our desks until 4.30 yesterday afternoon, half an hour after the time for lodging amendments—some other issues need to be identified to have an overall perspective of improving the opportunities for our children. I will address those later. In my speech yesterday, I was critical of the Government's education policy in other areas, but I want to make it clear that getting it right for every child is crucial because of the following key principles, three of which are successfully embedded in the pathfinder schemes: the local development of policies, dependent on the needs of the particular local community; improved communication between the different agencies involved in caring for vulnerable children; much greater consistency in the team that looks after each child; a reduction in the bureaucracy that accompanies the whole process; and an end to the wide regional variations in the quality of care that is offered. The most frequent complaint that we hear—I am sure that this is true for many MSPs—is that a child is passed over to too many different individuals in the process of their care. That factor can create confusion and sometimes raise  questions of trust for the child and for the parents or guardians. That is why it is so crucial that a lead professional is identified when several different individuals or groups are involved. It is good to see that that principle is at the heart of the Government's proposals. We also warmly welcome the Government's consultation process to look at reform in the children's hearings system—a system which has not been short of its critics in recent times, despite the fact that it has traditionally brought many benefits to our Scottish justice system. It is undoubtedly in need of reform, principally to ensure that its workings are much more efficient, but I hope that the Government will also accept that the reform process, as well as the developments set out by Fiona Hyslop this morning, can be strengthened if we adopt other measures too. Before the recess, Annabel Goldie made clear our commitment to having the courage of our convictions to examine other issues on the parenting front—suggestions that are not always very popular. She made it clear that we need to show both compassion and determination when confronting the fact that a large number of parents in society today genuinely find it difficult to pass on parenting skills to their children because they themselves were the children of parents who did not possess those skills. In 2003, the number of children referred to the children's reporter on the ground of lack of parental care was more than 16,000, and by 2006 that figure had increased to 19,500. When we consider, as Rhona Brankin mentioned, that many of those children suffer neglect because of drug or alcohol abuse, we cannot shy away from confronting the problem head on. A national debate is needed on the subject. I want also to stress our commitment in the Conservative party to policies at United Kingdom level that will encourage families to stay together and allow parents real choices when it comes to deciding what is best for their children. Family breakdown now costs the UK £20 billion a year, and if we do not have that underlying support through the UK tax and benefit system, the policies over which this Parliament has control will probably be much less effective. We believe that the foundation of the family unit is based on the institution of marriage, and it is vital that we end the perverse financial disincentive against couples who to choose to marry. The working tax credit received by couples should reflect that, and there should also be a transferable tax allowance for married couples. In the previous session, the Education Committee and the Parliament both held important debates on the two issues of kinship care and  child protection. As the minister will acknowledge, they are difficult areas of legislation but nonetheless important when it comes to proper care for our most vulnerable children. We are very supportive of the Government's ambition to improve support for kinship and foster carers, despite some of the complexities that such legislation involves. Such carers are hugely important, given that both kinship and foster care can often—though not always—provide a more stable environment than when children are placed in residential establishments. We will also do everything that we can to support the Government on the difficult issue of child protection. I have no doubt that there will be much scope for controversy in other areas of policy debate, but I hope that we can reach a consensus on the basic principles. We would be letting down our children if that was not the case. I have one serious word of caution. The services are both expensive and time consuming, given the specialist nature of professional care that is required. In a time of economic downturn—in all probability, recession—there will be even stronger temptations for local councils, which are largely responsible for the services, to make cutbacks. Councils are already facing severe difficulties because of other policies. The figures are plain to see, and it would be all too easy for exactly the same to happen with child care services, too. That is a very stark message if we really are to get it right for every child.

It was good to hear the First Minister speaking this morning about the importance of a  good-quality Scottish education. I have absolutely no problem with most of the comments on education that he made this morning, specifically when it comes to the children's hearings bill and the rural schools bill, but I have serious concerns—as will every parent, teacher and pupil across Scotland—about what he did not say. Although I do not doubt the Government's commitment to our young people—my goodness, we get told about it often enough—the Government has missed a huge opportunity to focus on the most pressing issues in our classrooms. For more than a year, rather than address our schools' problems, its obsession with the flagship policy of smaller class sizes has caused schools more trouble. I refer most especially to the imposition of artificial and unworkable targets instead of policies that would allow Scotland to deploy better the outstanding professional talent that it has in the teaching profession, too many members of which cannot get a job at the moment, and to deal with the pressing issue of discipline in our classrooms. I am in no doubt that parents, teachers and pupils want the focus to be on providing the best teaching and educational opportunities that are available and on developing policies that will remove from our classrooms the persistent troublemakers who stop other children learning properly. I will now deal specifically with two of the Government's policies—the class size policy and the policy on physical education—and explain why the Scottish Conservatives believe that radical change is required on both fronts. A year ago in the Parliament, I raised serious concerns about the ability of my local authority in Perth and Kinross to deliver the class size policy, citing the implementation costs estimated by the council's department of education. At the same time, Glasgow City Council and the City of Edinburgh Council stated their concerns, and it was not long before other councils expressed the same views. Witnesses who have appeared before the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee and members of the media have made it plain that the majority of local authorities cannot implement the policy within the given timetable with the extremely limited resources that have been provided. It is our contention that they should never have been forced to attempt to do so. Of course smaller class sizes help the learning process—that is a given in virtually every educational institution in the land—but the decision about numbers should rest with a headteacher, who is best placed to know what his or her school is getting up to, rather than with a Government or a local authority that wants to impose a rigorous one-size-fits-all policy that pays  no heed to local circumstances or to different teaching experiences. What do we say to the parents of the twins in East Lothian who have had to face the threat of their family being split apart because of the bureaucracy of a Government target, to the teachers in rural primary schools who might lose an outstanding colleague because of a Government target, or to the pupil in a secondary school in the Borders who finds that his advanced higher courses will not run because of the priority that the Government gives to meeting class size targets? That is not my idea of what good-quality education is all about, and I am pretty sure that it is not what parents and teachers think it should be all about, either. The class size policy is not working and it is time that the Government admitted that. I turn to PE, outdoor education and the Government's manifesto pledge to give children two hours of PE a week. The situation did not look too promising when Maureen Watt suggested that the two hours might involve walking to school. That was followed by an embarrassing Fosbury flop when the Government got itself in the most unbelievable muddle about whether PE activities would be undertaken by specialist PE teachers. That does not sit well with one of the five great mantras of the Scottish Government—to foster a healthier Scotland—nor does it sit well with what our Olympic gold medal winners are saying. They are pressing the case for far greater commitment in that area, particularly at grass-roots level. Every child, no matter who they are, should have the opportunity to participate fully in PE, in sport and in outdoor education.

Absolutely. I agree entirely with what Mr Harper says. Having such a target is simply the beginning. I have been extremely encouraged by the noises that have been made by the Government and by other parties in the Parliament on our proposals on outdoor education, which represent a start. It is every child's right to participate in outdoor education. That is why the Scottish Conservatives made new proposals for an outdoor education policy that would cost £10 million, which we believe could easily be funded through a combination of Government and private sector resources. Such a policy would mean that outdoor  education would be available to every pupil in Scotland at least once between primary 7 and secondary 3. In the previous session, the Government took what it said was the bold step of allowing local authorities to have more scope over the running of our schools. However, the reality is that that principle is totally undermined by the obsession with an unworkable, centralist class size policy. This session, the Government should take the even bolder step of allowing headteachers to run our schools and deliver excellence and discipline in our classrooms. That really would be getting it right for every child.

None of us who represent Mid Scotland and Fife need reminding of the horrors that afflicted the residents of Milnathort in 2006 or those which afflicted the residents of Perth and Strathearn in 1993. As Peter Peacock, Nanette Milne and Tavish Scott said eloquently, it goes without saying that severe flooding is one of the worst natural disasters that can affect a community. It can have long-term psychological and social effects, as well as the substantial economic costs to which Mary Scanlon referred in citing the example of Johnstons of Elgin. It seems obvious that flood management is hugely important. That is why we welcome the debate and the Government's determination to develop a modern approach to flood management via a new flood prevention bill for Scotland. The Scottish Conservatives congratulate Roseanna Cunningham and the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee on all their hard work in bringing together many experts in the field in an area that Des McNulty described as one of the most important to have come before the Parliament. It is useful that the debate has coincided with the publication of the report of the independent review by Sir Michael Pitt in England—a report that has further focused minds on the extent of the problems that we face and which has made it abundantly clear that traditional solutions to flooding are increasingly found wanting, because  recent policy has been far too biased in favour of hard engineering options. In that respect, the consultation processes of the Scottish Government and the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee have both been effective in bringing forth comment from a wide range of interested stakeholder groups, whose expertise is crucial in advising the Parliament about how Scotland can refocus flood protection policy. Indeed, the scientific debate appears to be well advanced. However, there are some key messages that we need to take on board, principally those that involve addressing the current shortage of engineers and people with hydrological expertise. There was a strong message from several witnesses that national legislation must clearly define where responsibilities lie in a language that is familiar to the general public as well as to the scientists and the technical experts. If there seems to be overwhelming support in favour of the catchment principle of flood management, legislation must reflect that in an unambiguous and workable way so that there is no repeat of the difficulties that were encountered in the aftermath of the recent Kinross and Milnathort floods. Transparency and accountability are essential, as is the existence of strong working relationships between all those involved, rather than there being scope for buck passing. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee has been clear about the need to avoid another layer of bureaucracy. We do not believe that we require an additional watchdog. However, there is undoubtedly a need for a national nerve centre, in the form of SEPA, to provide more accurate flood warning information and more careful and co-ordinated planning of flood management, which, I hope, will be of huge help to Scottish local authorities when they create their maps of old drainage ditches and streams in their areas. It is essential that lines of responsibility are clear and that an assurance is given to people that their communities will be safeguarded. In that regard, I take on board the points that Roseanna Cunningham made at the end of her speech about some of the issues around the information process, which might not be covered by the legislation. We do not want any future flood prevention schemes, such as those that are proposed in Almondbank, Birnam and Bankfoot, to be put in jeopardy because of disputes about where responsibility lies or a lack of funding. I join other members in asking the minister whether he will soon be able to provide detail in that respect, especially on how the additional funds will be distributed in order to provide funding for such flood mitigation schemes.  As I said, no one needs to be reminded of the horrors that flooding can bring. It is vital that we give full support to the proposal for a new flood prevention bill.

I add my congratulations to those already offered to Karen Whitefield on securing the debate. I also apologise in advance for not being able to stay right to the end; I have another parliamentary engagement at 6 o'clock. Like other members, I warmly welcome the report by the commissioner for children and young people. For the very reasons that Karen Whitefield and Mary Mulligan mentioned, issues that do not always make the headlines are nonetheless important to us in the Parliament. As the report explains, the routes that young people take out of care and into independent living are numerous and complex. No two cases are the same, so we must be careful not to make sweeping generalisations. The report is right to focus on the large number of looked-after children who are due to leave care, particularly from residential units, once they reach 16. The situation surrounding the provision of care and the circumstances that lead to a young person being placed in care vary immensely. So too do the personalities and capabilities of the young people involved. While leaving care for independent living might be the correct choice for one 16-year-old, it may be entirely inappropriate and extremely difficult for another. I am wary of suggestions that all those young people must remain in care until the age of 18, but I support the idea that no young person should feel obliged to leave care, or be pressured into leaving care upon reaching their 16 th birthday, simply because it is "the right thing to do." As highlighted by the report, the transition from care to independence, regardless of destination, is a tricky and uncertain time. To aid the transition from care to independent living, support for young care leavers should be available and, if  appropriate, it should continue to be available once that transition has been completed. Moreover, the decision to leave care prior to 18 should be that of the individual involved. We should seek to better educate young people on the options available to them and the implications of making certain choices. At the moment, too many young people choose to leave care, especially from residential units, without the help or support that we would wish to be the normal practice. It is vital that young care leavers are adequately equipped with the necessary skills and knowledge to cope with the challenges that independence can bring. Too often, that is not the case. We must never forget that these are some of our most vulnerable young people, who frequently—through no fault of their own—lack the basic levels in education and have little in the way of training or national qualifications. Currently, too high a percentage of 16 to 18-year-olds are not in education, employment or training, and all too often young care leavers encounter financial, education and employment problems that can result in them ending up in that bracket. There are strong and powerful messages in the report, to which it is important that the Parliament listens carefully. I am grateful to have had the opportunity to debate such a worthwhile subject. Social care does not always get the attention or the profile that it deserves. However, in light of this debate and the work of the commissioner, Kathleen Marshall, and her team, I hope that all the political parties will work together to ensure that young care leavers can make the transition from care to independent living as successfully as possible and at a time that is appropriate for them.

From what has been said this afternoon, it is clear that the most important objective must be to ensure that the Parliament sends out the right message to the cultural and artistic world in Scotland as it faces up to a testing set of circumstances, particularly in an economic climate that is getting increasingly difficult. Whether we are talking about a single artist or a major international company, that world is a crucial part of our national heritage and our future social and economic infrastructure, so we have a duty to protect it and to enhance its interests. Some of the most interesting sessions in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee were those in which we debated the terms "arts", "culture" and "creativity". As Ian McKee rightly said, defining those terms is not an easy task, but Malcolm Chisholm in his eloquent speech and Robin Harper made the important point that we must have parameters as we debate the bill. Dr Donald Smith of the Scottish Storytelling Centre told the committee: "if we do not begin with a workable definition, all the rest becomes difficult." He said that that might affect the accountability for delivering the remit. That is a lesson to learn. It is not easy to give definitions but, as Malcolm Chisholm said, we should not shy away from that important task. That issue precipitated debate in the committee about whether legislation is necessary. At times, the minister was not entirely convincing in speaking about why the bill is required to provide the new body, creative Scotland, with its functions. Those functions will be more diverse than the combined Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen functions, but the funding will be fairly tight. However, on the basis that the committee has agreed to accept the minister's assertion that a legislative requirement exists, the key focus of the debate must be to ensure that we make the bill as good as possible and worthy of the time that it has been given. We must live up to our name as a committee—Dr Smith described it as having done "an effective job in bringing all the issues to the surface."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 7 May 2008; c 947, 948.] It is now Parliament's job to deal with those issues head on. I hope that the minister means what she says when she states that we must end the doubt and confusion over whether creative Scotland or Scottish Enterprise will be the lead body. As  Jeremy Purvis said, we have had a raft of contradictory statements on that, which is not convincing. I reiterate the point that many other members have made that we need clarification on that before stage 2. That debate may reflect the conflict between the objectives of fostering artistic excellence and ensuring economic viability. Those two objectives do not always go together, but it is extremely important that ministers resolve that issue before we move on. Heather Jack, of the Scottish Government's Europe, external affairs and culture directorate told us: "there must be value ... in having a more coherent approach between the bodies".—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 30 April 2008; c 897.] As Ted Brocklebank rightly said, into that debate must come the role of our universities and local authorities, which are often in the front line in supporting artists who are starting out on their professional careers. A second challenge that we face concerns the desire to retain the arm's-length approach by ministers to cultural and artistic direction. The bill properly aspires to ensure that ministers do not interfere in creative Scotland's funding allocation process or in the judgments that affect the overall artistic direction of our national companies. Those judgments must always be reserved for those who have specific knowledge and experience in the relevant areas. We must be mindful of the need to ensure that the bill does not undermine that independence in any way. We need a little clarification of some of the language in the bill in that respect. Scotland is blessed with immense talent in our artistic, creative and cultural industries and I have no doubt about the Government's passion—or that of any political party in the Parliament—for developing that further. However, serious thinking needs to be done before stage 2, especially about how to provide clarity of purpose, how to infuse real ambition, at home and abroad, and how to provide the sector with much greater economic support than it currently enjoys.

This time last year, I was writing my last set of school reports. I could not help but be struck by the change in style that had taken place since I began my teaching career. Gone were the days of bluntly telling a parent that their little treasure had failed an exam and in were the days of saying that they had met the grade-related criteria in question 1, but done not so well in questions 2 to 10. As Rob Gibson said, in education these days, the way in which things are said seems to matter more than what is said. Frankly, this is where the Government has got itself into what the French would describe as "une débâcle totale"—I am practising for the French baccalaureate that we hear we are getting—otherwise known as a complete mess. Let us take class sizes. I am sure that the Scottish Government is well intentioned in seeking  to reduce the numbers in primaries 1 to 3 to a maximum of 18. However, ministers have completely failed to realise that the directors of education in our local authorities are telling them that, in many cases, setting specific targets is not the right way to do things. The Government insists on doing that, but authorities are telling it that delivering on class sizes simply cannot happen without spending an additional £420 million on more teachers and classrooms. That is many times the sum that the SNP originally estimated—so much for a Government that prides itself on numeracy and literacy. Take the example that Jamie Stone mentioned of Brora primary school in the Highlands, which is being forced to lose a member of staff simply because its school roll has dropped from 97 to 96 pupils and because the local council says that it must adhere to a mathematical formula, never mind the local circumstances. There is also the instance of Renfrewshire Council, which, as Rhona Brankin said, is scrapping current class size limits in English and maths in S1 and S2 to pay for the new ones in P1 to P3. Those are two very blunt messages, but the Government is not listening. In addition, the Government has got into a complete mess on flexibility. It insists that it wants more flexibility for local authorities and headteachers, so why did it persist with scrapping the successful schools of ambition programme, which acknowledges that schools know their situation much better than the Government ever could and allows them the freedom to decide how best to spend their money?

If that is true, why is the Government scrapping the programme? Many people are upset because the inflexibility can only create problems elsewhere. We know that advanced higher courses are being cut, as Murdo Fraser set out. We also know that, on PE and outdoor education—or, in SNP language, walking to school and healthy living—schools are struggling to come up with enough resources to find the specialist teachers. Ironically, that is at a time when many probationary teachers cannot find a job. I am pleased that the SNP is taking our policy proposals on some of those matters seriously, and I am grateful for the support of other parties, too, but I will be much happier, as will the teaching profession and parents throughout Scotland, when we have real devolution in our schools at local level, so that we can ensure that those activities happen.  The final report card is not looking too good for the Government. There are too many lapses of concentration; problems with sums; not enough exercise; and maybe even problems with the bullies in the playground, who this time are not Labour members but EIS members, whom I believe are seriously endangering the lives and educational futures of our children through the action that they have taken. Let me say unequivocally that we do not support the EIS in any way on strike action, because that puts into jeopardy the whole situation. We support the EIS in some of the complaints that it is making, but not on strike action. The Government must do better. Just for once, can we put educational needs rather than targets at the top of the agenda?

One of the most moving presentations that I heard during my former career as a teacher was about Auschwitz. It was deeply moving not only because of the vivid and sensitive description of what the pupils had seen on their visit, but because of its profound effect, which became clear when they assessed what the trip meant to them as human beings. It was a life-changing experience, so there is no doubt in my mind that educating youngsters about the Holocaust is not only an important lesson in history but one that is extremely valuable when it comes to understanding the many human conflicts that affect our world today, especially those that are so complex in relation to inequality and racism. As Karen Pollock, chief executive of the Holocaust Educational Trust, said: "The Holocaust Educational Trust's Lessons from Auschwitz Course is such a vital part of our work exactly because it gives students the chance to understand more the dangers and potential effects of prejudice and racism today." I understand why visits to the locations are a far better learning experience than anything that could happen in a classroom, especially when they include hearing real-life accounts from the survivors of the Holocaust. I have been more than persuaded of the need to allow as many pupils as possible from throughout my constituency area to take part in those visits, although I am also clear that how teachers and pupils engage in Holocaust  education should be a matter for the individual school to decide. In that respect, I caution the Government against becoming overprescriptive. With regard to Mr Macintosh's comments, it is unfortunate that a political judgment is being made in this debate—it should not be about politics. There are some unnecessary debates about Barnett consequentials and whether they exist; it is a great pity that the tone of the debate has been clouded by that. Jackson Carlaw's motion makes clear our support for the commitment of successive Governments to developing a national Holocaust museum based in East Renfrewshire. Like the outstanding work that is undertaken by the Holocaust Educational Trust, such a museum could help to ensure a permanent reminder to us all of the horrors of that period in history and, more important, a permanent reminder of the need for reconciliation in future generations. Together with the priceless value of Holocaust education in the school curriculum, that is why such projects are so important for this country's heritage and why the motion, so eloquently moved by Jackson Carlaw, is important both in its praise for what has already been achieved and in relation to what can, I hope, be achieved in the future.

Will the cabinet secretary consider our proposal of £10 million of funding, which would come jointly from public funds and from philanthropic and business interests?

As Murdo Fraser said in his opening remarks—at least, in the second part of his opening remarks—the Scottish Conservatives have been concerned about the need to develop a more consistent and coherent skills and training strategy. I will conclude our contribution to this  debate by picking out what we see as the main priorities. It is abundantly clear that there is an overriding objective to provide a workforce that is fit for the challenges of the 21 st century and which allows Scotland to develop its full economic potential and ability to compete successfully in the international community. However, we cannot ignore the concerns of around a third of employers in Scotland that many workers are still poorly prepared for work. The Government has recently set out its intention to focus more on basic skills in school testing, which is warmly welcome. However, in no way can that be expected to solve all the problems, and it is essential that we identify the other reforms that must accompany that move, including, as Richard Baker, Jeremy Purvis and Murdo Fraser said, the production of a much more robust skills strategy than the one that was presented to us previously.

Like any good Conservative, I am interested in the market economy and how supply and demand come together. There are two sides to the issue, so, as John Park identified, it is vital that we do not listen only to what the needs are. One of the great problems in the skills debate has been that, for too long and too often, it has been focused on one sector of the education system. One of the major difficulties is ensuring that people who are talented when it comes to vocational skills have the ability to use those talents and are not prevented from doing so because of society's attitude to university education and so on. I hope that when the cabinet secretary considers her examination reforms, she also considers a much more flexible system in schools, so that different situations have parity of esteem and youngsters are able to leave school after the age of 14 and get apprenticeships. That is an important issue, and it is excellent that John Park is bringing forward a bill that will enable us to debate it. I pay tribute to the Scottish colleges, which have a vital role to play. They are to be complimented  on their efforts to provide our young people with a much more career-focused programme, which gives them a head start. We need a robust strategy, and we need direction. There is a complaint that the new skills agency does not yet have permanent staffing and that its objectives have not been laid out. It is essential that those concerns are addressed. As many members have said, it is incumbent on the Government to come forward with its proposals. The sooner that that happens, the better. Although the Conservatives welcome many aspects of the debate and will support the Labour motion, we believe that we must get the message firmly across to the Government and to the wider public that we expect some leadership on skills issues.

What discussions are taking place with education bodies in Scotland to ensure that all pupils who wish to study for the advanced higher have the opportunity to do so, even if it means taking advantage of courses in neighbouring schools or in the independent sector?

Will the Scottish Executive, through the concordat with local government, ask the education officials in Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council to meet officials from the Educational Institute of Scotland who, in a recent statement, have expressed grave concern about the reduction in the availability of advanced highers in the area?

I suspect that many teachers and members of the public will be a little surprised by the SNP's insistence that there is a need to debate international education, given that there has always been, and always will be, a whole-hearted commitment in Scotland to international education. I agree with Mr Macintosh, who said that those people will be a bit surprised and probably a bit irritated that good-quality parliamentary time is being devoted to a motion on which we can all agree—Mr O'Donnell mentioned that—when there are far more pressing educational issues on the agenda. I add school discipline to the topics to which Mr Macintosh referred. Perhaps the decision to hold this debate was to do with the fact that the Government has been taken to task via the Daily Mail by the Scottish Association of Teachers of History for apparently thinking that history teaching, with all its international aspects, is being taught in a rather boring, dry and old-fashioned manner. Who knows? However, I will say something constructive. If there was a single reason why Scottish education made such an impact throughout the world in the days when it first established its reputation, it would be its concern for the international community and the role that Scotland had played in the economic, social, political and philosophical development of many nations around the world. The 18 th century Scottish enlightenment was remarkable for its outpouring of intellectual and scientific accomplishments, which rivalled those of any other nation at any time in history. It was made even more remarkable because it took place in a country that was considered to be one of the more backward  nations in western Europe. The achievements in philosophy, economics, engineering, architecture, law and so on of people such as Francis Hutcheson, Adam Smith, Thomas Reid, Robert Burns and Adam Ferguson speak for themselves. The effects of the Scottish enlightenment went far beyond Scotland. It was one of the most important forces in ensuring that Scottish education has always been underpinned by a strong international commitment. That commitment, especially in respect of the breadth of interest, has always been a cornerstone of our education system, and there is no question but that it must be maintained and enhanced. If pupils are to become well-educated, rounded human beings, part of the process must be their acquisition of a full awareness and understanding of the global community, and tolerance and respect for the many and varied cultures around the world. I turn to Mr Macintosh's amendment. One of the most moving presentations that I heard during my former career as a teacher was on Auschwitz. Many people think that educating youngsters about Auschwitz is extremely important. We have no problem in supporting that principle, but we have a problem with the Labour amendment, because we do not believe that it is up to any Government to decide to ring fence the money that is involved, and we think that it is up to headteachers to make decisions about best experiences. However, I repeat that educating youngsters about Auschwitz can play an important part in their education. We have many opportunities to learn from experiences in other parts of the world, which can only be good, whether the Government says that we should learn from China, Malawi or France. Indeed, the Conservatives urge members of the Government to undertake their next international trip to Scandinavia. In Sweden, they will see what happens when headteachers and parents, rather than the Government, are put in control of schools, and in Finland, they might be able to study a system in which pupils start school at seven years old. Such an approach would end the headache that has resulted from dealing with P1 to P3 class sizes.

I leave it to Mr Macintosh to defend his amendment. The key point is that it should be up to headteachers to decide the best extracurricular and core curricular items for their pupils. On a day on which we have considered the Scottish qualifications system, the other key point of interest at this stage is consideration of a worthy debate on the baccalaureate system. Today, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning made a firm commitment on a Scottish baccalaureate; she will explain the details of what will happen in S5 and S6 later. Perhaps there could be a worthy debate on the international baccalaureate. Many of the things that underlie the principles behind the curriculum for excellence are developed in the examination system for that baccalaureate, which has clearly taken on board exactly what the Government is trying to say in this debate. The Government ought to consider that. Internationalism has always been at the centre of Scottish education, and I am sure that no member hopes that it will not be in the future. We have no intention of opposing the Government's motion, but we object to the fact that it has taken time away from debating other, more pressing, educational issues. However, international education is important, so we will support the motion.

I thank the cabinet secretary for early sight of the information. I warmly welcome the announcement that there are to be changes in the Scottish Qualifications Authority examination structure and that there will be full consultation with the relevant stakeholders. I was pleased to hear on the radio that the cabinet secretary will be listening to teachers. The current system is only fit for purpose, especially in the context of the changing economic and educational climate. It is failing far too many pupils, particularly at the bottom and top ends of the academic spectrum. I want to concentrate on the baccalaureate. I am interested in what the cabinet secretary has said in that regard, but there are some other questions to be answered. The baccalaureate, if it is on an international scale, has an interesting dimension to it. As a Scottish baccalaureate is being proposed, I would be grateful if the minister could answer two specific questions. What is the reasoning behind having a baccalaureate standing alongside highers and advanced highers? Further, what is the reason for having a baccalaureate that deals only with science and with modern languages? Why are baccalaureates in arts and social sciences not being considered at this stage? I welcome the proposals regarding S4, particularly in relation to literacy and numeracy. However, I would like the minister to clarify whether the exams in S4 that she is proposing are national exams and to confirm that any internal assessment that might take place in S3 will be part of the process that builds up to S4 examinations.

Does the Scottish Executive agree that one way in which to avoid the problem arising in future  would be to set up a formal forum in which all the local authority education departments can meet the GTC for Scotland on a regular basis? That would bring together the two bodies that know best what teachers are required and what skills are available.

Has the Scottish Government had discussions with local authorities about providing extra support for teachers who are developing literacy skills in primary school classes where there are substantial language barriers?

Will the Scottish Government investigate why local authorities have been unable to deliver a better rate of satisfying school placement requests when the number of such requests has fallen?

In that context, will the minister clarify what the Government's policy is?

When the Government produced its famous skills strategy last autumn, the first part of the foreword by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning was deliberately all about how we could make Scotland a nation of ambition. It went on to refer to people who are "hungry to continually learn new skills" and stated that the Government would do everything possible to "motivate and engender a culture of enterprise and ambition in our schools." So said page 16 of that glossy brochure. The theme was also picked up by Sir Tom Hunter, who, like most other forward-thinking people, is keen that every single available pound in education is spent on raising aspirations and self-esteem and on changing the mood of Scotland from one of sometimes reluctant learning to one of a can-do attitude. He rightly believes that that is especially important in areas where there is a higher percentage of deprivation. For him, the schools of ambition programme was a much-needed lifeline and an essential starting block for expanding excellence in schools. The key words are "expanding excellence", particularly in developing the skills that employers value so highly and in allowing schools to realise their objectives according to their own circumstances. HMIE was also impressed, and it commented on the highly effective implementation of the programme in several schools. I say frankly to Mr Coffey that it does not matter whether HMIE believes that it is motivation or the whole effort that has gone up—the fact is that it has increased. Given what the Government itself says, what one of our leading businessmen and philanthropists says, and what HMIE says, I am at a total loss to explain how the Government can decide to wind down the schools of ambition programme, which has so far benefited 52 schools, whether now or in three years—there is a huge debate about what the policy is now. I am  told that that is being done because the cabinet secretary simply cannot tolerate anything in educational policy that does not meet the standard one-size-fits-all mantra that currently drives the SNP agenda. In the introduction to the skills strategy, the cabinet secretary wills us to praise those who are hungry for new skills, but at the same time she is prepared to deprive them of food, simply because she thinks that they have too much of a good thing. That is ridiculous logic and, despite the excitable eloquence of Mr Neil, it is socialism at its worst. It does the cabinet secretary's credibility no good whatsoever if she wants us to accept that she is serious about ambition. Surely we should use the highly successful schools of ambition model—especially as it has worked so effectively in some deprived areas—to build for the future and to offer much greater choice and diversity in meeting the aspirations of our children. The current comprehensive system has failed to deliver that choice and diversity by its constant obsession with one size fits all and by basing everything on the lowest common denominator. Schools of ambition have proved how we can turn things around for some of our weaker performing schools. The programme has proved what happens when schools receive money directly and they, rather than the Government, decide how best to spend it. The staff and pupils of such schools deserve huge credit for what has been achieved. The Government should celebrate that success and not cut off schools in their prime. The Conservatives ask the Government to reverse its decision and do what Sir Tom Hunter wanted: to stop playing politics with our children's education.

I ask the minister for clarification. She said that, yesterday, she heard a  professor of education say that we should not fast track too much change without considering the detail. Why, then, will a statement be made in two weeks' time in which, it has been suggested, changes to the examinations structure will be fast tracked? There are questions about how the two approaches articulate with each other.

The member makes an interesting point, but I should have thought that the opposite was the case—that in the curriculum for excellence there will be more focus on some children who have not been particularly engaged in the existing system. One of the underlying principles of the curriculum for excellence is that it focuses on individual needs—the whole process is built on that. That approach will bring greater self-discipline.

I start the Scottish Conservatives' contribution to the debate with an unequivocal declaration of support for the curriculum for excellence. However, we firmly believe that its innovation affords us a much-needed opportunity to address several other pressing issues in Scottish education, especially the need to ensure that there is much greater articulation between schools and other educational institutions. It was good to hear that the cabinet secretary agrees that that is needed. I heard what the cabinet secretary said about reform of the examination structure. Thank goodness for what she said. However, I give her a word of warning: we need a long overview of the whole structure. We need much greater rigour and the system to be decluttered. Hugh Henry and Margo MacDonald asked accurate questions. We need answers about what will come. If we are to add a Scottish science baccalaureate and a Scottish language baccalaureate, it sounds as though there will be two extra items in a muddled field. In two weeks' time, we will consider with considerable interest what the cabinet secretary announces. I hope that the debate was designed to give us the opportunity to stand back and view the direction of Scottish education as a whole unit. In that context, I want to define the merits of the curriculum for excellence and the main challenges that we must embrace if we are to ensure that its benefits move well beyond people's years in formal school education. Most people know when they meet somebody who is well educated. Their education shows in the way that they behave, their conversation, their range of interests and the skills that they bring to their occupation. A good education is about far more than passing exams; it is about the qualities that give a person good judgment, strong ethical values and a sense of responsibility as a citizen in a community. Good schools, colleges and universities, strong families and efficient workplaces have always provided mental and  physical wellbeing, a sharp focus on what really matters in life, and a sense of self-esteem, as they always will. They have always ensured that the individual is able to make a meaningful contribution to the economy. The curriculum for excellence marks a real watershed, from which we will achieve such things or yet more bureaucratic change that is built around spurious targets, with more measurable league tables and endless quantitative assessment that will almost certainly be rejected by a paper-weary profession. I commend the architects of the curriculum for excellence for taking the bold step of encouraging teachers to think for themselves instead of being the recipients of Government diktats; for building a curriculum in which flexibility will better serve the individual; and for ensuring that the diversity of local communities and the outdoor environment can be fully utilised in the delivery of school activities. We believe that that message should be echoed by much greater devolution in school management, so that educational decision making is put back into the hands of the professionals who are best able to decide the needs of their individual pupils. Good schools have always done that, but far too often there has been a constraining hand of Government, with the result that there has been an obsession with quantitative measurement and testing. At two sessions of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, we heard evidence from various witnesses about the curriculum for excellence. It was noticeable that there was deep concern—even despair in one quarter—about the fact that teachers, especially in secondary schools, did not feel that they had been fully engaged in the process of developing the curriculum for excellence or in the careful thinking that is required to ensure that there is a fully coherent exam structure. Last week's edition of The Times Educational Supplement seemed to tell exactly the same story. As one witness put it, the curriculum for excellence is "the biggest change in Scottish education for a generation".—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 27 February 2008; c 650.] However, it is the one for which we are least prepared.

I am grateful to the minister for her intervention, but I do not entirely accept it. A lot of the debate is about the underlying  philosophy of the curriculum for excellence, which must be decided at the input stage, not the outcomes stage. We need a little bit more thinking about the delivery of the curriculum for excellence in order to carry the teaching profession along with us. As the minister knows, teachers are committed to the underlying principles, but they want to see how those underlying principles can be broadened out, especially beyond 15 to 18. There are big question marks about how the curriculum will articulate with the exam structure. We will have to wait two weeks to see the new proposed structure. I will finish by identifying two crucial areas that must be addressed if we are not to waste our opportunity and deny too many of our children the best possible chance in life. First, we must take up the challenge that is laid down by the curriculum for excellence, which values all pupils, no matter whether their skills lie in vocational or academic subjects or a mix of the two. The curriculum for excellence is serious about that. It ensures greater focus and greater self-discipline—which a lot of our children are crying out for—but we must ensure that our educational structure properly caters for and respects those who opt for a more vocational balance. Secondly, it is time to grasp the nettle of the clutter and complexity of qualifications. I cannot say it often enough—it is a clutter. Many employers and parents know that. We must do something about it. We particularly have to do something about the sixth form in Scottish schools. Far too many sixth formers around the country are twiddling their thumbs because, for one reason or another—sadly, in an increasing number of cases, because of budget cuts—they are unable to pursue the courses that they want to pursue. That is totally unacceptable. It is also important to recognise the growing importance of our further education colleges alongside our universities, for which there is rising demand. It is time to examine properly what we expect from our universities and whether continually widening access at that level is the right answer. There are other options to be considered. We have a huge opportunity to get this right, but we need to be far-sighted. We need a vision of Scottish education in its all-round capacity—not just a vision that suits the economy, but one that promotes a fair-minded and ethical society in which individuals are valued for who they are. We need an education system in which every individual is encouraged to reach for the stars—with schools of ambition, perhaps—and in which, every step of the way, we promote excellence rather than the lowest common denominator, which all too often has been the trademark of educational policy.

What measures will the cabinet secretary put in place to ensure that the additional financial burden that the class size policy in primaries 1 to 3 will put on councils will not in any way have a detrimental effect on the ability of all parents who have children in those year groups to find places for them at good schools?

At 5 o'clock, members will face a stark choice. They can either show courage, by standing up and confronting the difficult task of delivering the long-term sustainable future of our universities and colleges—to which Margo MacDonald alluded—without which Scotland cannot retain the standards of excellence for which she is renowned and which the students in the public gallery represent, or they can show timidity, by opting to merely tinker at the edges and deliver nothing but more headaches for the years ahead. This debate is one of the most important to come to Parliament in recent times. It is important not just because the Government chose to make the abolition of the graduate endowment a flagship policy, but because, in doing so, it has, perhaps unwittingly at times, sparked off—not just in the Parliament—one of the most vigorous and passionate debates about the future of our university and college structure. Let me again put firmly on the record that it is our belief—and, I believe, that of at least one other party in the Parliament—that we have no less than a moral obligation to Scotland and to our future generations to ensure that that wider debate takes centre stage.

I will be happy when there is a moral obligation to examine from all angles how to achieve a sustainable future for our universities and colleges, not just for the next few years but for decades ahead. Such a moral obligation seemed to appeal to the Liberals on 8 October 2007, when Jeremy Purvis said that unless we got a clear commitment from the Government to meet in full the Universities Scotland recommendation, Scotland would sleepwalk into an uncompetitive higher education sector, with potentially disastrous long-term implications for the Scottish economy.

I am grateful for Mr Purvis's intervention. What I find extraordinary about the Liberal Democrats' position and cannot understand is why they cannot agree to the Labour and Conservative amendments that are on the table, which not only agree with the SNP on the abolition of the graduate endowment fee but propose a future independent inquiry. I have listened carefully over many months to what the cabinet secretary has said about the joint future thinking task force on universities. She has claimed that the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill is only the first step in dealing with student debt. I understand some of her points, but the overall supposition is naive and disingenuous. Before the election, in campaigning around the country, SNP members ingratiated themselves with the student body by making wild promises that they knew they could not keep—promises that would do nothing to secure the long-term future of our colleges and universities. As Jenny Hjul said in The Sunday Times at the weekend, the SNP took a calculated risk in the hope that its policy of underfunding would not upset as many people as would have been the case if the same policy had been directed at hospitals or schools. What the SNP Government should have done—and what every MSP should do if they really care about the long-term future of colleges and universities—is recognise that the issue requires root-and-branch review to address not only the funding levels that are required to ensure that Scotland can compete on the international stage,  university by university and college by college, but how university courses will articulate with the proposed changes in school education and those that may be made to the examination structure.

I agree entirely with the point that Margo MacDonald made earlier. At committee and in the stage 1 debate, I said that the connection in the debate on the graduate endowment and future funding and structure issues, which the Government persistently chooses to ignore, is simple: the principles and priorities of policy making. That theme was eloquently expounded by Professor Duncan Rice in a recent lecture to the Royal Society of Edinburgh. There is one simple fact in the debate: the structure and funding of the university and college structure is not built for the 21 st century. At 5 o'clock, with the courage of our convictions and minded of the moral obligation about which I spoke earlier, we have the opportunity to deliver on that. We must ensure that the structure and funding is so built. I ask members to dig deep into their consciences and support the Labour amendment and its Conservative addition.

Will the cabinet secretary present us this afternoon with evidence that the abolition of the graduate endowment fee will increase access?

All the speeches in the debate have made it abundantly clear that Parliament recognises that the first duty of any society is to protect its public, most especially its vulnerable groups, which include young children. Sex offenders present a very real danger to children for the obvious reasons that many members have spelled out. The recent high-profile cases serve only to fuel the fear. When sex offenders are released from prison or from hospital and are, quite rightly, carefully monitored and supervised, that process must be as effective as possible in order to secure public trust in the system, and the safety of the community. If the public is to have that trust, it is crucial that, collectively, Parliament demonstrates the same strength in campaigning that Paul Martin has demonstrated. As Helen Eadie and Bill Aitken made clear, we must not be afraid to embrace the technology that helps us to protect the most vulnerable groups in our communities, although we must pay heed to some of the constraints that Margaret Smith mentioned. All eight of Scotland's police forces are now able to publish photographs of high-risk child sex offenders on the internationally-recognised Child Exploitation and Online Protection Centre's most-wanted website. Co-operation is crucial if we are to make progress. The formal contract, which involves agreement between the Crown Office, ACPOS, the CEOPC and Crimestoppers, makes it clear that, in certain situations, the photographs of certain offenders, including high-risk child sex offenders who have failed to comply with the requirements of the sex offenders register, can be published, once there has been careful consideration of the legal implications and, in particular, of the potential prejudice to any future criminal proceedings.  It is interesting that Labour has inserted into its motion reference to the retention of the DNA samples "of all crime suspects", even when those suspects might not have been charged or found guilty. That is interesting because of the appeal that is going through the European Court of Human Rights, which might mean that the UK Parliament will have to change the Police and Justice Act 2006, which in turn will mean the destruction of tens of thousands of DNA samples. The Conservatives are not comfortable with the idea of innocent people having their DNA held by the state. We were concerned last year, when the Westminster Government was toying with the idea of introducing much wider powers of disclosure in relation to sex offenders, which would have amounted to the adoption of an American-style Megan's law. We are happier now that the plans seem to be more limited. This month, the Home Office has announced plans for pilot schemes that will allow parents or guardians to check whether someone with whom they have a personal relationship has any previous convictions for child sex offences. However, we continue to harbour concerns about whether the introduction of the Sarah's law pilot projects might push sex offenders underground, thereby putting children more at risk instead of making them safer.

I absolutely accept that, but safeguards have to be put in place to ensure public confidence in the system. We believe that the names and photographs of sex offenders who have broken their registration requirements should be published when it is believed that doing so is in the best interests of public safety. We want technology to be used, particularly global positioning system tracking so that all those whom the court or Risk Management Authority deems to be a flight risk can be tracked. Once caught, the offender should be required to undergo mandatory polygraph testing and the extended use of GPS tracking should then track and monitor their movements. The Conservatives welcome the U-turn on the idea of a United States style Megan's law. We also welcome the Government's commitment to allow Parliament to examine in great detail the new proposals. We need to ensure that answers are given to the serious questions in respect of how to put in place the necessary safeguards. On this  issue, public confidence is absolutely paramount. We support the motion.

Colleagues in Parliament will already be aware from my comments in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee on 23 January that I have pledged my support and that of the Scottish Conservatives for the legislative consent motion. The routes that young people take between school and further education and employment these days are increasingly diverse and complex. Therefore, any information that can better inform us about that process, and the better matching of education data and data for income and benefits, should be greatly welcomed. That information should be welcomed on two fronts: first, because it better informs us about the reasons why young people select particular courses and employment options, which has important implications for the Scottish economy; and secondly, because it provides us with far more insight into young people's expectations of our educational institutions. The minister will know that, during committee discussion of the bill, members sought reassurance that the necessary safeguards will be put in place to guarantee the correct use and appropriate protection of the data. I ask the minister to put on record this afternoon that she is confident that that is the case. It is essential for the Government to be able to assure us that the public can have full trust in the process, so that we minimise any risk of computer disks going missing in the post or getting stolen out of a car boot. Although the Education and Skills Bill mainly sets out provisions that apply only in England, it is important to establish what the potential  implications could be in Scotland. Rachel Sunderland from the Scottish Government schools directorate assured the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee that she "had a number of discussions at official level" about some potential "cross-border issues", especially concerning "young people who are resident in Scotland and ensuring that there were no implications for them, or for schools, businesses and learning providers in Scotland"—[ Official Report, Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 23 January 2008; c 565.] if that young person went on to educational courses or employment in the south. I seek assurance from the minister that there are no loopholes in that respect. If the law in England is to be changed to ensure that Scottish students remain in full-time education until they are 18, questions arise about students domiciled in Scotland who wish to take up an opportunity in England. Perhaps the minister could put on record whether she is confident that any loopholes there will be ironed out.

I pay tribute to the Government for bringing the matter urgently to the Parliament and I thank the minister for early sight of his statement. There is no question but that we give our unequivocal support to addressing the issue, and I am sure that the same is true of all political parties in the Parliament. I have two highly specific questions. First, will you clarify—

In his statement, the minister said that the Scottish Law Commission report "does not make specific recommendations for survivors of abuse in relation to the limitation period for raising a claim, which is currently three years." The report recommends that, outwith that period, the absence of a time bar should continue. Am I right in thinking that that is a matter for judicial review? Although the Government cannot interfere with judicial discretion, will it monitor the situation as regards cases that do not fall within the three-year period?  Secondly, will the minister provide additional information on how the hub system to which he referred will interlink with existing Government mechanisms and with the many local services that people who have been victims of abuse take advantage of, which help to allay some of their fears?

Earlier this month, the chamber debated the educational challenges that confront Scottish schools. It was an important debate for all sorts of reasons, but perhaps most of all for one question that went largely unreported. I hope that the focus of today's debate will be that question: what is education for? Today, I choose to praise the contributions to that earlier debate made by Robin Harper, Margo MacDonald and Peter Peacock, each of whom, in their different ways, dealt with the intrinsic values of education—an issue that I discussed originally with the headteacher at Crieff high school. In the difficult and, perhaps, perplexing quest for the answer to that question, we need to stand back and ask ourselves from an holistic perspective what we should expect our schools to do. I believe that extra-curricular activity—which is perhaps better named co-curricular activity—with all its many definitions, should be an integral part of the process. That view is not popular in some quarters. After all, extra-curricular activity is not measurable in the same way as the scores in a maths test or the A passes that the Scottish Qualifications Authority awards are. There is no national framework for such activity, which often appears on a school timetable only because of the personal and voluntary interests of an enthusiastic member of staff, not because it has been forced on the school by the strictures of the normal curriculum. Extra-curricular activity is often time consuming and irregular in terms of time allocation, and it does not lend itself to inclusion in league tables. Thank goodness for that, as I do not believe that such activity can or should be  condemned to obsessive quantitative measurement. Extra-curricular activities can be more important and more enriching than what I dare to call the run-of-the-mill education in the classroom, important though that is. I believe firmly that part of that quality is the deeply personal experience that the individuals who take part in it encounter. Some of my most rewarding days as a teacher were spent many miles away from the classroom, on the mountains beside Loch Ossian or in Wester Ross, working with children who had been taken well outside their comfort zone—I, too, was outside my comfort zone—and learning how to survive in an environment that was totally alien but richly educative. There are many thousands of teachers in Scotland just like me. In the build-up to this debate, I was privileged to receive a huge response from the many groups and schools who do outstanding work in the area. I take this opportunity, as I did when I submitted their names to the press this morning, to put on record the debt that the Parliament and all Scotland owes them for the work they do, especially with children who may be denied such opportunities elsewhere. It is impossible in seven minutes to do justice to all of that work, but I will summarise the essential qualities that it brings. It enables young people to take decisions in difficult situations, builds confidence and self-esteem, helps them to understand what commitment and responsibility mean, teaches them to work in teams—which is not always the most popular theme these days but is fundamental to the successful development of young people's skills—and, perhaps most important of all, allows them to start out on the journey of finding their inner selves. The groups that help children in that way do as much for our young people's social and spiritual well-being as anything else, which is a priceless asset in this day and age. I have lodged the motion for the simple reason that I do not believe that enough of our youngsters are able to experience such activities and that many of those who do are unable to experience them for a prolonged period, when the benefits are at their greatest. Whether the school that someone attends offers such opportunities is often a lottery; extra-curricular activity does not feature as a top priority for far too many people in education officialdom. I understand why. There is no doubt that one of the most damaging influences on such activity is the increasing reluctance of teachers, especially headteachers, to take responsibility for ensuring that pupils are able to participate in it. We are told that the risks are far too great and that the effort is not worth it, if one considers the mountain of  paperwork and potential litigation that goes with it. My extensive questioning of those involved suggests that, sadly, that has become a major issue. I have great sympathy for them, but it will be an indictment of education if we decide that there is nothing we can do about the matter. Have we really arrived at the stage of allowing political correctness and the doom merchants to override our logic and deep-rooted educational values? I fully appreciate that there is no easy answer, but I believe that, as well as encouraging all headteachers to ensure that they have a diverse and extensive extra-curricular programme in their schools, we as parliamentarians have an obligation to ensure that the legislation that covers risk is as simple and straightforward, and as supportive, as possible. We need clear guidelines that are based on common sense rather than bureaucracy. Above all, they should be based on the good practice of practitioners rather than of civil servants or people who have never been out on a hill or in a canoe. One of the difficulties that we face when it comes to extra-curricular activity is that that has often not been the case. The Scottish National Party manifesto made it clear that the Government believes that every child has the opportunity to experience the extra-curricular domain. As a politician who is a former teacher, I am passionate about the responsibilities that we have in that regard. With the exciting prospects that the curriculum for excellence offers, we now have the opportunity to enshrine such activities in the curriculum for every young person in Scotland, and I firmly believe that we can do so at a relatively low cost. As I said in my opening remarks, extra-curricular activities are worth their weight in gold when it comes to what real education is all about. Depriving pupils of that experience deprives Scotland of the ability to make the best use of the undoubted talents of our young people. As parliamentarians, we have an obligation to do something about that state of affairs.

I apologise for the absence of my colleague Murdo Fraser, who is, apparently, stuck on the Forth road bridge as a result of this morning's accident. I congratulate Labour on securing the debate. As Jeremy Purvis said, it should serve to focus our minds on an extremely important issue that goes to the heart of our communities, as Dr Macdonald eloquently said. Whether schools will be built is something that matters to people. This morning, the SNP and Labour have traded insults about the numbers of schools that have or have not been built. However, we want to know how many schools will be built in the future. The SNP has not come to the chamber with the details of its plans. Quite frankly, that is not acceptable in terms of its manifesto commitments, or from the point of view of the business community and contractors who might want to build the new schools. Further, as Mike Rumbles just said, it is certainly not acceptable in terms of the education of our young people. As Cathy Jamieson and Mike Rumbles said, we have not had the details of any of the Government's proposals. Worryingly, we have had confusion over the nature of the Scottish futures trust. As several members have said, the least that we expected was that we would get the principles that would allow us to engage in the debate. However, that has not happened. As I said in my opening remarks, the situation before the election seems to be very different from the situation after the election. The Government owes it to Scotland to tell the Parliament what it plans to do.

I share George Foulkes's concern, because we owe it to people to tell them which schools will be built, when they will be built and how the build will be financed. That is the crux of the debate, but I am not sure that we have heard many answers from the Government. Jackie Baillie made a relevant point about the changing nature of the curriculum. It is true that schools have to change to reflect the changing curriculum and their communities. Far more people are involved in schools these days, and communities take part in school activities in a way that did not happen in the past. That must be reflected in the building programme and in the financing. The issue is crucial if we are to deliver better education in Scotland. We owe it to our people and, above all, to our children. It is time that the Government came forward with plans that we can debate in detail.

As I think we agreed yesterday, first and foremost, the quality of the teaching profession is what matters in education. However, as Rhona Brankin said, the school estate plays a large part in determining an environment that is conducive to learning and which fosters good discipline and a sense of pride in the community. Just look at the  positive responses this week in Dumfries and Galloway and Perth and Kinross as new school buildings have opened or embarked on the first stage of the construction process. An attractive, clean, well-heated and spacious building plus an attractive, eco-friendly and energy-efficient campus can do a huge amount not only to boost the performance of a school, but to instil a sense of pride and common purpose. Therefore, it is only right that the building and maintenance of the school estate is a priority. Schools these days are used increasingly by pupils and teachers and by members of the local community. That is greatly to be encouraged, but it brings added pressures and costs. It is therefore extremely important that we take into account the diverse uses and the multipurpose nature of schools as we debate the appropriate use of resources and finance. We want our schools to be well built, to make efficient use of scarce resources and to provide best value for money. Those issues should be matters of economics and social welfare, not political dogma. The decision on which route to take to satisfy the criteria should be made on a project-by-project basis, as there is no one right way in which to build a school, nor is there always only one appropriate source of finance. So, in our view, quality outcomes demand flexibility in the system. In that respect, the Conservatives are proud to have devised the private finance initiative. Together with the public-private partnerships that were constructed by the Labour and Liberal Executive, the PFI has met the urgent need for the construction of school and other public buildings, which capital grants from the Government or traditional prudential borrowing by local authorities could not have done. Another substantial benefit of PPP/PFI has been the transfer of the risk of maintaining schools to the contractor, thereby leaving local authorities to concentrate on the vital task of providing education services, rather than being preoccupied with bricks and mortar. Local authorities have become increasingly used to the system and are now far better placed to avoid any mishandled tendering and the consequent unnecessary costs that occurred with some projects in the past. For some projects, up-front financing from capital or conventional borrowing might be a better option than a PPP or PFI scheme. The SNP has made much of its Scottish futures trust as a preferred finance option. We would not rule out a version of that, if the aim was to increase flexibility in the system so that the much-needed rebuilding or refurbishment of individual schools can take place without the need to wait for a uniform scheme to be put in place to redevelop a whole local authority school estate in one phase. However, it is incumbent on the SNP to come to  the Parliament urgently with a full statement to provide the details of its proposal, because the current signals reflect confusion and indecision. Before the election, the SNP seemed to suggest that the Scottish futures trust would mirror the American-style trusts, in which investors can invest in public infrastructure bonds on a not-for-profit basis. However, following the election, perhaps—just perhaps—as a result of the warnings of economists and legal experts that there could be complications in relation to tax liability and the operation of the policy in relation to the Scotland Act 1998, the proposals seem to have been watered down considerably. Any delay in making such a statement to Parliament would, by definition, mean more uncertainty and confusion, especially for those who want the go-ahead to build new schools.

Not at all. The reason is that we are asking for flexibility. There is not one right way of building a school or of financing that. The more flexibility that we have in the system, the better. We need to know whether the Government is committed to matching the school building programme brick for brick, as Labour asked, and we need to know what financial arrangements the Government intends to put in place. It is also essential that we have an assurance that the Scottish futures trust would be fully transparent, in that it would attract investment at the market rate and provide the ability to offer separate bonds for separate projects. In the Scottish Conservatives' view, it would be totally unacceptable for the Government to try to meddle in those matters. As Iain McMillan of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland has argued, it is essential that we have a good mix and that the private sector can play a full part in providing much-needed resources. As I said, it is vital that the quality of the school estate in Scotland matches the aspirations that we have for our young people. Absolutely no time should be wasted in setting out the detailed plans for developing the estate so that the incentive to deliver high-quality services is firmly put in place. I call on the Government to provide answers this morning to the key questions in the debate. I move amendment S3M-1258.1, to leave out from "; notes the SNP's commitment" to end and insert:  "and the need for energy efficiency, quality design including the incorporation of sound ecological and sustainable design principles, and value for money for the public purse in building schools; recognises the need for the Scottish Government and local authorities to continue to improve Scotland's school estate; notes the SNP's commitment to match the previous administration's proposed school building programme 'brick for brick', and calls on the Scottish Government to make a statement to the Parliament detailing its plans for new schools and how these will be funded."

I do not disagree with any of that, but could the cabinet secretary be a bit more precise about the timescale? When does she envisage the new proposals being put into operation?

I remember that when I was 14—which was not yesterday—I had a great debate in my mind about whether the social science that I  should take in addition to economics should be history or modern studies. A teacher put the matter firmly into focus by telling me, "History educates people; politics usually destroys them." I leave it to members to decide which subject I chose. The debate has been good. I want to put it on the record that there is no need to convert the Scottish Conservatives to the importance of Scottish history and the subject's inclusion in the Scottish curriculum and SQA examinations. Scottish history's rich diversity and our deep-rooted links with many other parts of the world, to which Dr Macdonald referred, are good reasons to study the subject but, in addition, all people in Scotland should learn Scottish history, because by doing so we become much better equipped to understand ourselves, where we came from and the complexities of our cultural, economic and social heritage. Tom Devine has written that Scottish history is a subject "of enormous dynamism and relevance". Scottish history also provides the necessary insight into many other academic disciplines. Without a good understanding of Scottish history, our understanding of our nation is at best incomplete and at worst insular and sectarian. Jeremy Purvis alluded to that. Tom Devine has made the valid point that the erosion of Scottish history teaching began with the insistence of some education zealots that there would be a place for history on the curriculum only if it was shared with geography and modern studies. As a result, history was no longer part of the compulsory curriculum beyond the second year. I agree with Tom Devine's analysis, but I add that that approach coincided with a belief on the part of the same zealots that skills were far more important that knowledge. Knowledge, whether it was about dates or anything else, was thought to be boring and irrelevant; skills were much more important, so it was incumbent on all teachers to change their methods. Perhaps there was a need for change, but the pendulum swung far too far. In many cases, children and teachers were left confused by an emphasis on skills that was not always accompanied by the knowledge that is necessary if people are to make best use of their skills. Conventional wisdom was again challenged by people who thought that history could be taught only in the context of concepts, such as war, industrialisation or revolution. Such an approach is fascinating at university and postgraduate level, but how can we expect children to understand events that are not put into chronological context? Great damage has been done to the teaching of  history in our classrooms by the obsession with skills to the detriment of knowledge and by the absence of chronology. As the minister said, the curriculum for excellence is one of the most exciting things on the education horizon. I do not mean this in a political context—that is surprising for me—but at long last we appear to be taking seriously the need to ensure that what we teach is relevant to the lives of young people, so that they can understand their responsibilities and have the appropriate knowledge to understand who they are and how their nation has been shaped. Scottish history must be part of that process. However, as Kenneth Macintosh and Murdo Fraser said—and, as Duncan Tom said in The Scotsman —it is vital that Scottish history is put firmly in its context. We must never succumb to the trite and inaccurate characteristics of "Braveheart" history. Scotland has a proud history; we need no contortion, twist or attempt to alter our past. Our pupils deserve to learn Scottish history. Whether they are being taught about Bonnie Prince Charlie or Mary, Queen of Scots, they deserve to be taught by evidence, not myth. Above all, they deserve to have their history well taught and put in the correct perspective.

I add my thanks to Patrick Harvie for bringing the debate to the chamber. It goes without saying that there is now almost universal acceptance that one of the greatest challenges that faces politicians these days is the tough assignment of changing attitudes on climate change. The temptation is to think that it can be left to international organisations and national Governments, but much of what has to happen is personal and has to be done at the local level. It is therefore vital that the large proportion of local government activity should be underpinned by constructive greener politics. Of course, that has a major implication for many of our higher education institutions. Without any question, there is an issue for schools, universities and colleges. As has already  been said, they can be the driving force. In the first instance, it is vital that they understand the bigger picture and are provided with a clear statement of the objectives or targets that they are expected to meet, of the initiatives that they can adopt and of how government at whatever level can help them. In that respect, it is important that all action to change our attitudes on climate change is based on sound scientific reasoning. There should be a clear understanding of the level of commitment—especially of financial resources—that will be required both to ensure the success of green projects and to find the appropriate incentive for essential economic growth. I am all too well aware of the different tensions that pull in opposite directions. Clearly, budget spending in the area is extremely tight. On top of that, our educational institutions in Scotland face major difficulties in funding their basic teaching duties—which, as we know, are already under considerable strain—as well as in finding adequate resources to address the green agenda. People & Planet and its go green campaign have done a huge amount to highlight the problem, but there will have to be a much wider debate on the need to balance an extremely ambitious—sometimes overambitious—set of green targets with the academic priorities of institutions and the needs of the rest of the economy. If anything was thrown up by the recent good but controversial debate about AI Gore and the Oscar-winning "An Inconvenient Truth", it was the need to keep hold of the true perspective—arousing the powerful emotive responses that are required to change our attitudes, while at the same time ensuring that policy is based on scientific fact. On that front, results from the green agenda will be important. In summing up, I will give a brief list of what I think we have to do better. First, we should not overlook the role of our universities and colleges and their outstanding research into technological innovations that are aimed at reducing the carbon footprint of mankind's activities. Government needs to consider carefully how to provide the best incentives for that research in Scotland. Secondly, we need to ensure that universities and colleges use existing technology and good practice to make their campuses greener, for example by applying for funding for microrenewable installations such as on-campus wind turbines and solar panels. Thirdly, I ask ministers to consider setting up the Scottish public procurement unit that was proposed in the Conservative manifesto. The unit would allow local food producers to serve the  institutions and therefore reduce the carbon footprint. People & Planet's intentions are admirable, and it has done a huge amount of work for which it deserves great praise. However, there should be a word of caution about setting unrealistic targets. It is vital that we take this debate forward in the wider context. For that reason, my congratulations to Mr Harvie on his motion are not quite unqualified. Nonetheless, it was vital that he secured the debate in Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that gifted and talented children are properly supported in all schools. (S3O-1987)

The minister will be aware of various initiatives in England and Wales, including the National Academy for Gifted and Talented Youth, which draws in particularly gifted and talented pupils from all parts of the country and all social backgrounds, to ensure that they can receive specialist teaching that is appropriate to their needs. Does the minister acknowledge that gifted children, especially from disadvantaged areas, could benefit from the introduction of similar initiatives in Scotland?

I welcome the debate and I pay tribute to Roseanna Cunningham, the member for Perth, who has consistently supported DARA Almondbank and raised its profile. As a regional member for the area, I am acutely aware of DARA Almondbank's important role as a world-class centre of excellence and as part of the fabric of the local economy, as Roseanna Cunningham said. DARA provides the expertise and ability to strip completely, replace, repair and rebuild everything, from systems, components and equipment to whole aircraft, for military and commercial organisations. As Roseanna Cunningham outlined, it has an impressive record in providing component support for the Sea King and Tornado aircraft, which has rightly given it an unparalleled national and international reputation. Over the years, DARA Almondbank has achieved state-of-the-art status and I join Roseanna Cunningham in paying tribute to the outstanding professionalism of all those who work at the site. Everyone knows that the helicopter forces are among the most pressed of our military resources in Iraq and Afghanistan. Because insufficient numbers of helicopters are available—as evidenced by the recent hurried Government decisions to buy six Merlins from Denmark and to convert eight Chinooks that had been intended for special forces into so-called standard configuration—those that are being deployed at present are being used at a rate that is far in excess of what was planned. Scottish Conservatives therefore support the retention of DARA Almondbank so that, at this critical time, the expertise that is available to Her Majesty's forces is in no way impaired. Although our first concern must be for the national interest, we want the site to develop a strong future within Scotland's manufacturing industry. There is no doubt that the closure of DARA Almondbank or any scaling down of operations at the site would have a devastating effect on the Perthshire economy. We must approach the issue of how best to provide for DARA's future in the United Kingdom with that in mind. It is clear from Roseanna Cunningham's comments that the activities that DARA Almondbank currently undertakes will continue to be required to provide essential services to our military capabilities, especially when there is a  growing need for those military capabilities to be enhanced to meet the extensive demands of our foreign policy. The challenge therefore is to ensure that the potential is achieved not only in the short term but in the long term. The UK Government's indecision over DARA is unacceptable. It cannot be right to put in jeopardy a vital support operation when our troops are engaged in some of the most demanding military operations since world war 2. The great uncertainty that that poses for the workforce in Perthshire is likely to undermine the workers' morale as they do their very best to provide support for our troops on the front line. The role played by DARA in the supply of helicopters to the front line is critical, and the military logistics that it provides are pivotal. Our front-line forces are currently at full stretch. They need to be confident that the essential back-up is in place. DARA Almondbank has demonstrated on many occasions that it can meet the challenge. The Scottish Conservatives welcome any moves designed to make the logistics back-up for our armed forces more efficient. We shall resist any measures that so cut our logistics capability that they starve the front line of vital support. It is vital that SNP ministers are in close contact with the MOD on this and other defence issues that are important to the Perthshire economy. I hope that the cabinet secretary will be able to tell Parliament this evening about the approach that the SNP Government has taken and about any meetings that he intends to have with UK ministers about DARA Almondbank's future.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it will provide to village halls during this session of the Parliament. (S3O-1873)

The minister will be aware of the growing concern among many churches and charitable and voluntary organisations that their exemption from water rates ends in 2010, as a result of changes to the principles that underpin water rate charges. What action is the Scottish Government taking to allay their concerns and to help them to avoid the difficulties that the new regulatory burden will impose?

The Conservatives welcome the opportunity to debate the important challenges that Scottish schools face. Four of those challenges are given a high profile in the OECD report and they deserve urgent attention if we are to improve education standards in Scottish schools. Indeed, we believe that the debate should not only build on the undoubted strength of the system, which the Minister for Schools and Skills outlined, but set the priorities for education policy in the immediate future. The first concern, which comes through loud and clear in the report and which came through loud and clear from Margo MacDonald this afternoon, is that a worrying lack of basic skills remains among too many of our pupils, especially when it comes to reading, writing and arithmetic. I am conscious that politicians will use the evidence that suits their case or, in some cases, scaremonger on the topic, but nonetheless there is convincing evidence on the difficulties that we face with the three Rs. I will put our cards firmly on the table because I believe that, if we address the problem properly, we will go a long way towards unlocking the other problems with education in Scotland. I believe that there is a way through for the three Rs. I will not accept any suggestion that success or failure in the three Rs necessarily reflects social background, although of course that can have a major impact.

I am saying that background does not necessarily determine performance, although of course it can have a big impact. I point to what both Clackmannanshire Council and West Dunbartonshire Council have done, which Rhona Brankin mentioned in her speech. They have had remarkable success in combining good teachers with the right teaching methods, high expectations and good discipline for pupils right across the ability range. There is a lesson to be learned from that. A second interesting finding in the report is the fact that the attainment gap in Scotland begins to develop in earnest in primary 5, rather than in earlier years, which is sometimes assumed to be educational wisdom. The attainment gap gets bigger when children are aged around 10. If the problem continues to worsen in the early years of secondary school, that is an important lesson about where remedial help is most required. The report's third important finding is that our curriculum and its accompanying exam structure do not currently serve the best interests of our pupils. Although there are many exciting developments in the curriculum for excellence, especially the initiative to ensure that education is about developing a well-rounded and responsible citizen, as well as one who is fit for the workforce, there is a key message in the OECD report that our system is failing too many youngsters. It is failing them because it is not providing enough focus for those who do not wish to pursue a purely academic career. I know that the Government is interested in developing that line of thinking. The public exam system needs to be simplified, to be made much more rigorous and to put greater emphasis on basic competence in literacy and numeracy than it does at present. As we have said before, we entirely agree with the OECD that there needs to be a much more radical approach to vocational opportunities. It is my contention that public exams should continue to start in secondary 4. Standard grades should be replaced by an exam that takes on board the best of the current intermediate 2 courses and puts much heavier focus on the use of literacy and numeracy. If that means that pupils take slightly fewer but more rigorous exams at that stage, so be it. The Scottish higher, which by and large retains its place as a highly respected qualification, remains the focus for the end of S5 and, therefore, the basis for university and college entrance, but we need to think about what happens post higher. The advanced higher, which is an excellent exam in many cases, far superior in  some areas to the English A-level, is not being taught in enough schools, and the danger is that universities will soon start to disregard its worth. During the Christmas holidays, there were many calls on that issue. I hope that the Government will take up the cause of listening to what people are saying about reform of the exam. The debate about a Scottish baccalaureate is still to be had. Finally, I come to the OECD recommendation that schools should have more autonomy in their governance. Members will not be surprised when I say that Conservative members are delighted to hear that, because if there is one fundamental problem that is holding back the whole system, it is the straitjacket of central control, which pays no heed to regional differences, the needs of different types of schools or the needs of individual pupils. Conservative members believe that standards in schools will improve only if we put control back into the hands of the professionals on the front line and take it away from the bureaucrats. The same is true of all other public services. The OECD has said some extremely important things about what Scottish schools do well, and rightly so. However, it has also said a lot about the important challenges that we face. It is incumbent on all members of the Parliament, including members of the Government, to address those specific challenges without further delay. I have pleasure in moving amendment S3M-1131.1, to insert at end: "further notes that the report's key challenge to Scottish schools is to make them work consistently well and equitably and that this outcome is dependent upon greater autonomy within school management, much greater emphasis within the curriculum on basic skills in English and mathematics and greater opportunities for pupils to follow vocational opportunities."

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the growing support among distinguished figures, both in business and the university sector, for a full and independent review of higher education funding. I heard what the cabinet secretary said in her previous two answers, but why has she convened an internal review that is slightly limited in its role, as opposed to an independent review?

The minister is right to say that Scotland is passionate about sport. It is. However, that passion lies as much in the grass roots as it does in our elite athletes. Will he provide more detail than he gave in his statement on exactly how the new structure will increase participation at the grass roots, particularly among schoolchildren? More importantly, how will it attract volunteers who are willing to assist in that area?

I congratulate Robert Brown on securing tonight's debate and reiterate the welcome to the representatives of Scouts Scotland who are in the public gallery. It is testament to the success and dedication of the scouting movement in Scotland that we are celebrating its centenary. The fact that, during those 100 years, scouting has grown to become the world's largest co-educational voluntary youth movement is very special. Living in rural Perthshire, I know at first hand about the commitment of local volunteers and how much the organisation enriches the lives of young people in our communities. The scouting movement has always played a significant role in helping to nurture a sense of responsibility within our young people. It gives them a sense of belonging and recognises that we will be able to tackle the big challenges that our society faces if we nurture a sense of pride in and responsibility for the local communities in which we live. It demonstrates that we can all play an active role in making Scotland a better place to live. In my home area of Perth and Kinross, 1,300 young people are active members of the scout movement. If anyone needs proof of what they do, they only need pick up a copy of the local newspaper to read about all the various activities that take place throughout the community, whether it be building mountain paths—maybe not quite on the scale of Everest, but they have been doing it in Perthshire—or delivering the Christmas post at a very competitive price. The role that the scouting movement plays in the development of our young people can never be overlooked. From the learning stages of the beavers at age six through cubs to scouts to scout explorers and on up to age 25, it is an impressive framework in which to develop the well-rounded young people of tomorrow. Sadly, too many people now seem desperate to wrap our young people in cotton wool and keep them away from life's challenges. The scouting movement has played and always should play an important role in keeping that trend at bay and giving our young people the opportunities to develop, most particularly when they are given the responsibility of working in teams.  As a former girl guide and brownie teacher who is still involved with outdoor education, I am conscious of the many challenges that face the scout movement as it looks towards the next 100 years. That was discussed at the recent centenary Scottish conference, which was held at the Aviemore highland resort, where more than 100 scouts took the opportunity to have their say on the future of the movement as part of the youth summit. The scouting movement in Scotland must look towards the challenges that the organisation will face and develop innovative ideas to ensure that scouting in Scotland continues to reflect the needs of our young people. In this digital, high-tech age, the founding concept of giving our young people the opportunity to try activities that they would not otherwise have the chance to do perhaps takes on a new and more challenging dimension, but I have no doubt that Scouts Scotland has the determination and vision to meet those challenges. As Robert Brown said, perhaps the greatest challenge that faces Scouts Scotland and other youth development groups is finding an adequate number of volunteers. I hope that the minister will take the issue very seriously. Over the past 100 years, Scottish scouting has evolved and changed considerably to accommodate the changes in our society and the world in general. I congratulate all those involved in the Scottish scout movement on the achievements of the past 100 years, and all that I can say as they look to the next 100 is, "Be prepared."

What plans does the Scottish Government have within its share of the education budget to improve pupils' reading, writing and arithmetic skills?

This time last year, the Scottish Conservatives welcomed the publication of the previous Executive's consultation document that set out a national strategy for fostering and kinship care. We are happy to support the motion this afternoon, given the Government's determination to pursue that strategy's main objectives. The importance of the issue cannot be overestimated, as Mary Mulligan said, nor can the need for cross-party effort to take significant steps to address the need for greater provision and better care for some of the most vulnerable children in Scotland. In difficult situations where children cannot live with their parents, we fully appreciate that they usually want to live with a family member or friend under kinship care, or, if that is not possible, in a family environment with appropriate foster care, rather than in a residential establishment. In our view, such placements usually give the child the best chance of overcoming the disruption and stress that they had to face in coming to terms with their previous circumstances. There is likely to be more stability and continuity in kinship or foster care, both of which are major factors in developing new confidence and self-esteem. However, we also recognise that in some cases, perhaps when the child has been severely scarred by an experience at home, or if they require intensive specialist health care or educational support, residential care plays an important role. Whatever route is taken, it is imperative that the child's best interests come first in their educational development and their social and economic integration. The Scottish Conservatives have advocated a national system of kinship care allowances, a national system of fostering allowances and more  careful allocation of placements. We have also expressed concern that the provision of care varies widely throughout the country. Areas of significant shortages and poor practice persist, so it is good to hear that the Government is trying to address them. We are most concerned by the overall growth in demand for vital services and the question mark over whether the present funding arrangements are adequate. Professor Arthur Midwinter flagged up his concern about the funding shortfall between the provision of grant-aided expenditure and local authorities' spending on core social care for children. The Government has made provision for some extra funding. We welcome the announcement that was made in the past 24 hours. There will be some transfer to local authorities, but the budget's 17.7 per cent reduction in funding for child care services over the next three years raises serious questions, as Mary Mulligan said, about how we can finance all the changes when demand is growing so quickly. More important, Professor Midwinter flagged up the need to tie the overall policy objectives to financial arrangements much more coherently than they are at present. We urge the Government to debate that point fully. Everyone recognises the importance of a child's first placement. If it works well, it increases the chance that the child will develop confidently and will have the maximum security and permanence during their time in foster or kinship care. Thus, the assessment processes that the young person and the prospective foster or kinship carer undergo before the placement is decided are crucial. The bodies that are responsible for matching children with care arrangements—local authorities and independent fostering agencies—must continually review their procedures and make the area a priority for the deployment of their best qualified and most experienced staff. The previous Administration made the sensible suggestion that the child should be more involved in the choice of placement. It is good to hear that the Government is also approaching the matter in a child-centred way. Obviously, once a placement is made, it is essential that the relevant parties have an opportunity to agree the care plan for the child, under the supervision of a lead professional. The child needs to feel entirely confident that all the key people are involved, just as the team needs to feel confident that there are strong links between the child, family members and the members of the professional bodies. That is a matter not only of trust, but of adequate resources and, increasingly these days, adequate funding. The social care sector has had to put up with increasing expectations from Government, therefore  Parliament has a duty to clarify the role that it expects kinship and foster care to play and to ensure that carers are fully supported. It is vital to recognise the growing importance of the kinship role—I am pleased by the Government's announcement in that respect—and the need to remove some of the barriers that currently affect its status. Only 12 of the 32 local authorities pay the main categories of kinship carers the same basic allowance that they pay foster carers. A further 10 local authorities pay a fraction of that allowance—usually only around a third. That seems grossly unfair. What matters most are the best interests of the child and the achievement of a workable and effective balance between family and state support. That latter issue is never going to be easy, given the conflicting influences that can sometimes cloud the matter in defining where final responsibilities should lie, especially in an age when vulnerable children face increasingly complex problems. We look forward to taking part in cross-party discussions to address the important issues.

The cabinet secretary is on record today as having said that the concordat between the Scottish Government and the Convention of  Scottish Local Authorities is a historic new partnership that will allow for much greater flexibility in delivery of front-line services. Does she agree that when it comes to class sizes and the common sense that she mentioned, the best way to ensure that those two principles are taken forward would be to allow headteachers, rather than Government, to decide on the best class sizes for their schools?

In summing up for the Conservatives, let me give a compassionate welcome for the  opportunity to debate the issue. As has been said several times, we cannot underestimate the importance of the tourism industry, not just because of the £4.2 billion that it returns to the Scottish economy, but because of its potential to promote a positive image of our country in a highly competitive international community. As the minister, Mr Macdonald and Mr McArthur all rightly said, we should have a head start in doing just that. We have a beautiful country that has some of the finest scenery in the world—notwithstanding the rain, the mist or the midges—and which offers a wealth of opportunity to exploit rewarding outdoor activities. In addition, there is the warmth of a traditional Scottish welcome and its accompanying hospitality—which Mr Allan did not experience—the lure of several world-class historical sites and entertainment centres, and the potential that exists to develop many of our resources that have such a distinctive Scottish brand, as David Stewart and David Thompson mentioned. A successful tourism industry matters not only from the economic and social perspective, however. If we marshal our resources effectively, it should play a large part in the feel-good factor that applies to Scotland's role in the global community. If I may be allowed to be slightly less compassionate for a moment, I firmly believe that a much more integrated approach must be adopted—one that combines a clear and coherent strategy for all the related businesses and stakeholders. From listening carefully to the views of various stakeholders in the tourism industry, including representatives of local tourist boards, two chambers of commerce and people who are on the front line of service delivery, I know that there are many good tourism initiatives around the country—many of which have been mentioned—that are not always co-ordinated or publicised in the most effective manner. It is good to hear that the minister is aware of that. In addition, as Gavin Brown and Nanette Milne said, there are concerns that in some areas, we do not seem to be attracting the footfall of tourists that we had hoped for. On that point, although Patricia Ferguson would like to take the credit for the increase in the number of international visitors to Scotland in 2005-06, she will share our concern about the decrease in the overall number of visitors in that period. I have read the manifesto of the Scottish Tourism Forum, which points to three fundamental failings in the current set-up, the first of which relates to the difficulties with the transport infrastructure. Those failings deserve more attention than has been paid to them this morning. Nanette Milne flagged up the fact that the position on their map that Flybe gives to Inverness does  not help matters. Equally unhelpful is the situation on the west Highland line, whereby one arrives in Oban on a train, only to find that the ferry to Barra and South Uist left a few minutes before the train got in. That is not about new infrastructure, but about better organisation. The point has been made that it would not happen in Switzerland or France. The STF also highlights the fact that many jobs in tourism are not particularly well paid and it identifies technology problems in the sector. We must take all those issues seriously. Again, it was heartening to hear that the minister is trying to address them. As Gavin Brown said, the biggest challenge that we face is the need to find a coherent national strategy that will also allow for plenty localism when it comes to making best use of our resources in the diverse parts of the country. On that front, we would have deep concerns if the Government's new strategy was driven only by the desire for greater centralisation. We need more detail on how we can make best use of the local diversity that enriches the tourism experience in this country. Assurances must be given that there will be effective forums across the country that will allow full representation of organisations that are on the front line, whether they are small businesses, large enterprises or local services such as tourist information offices. Worryingly, too many stakeholders point to concerns about the replacement of the area tourist boards with VisitScotland hubs, especially given the proposed decrease in the number of hubs. What must be done? First, there is an issue about management of the industry. Under the previous structure, tourism operatives were members of a tourist board and had ownership of the body to which they paid their fees. They had a direct say in what went on and a vote in the election of local board members. The new model moves away from that set-up to a much more centralised structure. As I mentioned, it is worrying that the number of hubs will be reduced to six. Instead of being partners, tourism operatives will become clients who must buy services from their tourist board. We worry about how much that might curtail the driving force of the private sector, which is so crucial to the industry. Some of the most successful tourism initiatives have been in areas where local businesses have combined effectively to take advantage of local resources and changing signals from the market. We should not forget about the huge importance of local services, particularly those that are provided by tourist information centres. Although TICs are having to adapt to changing needs, they are still central to provision of effective services, in  the same way that local post offices and other such public facilities are. There is an unequivocal case for a better transport infrastructure with much greater linkage between routes and better planning of existing connections. We support the reduction in business rates—although we firmly believe that it should happen in the next financial year rather than be phased in over a three-year period. We are fully aware that lower business rates are only part of the answer, but if we are to ensure that small businesses have a first-class future, such a policy will be welcome. I finish by returning to the Conservative amendment. We must strive for the improvement we know Scotland can deliver. We must be ambitious—it is important to recognise that we are talking about an ambition rather than a target. That is why our amendment is important.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it supports the future of all tourist information centres. (S3O-1188)

I thank the minister for that answer and for his comments to Murdo Fraser. Does he accept that much of the concern among the public about the future of tourist information centres throughout Scotland arises because of the absence of a Government commitment to put in place a coherent national strategy for the promotion of the tourism industry, which is one of the most important industries in Scotland's economy?

In answer to Mr Gibson's question, the minister outlined some plans with regard to music education. What plans does the Scottish Executive have to expand outdoor education in Scottish schools?

I thank the minister for prior sight of the statement. It was at rather short notice, but at least it was better hearing it from him than from the media. On such an important issue, that is fitting. I give members an unequivocal assurance that the Scottish Conservatives support the efforts to improve child protection that were under way under the previous Executive and are now under way under the current Government. We are pleased that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill was adjusted into a form that we could accept, given our concerns on two issues. The first of those was the fact that the consultations were incomplete and some of the bill was imperfectly drafted. That put at risk quite a lot of the good will of the organisations that are required to implement any changes, so I urge the new Executive to avoid repeating that mistake with any new legislation, especially given the sensitivities that surround the issue and the Kerelaw inquiry in particular. The second fault with the bill was that it left too much detail to secondary legislation. It is good to hear that the minister is addressing both those problems, but I seek two further assurances from him. First, does he agree that the voluntary sector has neither the infrastructure nor the budgets of the public sector to cope with the administration of child protection? If so, will he comment on how the Government can assist voluntary agencies, especially if any retrospective checking of staff is required? The public needs to have full confidence and trust in the process, which is not always the case at present. The second reassurance that I seek concerns an issue that is close to my heart as a former teacher who is involved in sports coaching and outdoor education. Will the minister do something to allay the fears that some aspects of the child protection process are so bureaucratic that they are in danger of preventing some people from volunteering to help with the huge range of extracurricular activities that are of great educational and social benefit to children all over Scotland?

In speaking to the Conservative amendment, which is in my name, I begin by saying that no self-respecting politician could possibly disagree with the sentiments that are expressed in the Government motion, nor could they disagree with the compelling evidence that has been presented in a wealth of social and educational research in which the behavioural patterns of children aged zero to eight have been studied. The importance of the early years goes without saying, as does the importance of the many and varied influences during what can be the most rewarding years of childhood. We can be under no illusions at all about the importance of the pre-school years and primaries 1 to 3 for educational achievement and wider social and cultural development, whether that means developing cognitive skills, helping children to adopt healthy eating standards and good manners, or ensuring that they understand others' needs.  However, we should not just debate a few grand sentiments and principles. I hope that today's debate will be about the details of workable policy, as Ms Brankin hinted, and not just about the ideals with which we want to inspire educational thinking. The amendment in my name reflects that and our belief that several key policy areas can be identified to provide stronger support for the family and, more specifically, for the institution of marriage. Although I do not want to dwell too much on Westminster responsibilities, I stress our commitment to Conservative policies at United Kingdom level that will encourage families to stay together and give parents real choices in deciding what is best for their children. If we do not have underlying support through the UK tax and benefit system, the policies over which the Parliament has control will be much less effective. I will go straight to the detail and deal with the importance of the family in pre-school years—a point that was enunciated forcibly by several key witnesses who gave evidence to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee earlier this month. The definition of the family is diverse these days, but there should be no doubt that its bedrock has been and always will be the institution of marriage and the creation of a stable environment within marriage.

I may be just about to answer Mr Purvis's point. I say to those who argue that that approach is somehow old-fashioned or discriminatory that, rather than ask politicians to judge, they should ask children and their parents what their ideal family situation would be. They need no reminding of the costs of family breakdown, which are now a staggering £20 billion a year in the UK. It is therefore essential that Government policy should be directed specifically at redressing the situation.

Our party has made it clear that we will accept that. It is vital that Government policy is directed in that way to end the perverse financial disincentive for couples to come together and stay together. The working tax credit that couples receive should reflect that situation, and perhaps transferable tax allowances for married couples should be introduced. Because of the situation, the Conservatives want a child benefit system that more heavily supports families with children in the age range zero to two, when costs are often at  their highest and are, in many cases, prohibitive if one parent wishes to stay at home. Besides that, it is important to remind ourselves of the Government's appropriate role, namely that it should support, not interfere. Thousands of parents in Scotland are perfectly capable of bringing up their families successfully, and they should be able to get on with it without the burden of a nanny state. So when we use the phrase "early intervention", let us be specific about the terms of reference: it is a relevant and appropriate description when it refers to the additional support for those families who genuinely need it—there are many of them—but it is not appropriate if it relates to developing a one-size-fits-all strategy that dictates how every child should be brought up. Frankly, that is what is wrong with some aspects of SNP policy, and it is most clearly exemplified in its universal or one-size-fits-all policy of reducing class sizes in primaries 1 to 3 even when that cannot be funded properly and it is not the appropriate priority. The Conservatives believe that class sizes should not be determined by the Government at all, but instead should be decided by head teachers—it is good to see a Labour conversion to that policy. Give head teachers the choice between having universal smaller class sizes and the freedom to run their schools and they will take the latter. I turn to the role of schools in early learning, and specifically to numeracy and literacy skills, on which, frankly, Scotland is not performing well enough. There have been many encouraging signs at nursery and playgroup level and in some early years of primary, but much more needs to be done. Basic skills are required. I hope that we will never go back to the bad old days when the emphasis was on expression rather than a good firm grasp of phonetics and numbers. I will close on an important point to which the minister alluded. Will the Government give a firm commitment to develop policies that support children outwith the formal learning environment? The Government hinted at that in its manifesto, but to date it has given absolutely no detail. We want firm policy details. I entirely agree with Rhona Brankin that we are not hearing nearly enough policy details. I move amendment S3M-722.3, to insert after first "families": "and the institution of marriage".

Does the First Minister agree with me and with the local community that, in light of the fatal road accident that occurred two weeks ago at the Blackford junction of the A9, urgent action must be taken to upgrade the dangerous junctions? Will he now instruct his transport minister to bring forward the strategic transport projects review to implement major safety improvements at junctions on the A9?

I think that parliamentary colleagues are aware of the remarks that I have made recently in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee and the chamber. I share the cross-party view that the problem of unhealthy eating among our schoolchildren is extremely important, and that it must be a major priority in this parliamentary session. I have listened to compelling evidence that reflects the extent of the problem and to the opinions of groups that are best placed to understand what must be done. I have also listened to the Government's proposals, and was minded to support the pilot scheme, which will test the effects of offering free school meals in five council areas, because it seemed to me to have a great deal of merit. I was persuaded that it might play an important role in the development of future policy.  Given the Government's statements on the issue, I expected, as a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, that I would have the opportunity to hear a bit more about the merits or otherwise not only of what has been proposed, but of other proposals that may lead to more healthy eating. As we all know, there are conflicting views—perhaps reinforced by this morning's report on a similar issue that was issued as a result of an Office for Standards in Education pilot—about how best to tackle the problem. Therefore, I was concerned and frustrated to find that the Government had already sanctioned the pilot prior to any full discussion in the committee or the Parliament and that it had given the go-ahead for Scottish Borders Council to issue letters—dated 28 August—to tell parents that free school meals would be available for their children from October until next March. As a result, the committee was redundant and the judgment of MSPs was compromised. I hope that members agree that that is not the most democratic way of operating or—more important—the best way to ensure that there is public trust. I repeat my likely support for the pilot, but want to put on record once more, as I did at the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee on 26 September, that there must be correct procedures by which the Government allows Parliament to debate important policies.

As the speeches of Roseanna Cunningham and Keith Brown have already made clear, none of us who represent Mid Scotland and Fife need reminding of the horrors that afflicted the residents of Milnathort last year or the horrors that afflicted the residents in the Perth, Kinross and Strathearn areas in 1993.  It goes without saying that flooding is one of the worst natural disasters that can affect a community. As Peter Peacock has just said, flooding can have deep psychological and social effects as well as the obvious economic costs. Those costs amounted to something in the region of £40 million in the case of the Tay and Strathearn floods in 1993. It is obvious that flood management is hugely important, but the Government is absolutely right to stress that the sense of urgency is increased because of recent climate change trends. We should be under no illusions about the dangers of delaying new legislation. The Scottish Government has already indicated that it takes flooding extremely seriously, and its proposal for a new flood prevention bill for Scotland is to be warmly welcomed. I hope that work can begin immediately on investigating best practice in other parts of the world and on ensuring that we have a comprehensive understanding of the complex science that underlies flood prevention. Clearly, a variety of interested stakeholder groups wish to participate in the debate, and the facilities to allow such participation should be put in place as soon as possible. That said, the key focus has to be on responsibility—first, responsibility for what happens when flooding takes place, and secondly, responsibility for flood prevention. Scotland needs national legislation that clearly identifies where the responsibilities lie in both cases, and it should be in language that is familiar to the general public as well as to the scientists and technical experts. As members are fully aware, Perth and Kinross Council faced severe criticism from many residents in Milnathort for its response to the flooding chaos. That criticism has now prompted a full investigation into where the different responsibilities should lie. Perth and Kinross Council has taken matters very seriously indeed, as is evident from the paper that its enterprise and infrastructure committee produced in August. It is absolutely right to initiate procedures to not only investigate what went wrong but put in place measures to improve transparency and accountability. With that in mind, it is important to recognise that the primary responsibility for ensuring that water is kept out of a property lies with the property owner or occupier. That is not always recognised by the individuals concerned. It is therefore the owner's responsibility to undertake precautionary measures, and in particular to ensure that their property is adequately covered by their insurers. That is particularly important in light of the fact that the costs incurred by the insurance industry after the recent UK floods were  sufficiently high to make the industry re-examine its commitment to provide full insurance cover. Incidentally, such cover is not always available in other countries. Measures will be successful only if the other parties involved in flood prevention are fully responsible and accountable in that role, so that insurers have confidence that they are not the only people to carry the economic cost. The new bill must concentrate on that aspect of policy, and it must do so in three main areas. First, it must streamline the decision-making process to allow a much more holistic approach to be taken throughout the UK. As things stand at present, a large number of groups are involved in flood management and prevention, and it may take time to rationalise that structure so that responsibilities are more clearly defined and there is less scope for buck passing. Secondly, the science that is relevant to flooding is changing all the time, which inevitably means that an important debate has to take place to find the appropriate balance between soft and hard engineering defences. That will undoubtedly involve additional resources. Thirdly, if we are to continue to place on the individual the primary responsibility for keeping water out of their property, emphasis must be placed on assisting responsible landowners and punishing those who default. Huge amounts of money can be involved—to say nothing of the amount of work that is required—in maintaining efficient defences. Flood management will therefore not be successful unless individual landowners are able to recognise and deal with their responsibilities. I said at the beginning that no one needs reminding of the horrors that flooding can bring. It is therefore imperative that the proposal for a new flood prevention bill is fully supported.

I rise to speak in this debate because I recognise the strength of public feeling on the issue, which many people who are attending the debate have articulated well. Nobody doubts that difficult decisions must be taken when it is proposed to upgrade or reroute an electricity line, but that does not remove the public's right to have access to informed and relevant expertise that can outline the detailed scientific analysis and the rational arguments, which should properly reflect the economic costs and benefits of specific routes. Both are needed so that the impact of proposals on different  communities and local environments can be accurately assessed. At the early meetings that I attended at Crieff community hall and Kinbuck community hall, Scottish and Southern Energy gave us specific assurances that extensive research on the proposals had been undertaken, that there had been a comprehensive consultation process involving local authorities, interest groups and the general public, and that sufficient work had been undertaken to ensure that the proposals were consistent with Government regulations and land use policy. However, in time, it became clear that the conduct of the inquiry was falling well short of public expectations and the democratic process. Members of the public were frequently left without complete information. In particular, written records of meetings were absent; there seemed to be no flexibility within the timetable for hearing important evidence; and access to a great deal of information seemed to be limited to internet access. Those difficulties—particularly the lack of written records of deliberations—were exacerbated by the meetings being held across a wide geographical area, which made it difficult for the public to keep up to date with what was going on. Moreover, several interest groups found that their dealings with Scottish and Southern Energy were fraught with confusion and red tape and liable to conflicting information. There were signs—I say this with sadness—of a lack of common courtesies. In such an inquiry, especially an inquiry that involves so much public money, members of the public have a right to expect access to informed expertise so that they fully understand the complex technical considerations that are involved, but such access has often been available only if interest groups could hire expensive advisers and Queen's counsels. That seems to be grossly unfair when it is set against Scottish and Southern Energy's application to the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets to be reimbursed to the tune of £7 million from electricity customers throughout the UK. In short, there seems to have been anything but a public inquiry. The procedures that have been used throughout the lengthy process have been bureaucratic, incomplete and seriously at odds with democratic principles that should, first and foremost, set out fully to engage the public in an extremely important debate about the future of energy policy in this country.

When I first entered this Parliament as an inexperienced member a few months ago, one of the wise old heads, in the form of Mr Alex Neil, told me that it would be a different experience from the classroom. I say to Mr Neil that, today, I am beginning to wonder. At the time, I was a bit puzzled that the Scottish Executive, as it was known back in May, gave so little time to debating education and skills. That seemed particularly odd, given that the SNP's two flagship policies of removing the graduate endowment and reducing class sizes for all primary 1 to 3 pupils were hailed as top priorities for the Administration, and were trailed in the press and the SNP manifesto as such. Was the explanation that there were so many other priorities on the agenda that education was beginning to be squeezed out, or was it that the Administration had woken up to the fact that some  of its manifesto pledges were already hostages to fortune? Like Labour, the Conservatives have grave misgivings about the SNP's ability to deal with the real issues that currently affect education in Scotland. I begin with the wrong-headed policy of abandoning the graduate endowment, which—as Hugh Henry rightly said—will do nothing to secure better funding for our further and higher education institutions so that they can maintain both the highest possible standards of teaching and research and an important level playing field for students throughout the United Kingdom. The cabinet secretary must be aware of our universities' concern that they will be unable to maintain their international reputations if they lose staff and resources to better-funded universities south of the border. She must—I hope—question the wisdom of a policy that, instead of putting money into the system, will in fact take it out. We repeat our demand that she should establish an independent review of higher education as soon as possible, to convince colleges and universities that we are taking the matter seriously. Secondly, the policy of a universal reduction in class sizes to 18 for all pupils in primaries 1 to 3 is simply not sustainable and should not be paraded as a one-size-fits-all panacea that will drive up educational standards in the first three school years. Although it is true that reducing class sizes can, in some instances, help to improve both educational standards and discipline, that is by no means a universal assumption that can be made about every school in the land, and it should not be the Government's role to decide on class sizes and what is best for individual pupils in individual schools. That should be a matter for the head teacher, and I know that many teachers and parents throughout Scotland agree. Effective learning is, first and foremost, about good teaching in a calm and disciplined environment. There are many circumstances in which parents would opt to have their child taught in a slightly bigger class if it meant better teaching, better discipline and better access to a better school. There is by no means always a direct correlation between lower class sizes and better attainment, so the cabinet secretary must acknowledge that a one-size-fits-all policy is not the best way forward. It is increasingly out of date, and it is out of tune with the need for more diversity in education. Last Thursday at First Minister's questions, I raised my concerns about the ability of local authorities to deliver that policy. I cited some estimated costs from Perth and Kinross—incidentally, an SNP and Liberal council—which says that it cannot put the policy into operation. No sooner had I raised those points than the council  administrations in both Glasgow and Edinburgh told the cabinet secretary that they, too, will not be able to deliver on the policy, given the resources that she is proposing to make available.

I will after I have finished the point. I put it to the cabinet secretary that the policy of universally reducing class sizes in primaries 1 to 3 is economically unsustainable and educationally unsound. I also fear that it could do great damage to the freedom of parents to choose the school that is most suited to their child.

Quite frankly, that is nowhere near enough. The key point is that the council cannot deliver the Government's policy because of the strictures that the Government has put on it. That will not lead to better education, which must the overriding principle. The theme that I want to dwell on in my final couple of minutes is that of discipline. Discipline is the most important issue currently affecting our schools, and I believe that parents, teachers and the wider public would agree with that. I ask the cabinet secretary again, as I did on 20 June, to place the improvement of school discipline at the very top of the school agenda. Without scaremongering—and I stress that point—and without taking anything away from the excellent teaching that goes on across Scotland all the time, I say that head teachers must be given the appropriate powers to deal with unruly pupils. In my opinion, those pupils should not be allowed back into the classroom until they have learnt how to behave. I ask the cabinet secretary again to ensure that a far more rigorous approach is taken to the publication of statistics to assist teachers and local authorities identify where the real problem lies. Like Labour members, I am strongly of the opinion that discipline is the most important issue that we have to deal with. In the grand scheme of things, perhaps only a small number of pupils are causing problems, but if we let them get away with it, we will have serious difficulties in times ahead. As the First Minister is very quick to tell us, the Scottish Executive has, since last May, apparently grown up to be a Government—a decision that we  are told is based on common sense and the added responsibility that goes with running Scotland. The Conservatives intend to hold the Government to its word. Let us hope that that means that the Government will become much more responsible and will address the real educational priorities that face this country, because to date the record has been very poor. Yesterday, my colleague Murdo Fraser awarded the cabinet secretary six out of 10 for her skills strategy. Let us just say that today's report card would read: "Could do better if attention was focused on the real things."

Members have unanimously made clear the importance of a skills strategy in developing a successful economy and more meaningful and fulfilling opportunities in education. In that respect, it is good that a skills strategy is now a priority on the Government's agenda. As my colleagues Murdo Fraser and Derek Brownlee have said, the Conservatives will support the basic principles behind the cabinet secretary's announcement. We especially recognise the need for a much more coherent and consistent approach in delivering skills training. However, we believe that the strategy, as it stands, does not go nearly far enough in dealing with some of the fundamental issues. We therefore seek to use this opportunity to receive assurances from the cabinet secretary that she will address those issues as a matter of considerable urgency in the next few months. First, with regard to basic skills in literacy and numeracy, the cabinet secretary has correctly identified that there is a need for far higher standards. That is self-evident from the worrying statistics on the number of Scottish school children—and, in some cases, university graduates—who leave education unable to meet the requirements of employers. Does the cabinet secretary accept that the situation will improve  only if there is even greater emphasis on the three Rs in the primary 7 and secondary 1 and 2 curricula? Does she also accept that there must be much greater rigour in the school examination system to consolidate those basic skills? The cabinet secretary will be only too aware of the fact that many people in the teaching profession—and, sadly, many employers—are deeply concerned about the dumbing down of the knowledge content of exams and about the fact that pupils can arrive at the end of their school careers without the necessary skills to move into a 21 st century workplace. The sizeable amount of money that Scottish businesses must spend from their training budgets on remedial training rather than on training for new skills is evidence of just how serious the problem is. On the same theme, I urge the cabinet secretary to ensure that there is absolutely no slippage in the timescale for the curriculum for excellence, which is, as she says, an exciting new challenge for Scottish schools in dealing with many aspects of broadening the skills base and the adult responsibilities that go with that. In my view, the curriculum for excellence has much to offer Scotland. It is essential that subject teachers be given the necessary assurances that resources and information will be given as soon as possible to allow them to develop their own areas. If we can get the balance right between greater rigour in the exam system, which is much needed, and the creation of imaginative and responsible citizens, which is the vision behind the curriculum for excellence, the skills strategy will have a far greater chance of success. Secondly, we believe that we should go much further down the road to formal vocational training and apprenticeships. We welcome the cabinet secretary's moves to improve the links between schools and colleges although it is, ultimately, merely tinkering at the edges. Will the cabinet secretary agree to consider the practice of other European countries of allowing pupils to leave school at 14 if they and their teachers accept that pursuit of an academic curriculum is neither appropriate nor relevant? Learning a trade or a craft should never be regarded as being somehow inferior to an academic education. It is time to recognise that far more youngsters would be much more able to get a meaningful focus if they were able to harness their talents outside an academic classroom. That would also go a long way towards dealing with the growing number of young people in the NEET category. The key point is that we must ensure that the skills that are fostered are the most appropriate for the jobs that are available. We should be mindful of the 8 per cent of vacancies in the workplace that remain unfilled because applicants do not  have the necessary skills, qualifications or experience. Murdo Fraser has asked the cabinet secretary to rethink her hostile approach to skills academies—I hope that she will do so as soon as possible. They are a logical extension of some of the principles that she has set out and that we have underlined this afternoon. They would do much to enhance the opportunities for specialist training, especially in areas such as technology, music and sport, in which Scotland potentially has so much creative energy. It is to be hoped that the reluctance to embrace the idea at the moment is not bound up with an obsessive attachment to a one-size-fits-all education system that, frankly, is increasingly out of date and is not meeting the needs of many youngsters in our society. We agree with the cabinet secretary's desire to merge Careers Scotland and learndirect Scotland, but we urge her to go further and to create a single skills agency for Scotland that would not only take on the functions of those two existing bodies, but would incorporate the skills training that is currently undertaken by Scottish Enterprise. There is a clear need for streamlining, greater simplicity and much greater accountability. I conclude by returning to my original point, which is to pledge the support of the Scottish Conservatives for a skills strategy as a priority of Parliament. We will support some of the basic themes that have been announced this week, but we are of the very strong opinion that there are still far too many missed opportunities to deal head-on with the problem that employers face as they seek a fully trained workforce that is capable of delivering greater economic progress for Scotland as a whole.

By this stage in the debate, it has become abundantly clear that the Scottish Conservatives warmly welcome the new Scottish Executive's—or Government's—announcement of additional funding for the Crichton campus, and that we welcome the emergence of the academic strategy. We continue to support strongly the excellent work that is done at Crichton, and we praise the spirit that has been shown by staff and students in their campaign to protect their institution. Many people have praised MSP colleagues in the south-west who have done so much to make the case for resolving the impasse in favour of the University of Glasgow's retaining its status at the campus. If I may borrow a phrase that is usually associated with other political parties, and "speak up for those who have been denied a voice", I too pay great tribute to those efforts. In the introduction to the prospectus for the University of Glasgow at the Crichton campus, Professor Ted Cowan, its director, says: "As long as humankind has been resident on this planet, individuals have wondered about the meaning of existence, asked questions about the plight of humanity ... and have speculated on whether there might be a better way of doing things." In six minutes it would obviously be totally impossible to explain the meaning of existence, but it is right today to ask questions about the plight of people who live in rural areas and who may wish to take up the challenging questions that are encountered in higher and further education. On this side of the chamber, we will not hold back  from suggesting that there is perhaps a better way of doing things. Wider lessons can be learnt from Crichton, including lessons on university funding. I want to refer to the specific events that have given rise to this debate. At the time, we made plain our concerns over inaction that would have resulted in the withdrawal of the University of Glasgow from the campus, which would in turn have burdened the local area with further social and economic difficulties. The loss of young people to the cities has been a major contributor to those difficulties. Between 2001 and 2005, there was a fall of 6.3 per cent in the population of people below working age in Dumfries and Galloway. That figure is disproportionately high for Scotland as a whole, but it reflects a picture that is common in rural areas. It is imperative that depopulation be not allowed to continue unchecked; if it were, that would store up serious employment difficulties for the future. Many of the young people who leave are intelligent and hard-working. They leave to go to university but never return, and although school leavers from Dumfries and Galloway are actually slightly more likely to enter full-time further education than those from other regions, only 12.7 per cent of those undergraduates stay to study at the Crichton. I presume that the rest study outwith the area. The problem is much worse for postgraduates, almost all of whom, although they are registered as living in Dumfries and Galloway, currently attend institutions outwith the area. As the introduction from Professor Cowan that I quoted implies, the Crichton campus was founded on noble ideals. Giving rural areas higher education provision is not least among those. If both undergraduates and postgraduates are given opportunities to access higher education in their local area, it is much more likely that young people will stay put, for reasons of convenience and cost. Equally, some young people—who might otherwise have been put off entirely—may decide to attend university for those same reasons. If a rural campus is very good, it may even attract a significant number of students from further afield, although that is more of a long-term goal for the Crichton. It should also be noted that campuses such as the Crichton are often the only means of providing access to tertiary education to many mature students, who generally have families and jobs and hence find it difficult to relocate.

The cabinet secretary makes a perfectly valid point. The security that goes along with resource provision will be extremely important. There will also be benefits to the local economy in retaining bright young people in the area through their university years and beyond, in upskilling the existing local workforce, and in presenting local employers with easy access to a pool of very good-quality graduate labour, and to the technical expertise and facilities of a university. More widely, we must add that the uncertainty that has been experienced over the future of the campus, however unfortunate that was, has bolstered the case for a wide-ranging review of the way in which all higher and further education is funded in Scotland. Sufficient funding must be provided and—as my colleague Murdo Fraser has said this afternoon—the provision of funding on a decentralised basis will be a major issue in the future. Funding must be sustainable on a long-term basis—not just for a few years, but for a long time in the future. If we recognise that outreach campuses that offer a large number of courses to a small number of students in rural areas are desirable, we must also recognise that there is a need for different and much more generous funding. As well as supporting the cabinet secretary's motion, I urge her to turn her attention to the generous funding arrangements that must be put in place for all university campuses and all further developments in higher and further education.

To ask the First Minister how he will ensure that there is sufficient school accommodation of the correct type for him to meet the promises on class sizes and early intervention and the expectations of parents. (S3F-125)

In Perth and Kinross, the deputy director of education has estimated that 12 schools will not, with existing resources, be able to meet the targets. He said that he would need 19 additional classrooms, the additional teachers for which alone would mean a bill of somewhere in the region of £735,000 on top of his budget of £2.1 million for this year. His fear is that the additional financial burdens are so great that classrooms that are currently used for art, music and drama might have to be sacrificed, with consequent damaging effects on children's education. What will the First Minister do to ensure that that does not happen?

Does the cabinet secretary have any idea how many extra teachers and classrooms will be required, assuming that the SNP manifesto commitment is realised?

I do not think that a single member disagrees with the cabinet secretary when she identifies the importance of education, lifelong learning and skills, which are in her brief in this third session of Parliament. In my role as the Conservative's shadow spokesman for schools, children and skills, I thank her for providing at least some of the detail about how she intends to deliver manifesto commitments for Scottish schools. The cabinet secretary is right to identify the early years of a child's life at school as the most important, so I think that she will find common ground throughout the chamber when she places emphasis on making necessary resources available for the nursery and early primary school years. Too many children fall behind in those years, and a strong correlation exists with social deprivation, so early intervention may present the only prospect of getting back on the right footing. I am sure that we all agree with the cabinet secretary when she states her determination to improve the learning environment for all pupils throughout Scotland by improving the curriculum's focus, by improving the opportunities for vocational training and by improving links with colleges and universities. All that is hugely important to our children's future and to suggest otherwise would be churlish. In delivering that better learning environment, I challenge the cabinet secretary to address a specific issue: I ask her to accept unequivocally that something needs to be done urgently to improve school discipline. I stress that I say that not to scaremonger, to exaggerate or to take anything away from the excellent teaching that happens throughout Scotland every day, but it is time to acknowledge that the discipline problem is growing and that, in many cases, it threatens to undermine the well-behaved majority's educational achievements. Sadly, the problem is at the top of  the agenda for a large proportion of the teaching profession and among parents. It simply cannot be allowed to continue. Given that, members will understand why I was disappointed to receive a response earlier in the week from the cabinet secretary that suggests that she is preparing to make a personal U-turn on the publication of statistics—for which she asked when in opposition—that would tell us exactly how many incidents of verbal and physical attacks on school staff take place annually. She rightly criticised the previous Scottish Executive for failing to produce such statistics—she has said that that failure was "not good enough", because it suggested that there was something to hide. I hope that, in government, she will understand that teachers and parents expect her to be responsible for telling her department that it must produce such statistics, which—incidentally—local authorities already compile. It would not be expensive to publish them in the public domain.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her clarification, but I am not being in the least bit negative. Statistics certainly cannot tell us the whole story about indiscipline in schools, but they are an important part of identifying the real problem, and we have a right to know what they are. Indeed, if she does not accede to demands for publication of those statistics, Parliament and the authority of the cabinet secretary to tackle school discipline could be undermined. The wrong message would be sent to members of staff who have been unfortunate enough to be the victims of such incidents.

That is a perfectly valid point and I thank the member for raising it.  The cabinet secretary used a large part of her speech to discuss the reduction of class sizes, which she obviously sees as being a vital weapon in the fight against indiscipline. In some cases, it may be, particularly in the early years, but I do not accept that national targets and a one-size-fits-all class size are the most pragmatic ways forward. Apart from anything else, such policies could be unusually expensive both in terms of parents' freedom to choose the school that is most suitable for their child and for the public purse. That brings me to my final plea. Does the cabinet secretary agree with the main thrust of the Conservative manifesto commitment to give head teachers far more control over their schools and the freedom to decide what is best for pupils and teachers in their schools, and about discipline, class sizes and setting their own budgets? Those men and women are the professionals on the front line. I hope that the Scottish Executive agrees with us that we should trust them as the people who are most likely to make the right decisions about what should happen inside our classrooms.

It is also a privilege for me to lend my support to Karen Whitefield's motion. Education is many things. It is the foundation on which we base our hopes and aspirations for our children, as well as something that touches our deepest emotions—a point that Christine Grahame rightly brought to our attention. It is also the prerequisite for economic wealth, the guardian of our culture, the vehicle by which we learn about our rights and responsibilities and the key with which we can unlock many doors to the wider world. Like health, education matters to everyone and it is often used as the yardstick by which we measure the progress of a nation. It is tempting to focus solely on the need to ensure that all children across Scotland, whatever their backgrounds or physical and mental abilities, have their respective educational needs addressed. That is a major challenge in itself, but the wider moral issue of what to do about the international situation is also at stake. In that context, it is right that education is defined as an inalienable human right and that it should be defined as such in article 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. However, it is not right that education is still denied to almost 80 million children across the world. It is our duty to rectify the situation in whatever way we can and to ensure that the privilege of education is extended to the many millions who are currently without that fundamental human right. What should we do? In the first instance, our international aid programme must be refocused to ensure that money goes to those who are most in need. Currently, only 32 per cent of our aid budget is spent in the poorest nations. When we consider the nature of the challenge that we face—1.2 billion people, which is around one in five in the world, survive on less than $1 a day; life expectancy is actually falling in some nations; 30,000 children die every day from easily preventable diseases; 11 million children are AIDS orphans and another 40 million are HIV positive—it is clear that far more money must be directed at the poorer nations and that aid should remain independent of British commercial interests. Not only is it important to end the practice of tied aid,  but my party would also like there to be more opportunity for money to be sent directly to those who are most in need. Perhaps that would be best managed in the form of aid vouchers that can be redeemed collectively by individuals in the poorest communities for development services that can provide new schools and new medical centres. There is a moral obligation on the British Government not only to meet the United Nations' target figure of 0.7 per cent of gross national product being spent annually on aid, but to try to ensure that that happens before 2013. In particular, more money needs to be spent on medical services—for example, on projects such as the millennium development goal on malaria—so that more children have the opportunity to have a better health record that will allow them to attend school regularly. One of the most important ways that we can assist with education is to export knowledge; to ensure that a growing number of businesses and individuals with professional expertise have the incentive to work with the poorest nations to build new infrastructures and public services that give people a better start in life. Such is the scale of poverty and educational disadvantage that it is all too easy to be overwhelmed by the challenge that we face. However, there are positive policies that we must pursue, and it is incumbent upon us all to play our part in delivering a more efficient structure of international development that will help to provide far more individuals everywhere with the education that they have a right to receive.

The equivalent to the graduate endowment for those from other parts of the United Kingdom who currently study in Scotland is the £1,700 annual tuition fee. Before the election, the cabinet secretary gave the commitment to the 28,000 students in that category that they deserved exactly the same deal as Scots and that they would pay nothing under an SNP-led Administration. Will she honour that commitment and, if so, exactly when will it be in operation?

To ask the First Minister what plans the Executive has to improve discipline in primary schools. (S3F-32)

I thank the First Minister for his answer and Mrs MacDonald for her excellent aside. In light of the SNP's manifesto commitment to produce new guidelines to help schools establish much more peaceful working and learning environments, does the First Minister agree that Scottish headteachers should be given the power to search pupils who are suspected of carrying knives and other dangerous weapons, as is already the case in England?

The Scottish Conservatives are delighted to have had an early opportunity to debate what is undoubtedly one of the most important policy issues that will determine the future progress of Scotland. In the Parliament's third session, it is important that we focus less on the ideology of education and far more on the practicalities that schools, colleges and universities face, of which there are many. As Murdo Fraser said, the Scottish Conservatives have long been concerned about the need to develop a more consistent and coherent strategy on training in vocational skills, and we welcome Fiona Hyslop's recognition that the present situation is unsatisfactory. In our view, future policy should be driven by three key themes. First, the overriding objective must be to provide a workforce that is fit for the challenges of the 21 st century and which will allow Scotland to develop its full economic potential and its ability to compete successfully in the international community. We cannot ignore the concern of around a third of employers in Scotland—including many members of the Confederation of British Industry—that many school leavers are poorly prepared for work. Secondly, the education system must be as flexible as possible so that it is better suited to the individual needs of youngsters whose aspirations may differ considerably. That means ensuring that youngsters at the age of 14 will have the opportunity to enter vocational training if they feel that pursuing full-time academic courses is not relevant to their abilities.

I agree that the practices to which Mr Purvis refers are important, but I do not think that what we suggest would divert resources from them—that would not be appropriate at all. A vocational approach to Scotland's education system would provide our young people with a career-focused programme that was designed to give secondary pupils a head start in their post-secondary careers. The Conservatives support the introduction of skills academies and science centres of excellence, although we acknowledge that there must be much more discussion of them. We regard such schools as an important milestone on the path away from a one-size-fits-all system towards having a much more diverse range of schools that would operate with much lighter state direction. As well as specialising in vocational education and science, it is only logical that schools should be encouraged to specialise in music, drama, art, sports and other areas for which there is demand, such as technology. However, the idea that our young people should, in effect, be forced to stay on at school until they are 18 is, at best, reactionary. The notion that we can solve the problems of those many young people who want to escape from an educational environment in which they do not perform well by making them, through law, stay on at school is, in our opinion, ill thought out. It will do nothing to help solve the educational issues that many pupils face.

Not on this one, thank you. We must look at the practice in other European countries such as the Netherlands, Germany and Ireland, in which vocational training is incorporated in the education system. That removes the possible stigma of vocational skills being thought of as low-level skills, which they are not. Apprenticeships in such systems have a positive effect on youngsters' self-discipline. In that regard, I agree with Mr Harper's point about developing well-rounded individuals. We should support much of the blue-skies thinking that is emerging from the curriculum for excellence programme. Much work remains to be done to put flesh on the bones, but there is a  welcome recognition that more focus is needed on the teaching of life skills. Thirdly, a coherent national framework that involves all levels of a youngster's educational experience must be developed. Many good initiatives exist throughout the country, but there is not always a national framework in which to fit them together, especially for the teaching of basic skills in reading, writing and arithmetic. I restate my party's commitment to putting skills and vocational training at the top of the political agenda. We welcome much of what the minister said.

I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on  securing the debate and commend her diligence in seeking answers to the questions that, as yet, remain unanswered. I extend to you, Presiding Officer, the courtesy of apologising for the fact that I have to leave the chamber shortly before 6 o'clock because of a school engagement that was fixed before I was notified of the debate. Ms Cunningham is quite right to say that the issue of water safety has, sadly, been at the forefront of our thoughts recently with the tragic loss of life on the Tay. I extend my condolences to the families involved. Not surprisingly, the issue has caused much concern among local fire officers for the very reasons that Ms Cunningham has outlined. It is principally on those grounds that I am happy to support her motion. Scotland has more than 50,000km of moving water, so it is unsatisfactory that we do not have a coherent water safety strategy under which there is a statutory duty to rescue people who become trapped in moving water. The Fire (Additional Function) (Scotland) Order 2005 places a statutory duty on fire and rescue authorities to make provision for "rescuing people trapped, or likely to become trapped, by water ... in the event of serious flooding" in their areas. However, it is unclear whether the provision covers direct responsibility for carrying out rescues from moving water when no authority in Scotland has a statutory duty to do so. In Norway, for example, the police have a core responsibility for responding to such emergencies, with additional headquarters in each of its 19 counties so that such incidents can be managed directly. In the past, our fire and rescue services have demonstrated their ability to deal with many difficult and challenging incidents. I pay specific tribute to their professionalism during the recent flooding in the Milnathort area of Kinross-shire. That professionalism should not be compromised by a lack of clarity in the laws of the land. Naturally, firefighters have voiced concerns about the need for dedicated water rescue equipment, and they believe that further training is necessary to ensure that such rescues can be carried out. I take the opportunity to highlight another arm of our rescue services that is often overlooked and its specialist training and rescue service potential. I refer to the Scottish mountain rescue teams, which could play a vital role in a Scottish water rescue strategy. Made up of volunteers who are on call 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, many mountain rescue teams are more used to carrying out rescues from rivers and dangerous gorges  where rivers are in spate. They should be included in any legislation. As with climbing, perhaps the most important safety aspect in relation to moving water is the fact that people need to be aware of the hazards and have the appropriate skills to prevent themselves or others from getting into incidents. The Safe-Tay charity in Perth, which was established to promote water safety and to prevent future tragedies in our rivers, is to be commended, and I hope that the idea will be extended to other parts of Scotland. Above all, it is important to take a much more co-ordinated approach and bring together all our rescue services. On that point, I fully agree with the motion.

When it comes to the creation of wealth in this country, no policy could be more important than the education of our young people. It is a theme that is close to my heart and on which I am grateful to make my first speech in the chamber. There is no doubt that Scottish education can rightly claim many distinguished achievements in its long history, for which we have been admired throughout the world. However, the Parliament should be in no doubt about the concern among today's employers that in some areas we are failing to live up to that reputation, given our inability to produce a workforce that is adequately  skilled to cope with the demands of the 21 st century. In particular, it is deeply worrying that the CBI, in its recent manifesto for the elections, highlighted the fact that it is now commonplace for the Scottish business community to spend an unacceptably high percentage of its £2 billion annual training budget on what is, in effect, remedial education—I use its term—rather than on new skills and on ensuring that Scotland is better able to compete on the international stage. The reality is that the basic levels of reading, writing and arithmetic of too many of our school leavers is simply not good enough, and is often accompanied by a lack of awareness and understanding of the world of enterprise. In my view, three things need to happen, and they must be an urgent priority for this session of Parliament. First, we must get away from the policies that are driven by artificial targets and focus on quantitative rather than qualitative measurements of academic standards. Governments that insist on dictating the numbers of students who will end up with graduate-level qualifications do no service to our young people or our economy as a whole. University entrance should be based on merit alone, certainly not on some pie-in-the-sky percentage that is dreamt up by civil servants or ministers. Secondly, there is the related need to provide youngsters who wish to pursue a vocation or apprenticeship rather than a degree with the facility to do so from the age of 14. Far too many Scottish pupils feel trapped in school, where the pursuit of an academic career is of neither interest nor relevance to their aspirations. Subsequently, too many of them get into trouble. They become disaffected and lose confidence and, most important, lose out on the opportunity to earn an income and the adult responsibilities that go with it. There are sufficient problems with discipline in schools already without our adding to them with more disaffected young people who do not want to be there. Thirdly, there needs to be much greater consistency in educational standards throughout Scotland—a problem identified by Her Majesty's chief inspector of education as one of the main reasons why too many young people are leaving school short of the basic skills that are required in any workplace. Local government must play its part in responding to that concern and it must refuse to accept the lowest common denominator when it comes to education policy. Scotland was once renowned for its industry and enterprise. It can be again, but to achieve that, tough decisions will have to be made in the Parliament, especially those that focus on the pursuit of excellence rather than on misplaced and  expensive political correctness, which rewards too many of our youngsters with nothing other than mediocrity and negativity.