The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08742, in the name of Stuart McMillan, on society’s increasing reliance on food banks. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with concern the ever increasing rise in the number of people relying on foodbanks in Scotland and across the UK; considers that it is not only the unemployed, but also those underemployed or underpaid who are increasingly becoming reliant on foodbanks to feed themselves and their families; acknowledges the hard work and dedication of the staff and volunteers at foodbanks in West Scotland and across the rest of the country, and believes that changes to benefits, rises in energy costs and static incomes have helped contribute to such a large increase in the need for such aid.

I call Dennis Robertson.

Mr Brown, will you turn your microphone round slightly? We are not hearing you properly; I am not sure whether that is because of the chat in the chamber.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08729, in the name of Jenny Marra, on the international day of zero tolerance for female genital mutilation. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes that 6 February is International Day of Zero Tolerance to Female Genital Mutilation; considers that female genital mutilation is a severe abuse of human rights, in which women and girls can have their clitoris and labia cut and their vagina sewn up; understands that there are 3,000 women and girls at risk from female genital mutilation in Scotland and that this number is due to rise according to new population estimates in the 2011 census; understands that there has not been one single police report, prosecution or conviction for female genital mutilation despite renewed legislation passed by the Parliament in 2005; notes the Scottish Government’s commitment to fund a scoping exercise to assess the scale of female genital mutilation across Scotland, and notes calls for this exercise to be comprehensive yet swift and to result in a further commitment for tangible action to tackle the human rights abuse of female genital mutilation in Scotland and protect those women and girls at risk of harm from what it considers this torture.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08842, in the name of Maureen Watt, on self-immolations in Tibet. The debate will be concluded without any questions being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with grave concern that at least 127 Tibetans have self-immolated, often fatally, since February 2009; understands that these actions are largely acts of protest against restrictions on religion, the Tibetan language, access to employment and the degradation of water resources and grazing lands; expresses concern at what it understands has been the state’s attempts to prevent accurate reports of self-immolations reaching the media; condemns what it considers the criminalisation of family members and sometimes witnesses to the incidents; believes that 11 countries urged China to improve the human rights of Tibetans at the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva on 22 October 2013, and commends the work of the Scottish Centre for Himalayan studies at the University of Aberdeen, the Grampian Tibet Support Group and other groups across Scotland in highlighting human rights and supporting cultural and educational links with Tibet and beyond.

We have some time in hand, so I can generously give members up to seven minutes and still have a little bit of time for interventions at this stage.

You must conclude, please.

You must conclude, please.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08592, in the name of Joan McAlpine, on congratulations to the Big Burns Supper 2014. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates the Big Burns Supper festival on its programme of music, carnival, cabaret and theatre that will take place in Dumfries from 24 to 26 January 2014; understands that the Big Burns Supper was established in 2012 and is now the world’s biggest Burns Night celebration; further understands that the 2014 festival will be the biggest to date, attracting visitors from Scotland, the UK and across the world; welcomes the varied programme of entertainment featuring international as well as local talent including Big Country, the Spanish-born singer, Concha Buika, and Cammy Black from Dumfries and Galloway; notes that 2014 is the Year of Homecoming and that the Big Burns Supper will celebrate this with a lantern procession that will include 2,000 people, and congratulates everyone who has contributed to the festival’s increasing success, including the organising team lead by Graham Main, Creative Scotland, Homecoming Scotland, Winter Festivals Burns Night, 8020 and Dumfries and Galloway Council.

Yes.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08734, in the name of John Lamont, on the City of Edinburgh Council (Leith Links and Surplus Fire Fund) Bill. I call John Lamont to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the City of Edinburgh Council (Leith Links and Surplus Fire Fund) Bill Committee.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what importance it places on the provision of low-vision aids. (S4O-02798)

The arrangements for community optometry seem to be working well, but does the minister recall that one of the original aims of the scheme was to “provide rapid and uncomplicated access to low vision equipment” because it can help people to live independently? I am advised by local optometrists that they cannot begin to meet the demand for low-vision aids within the current funding structure. Can the minister comment on how that situation might be improved so that my constituents and others can enjoy enhanced quality of life?

The first item of business this afternoon is consideration of business motion S4M-08768, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during stage 3 of the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3: 35 minutes Groups 4 to 6: 50 minutes.—[Joe FitzPatrick]. Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendments members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, SP bill 26A; the marshalled list of amendments, SP bill 26A-ML; and the groupings, SP bill 26A-G. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period for voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Members who wish to speak in the debate on any group of amendments should press their request to speak button as soon as possible after I call the group. Members should refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Section 4—Regulators’ duty in respect of sustainable economic growth

The question is, that amendment 21 be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08745, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill. Before I invite the minister to open the debate, I ask the cabinet secretary to signify crown consent to the bill.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08752, in the name of Neil Findlay, on the NHS in Scotland. We are tight for time this afternoon. I call Neil Findlay to speak to and move the motion.

You are in your last minute, Mr Henry. I can give you only a few seconds extra.

On this occasion, I will allow nicknames.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08732, in the name of Rob Gibson, on the Scottish Government’s consultation on its draft climate change adaptation programme. I call Rob Gibson to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. Mr Gibson, you have 10 minutes.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08651, in the name of James Dornan, on the CEDAR—children experiencing domestic abuse recovery—network. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Since James Dornan cannot be with us for the debate, for very understandable reasons, I call on Sandra White to open the debate. Motion debated, That the Parliament commends the work of the Cedar Network and other third sector organisations in assisting women and young people who are affected by domestic abuse; notes that a branch of the Cedar Network has been established in Glasgow, which adds to the rest of its network across Scotland; considers its work, which it carries out through group work and support, to be hugely important in aiding recovery from domestic abuse; notes what it sees as the Cedar Network’s close working relationship with a number of third sector and statutory organisations, such as the Castlemilk Domestic Abuse Project; considers that the inclusion of trained facilitators from a wide range of statutory and voluntary agencies helps to foster a multiagency support network that is crucial to the success of the project; highlights research conducted by Nancy Lombard, who is a lecturer in social policy at Glasgow Caledonian University, on young people’s attitudes toward violence, which suggests that engaging them in discussions on the subject will help challenge gendered perceptions of this, and considers education on violence and support for women and children to be key in helping to break cycles of domestic abuse.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08221, in the name of Paul Martin, on the effectiveness of existing dog control laws. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes calls to review the effectiveness of existing dog control laws following what it considers a large number of dog attacks throughout Scotland, including in Glasgow; notes calls for compulsory microchipping of dogs to aid identification of dangerous dogs and encourage responsible dog ownership; considers that the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010 was a positive step forward in dealing with dangerous dogs and irresponsible owners but considers that more work needs to be done to prevent dog attacks, and notes calls for greater emphasis to be placed on assessing owners and the environment in which dogs are kept.

We now turn to the open debate, with speeches of four minutes, please.

Order, please.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08602, in the name of Fiona McLeod, on recognising the value of community optometry. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises the value of community optometry and the work of Optometry Scotland; notes that, as a result of an ageing population, the number of people in Scotland, including in Strathkelvin and Bearsden, with sight loss is projected to double in the next 20 years; welcomes what it considers the tremendous strides made in recent years with the development of the Scottish Vision Strategy with its emphasis on prevention, and considers that there is now an opportunity to make Scotland a world leader in integrated eye care.

I can give Patrick Harvie a little bit of extra time.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08323, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on discontinuation of the Home Office’s go home campaign. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the Home Office decision to discontinue what it considers its insensitive, callous and ill-thought-out Go Home poster campaign at its reporting centre at Brand Street in Glasgow; considers that, as the Scottish Refugee Council has stated, it caused distress to men, women and children in Scotland, some of whom are past victims of atrocity, torture and ill-treatment; notes what it believes is the shared will in Scotland and across the UK against such a hostile policy toward people who have claimed asylum in the UK; considers that the Go Home campaign messages echoed the language of the National Front in the 1970s, which was targeted particularly at non-white communities and recently arrived visible minority immigrants, and believes that what it sees as such an intemperate and appalling approach to refugees should be rejected.

That brings us to the closing speeches. I regret to note that two members who participated in the debate are not in the chamber. I trust that they will return to the chamber for the closing speeches.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is portfolio questions, and the first set of questions is on culture and external affairs. I regret that Ken Macintosh, who lodged question 1, does not appear to be in the chamber.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08610, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill. I call Fergus Ewing to speak to and move the motion. Minister, you have 14 minutes.

I call Hanzala Malik, to be followed by Christian Allard. I understand that we have some time in hand to compensate for interventions.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08431, in the name of John Wilson, on the 12 days of debtmas credit union campaign. The debate will be concluded without any questions being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government’s 12 Days of Debtmas campaign, which aims to encourage people to use credit unions rather than opt for high-interest short-term loans during the 2013 festive period; understands that, recently, there has been a growth in payday lending and that such loans have plunged many people and families in Central Scotland and throughout the country into financial hardship; notes that, across Scotland, credit union membership continues to grow, with over 350,000 people using their services, which, it believes include providing borrowing at much more affordable rates; understands with caution that some credit unions might be unable to provide the level of support required, and notes the calls for the Scottish Government to ensure that every credit union is provided with the necessary tools to act as a practical alternative to the high-interest borrowing and payday loans that many people could be vulnerable to during the festive period.

Does the cabinet secretary recall that, when I campaigned against the closure of Monklands A and E, I called for more investment and improvement in that hospital? Given that the report says that NHS Lanarkshire staff “at all levels indicate that there was a state of perpetual crisis ... regarding unscheduled care”, will the Scottish Government now commit to investing more funding as well as a support team to ensure that people get the care that they need? Will it also consider an additional minor injuries clinic at Coatbridge to help to alleviate the pressure on our A and E services?

We will now proceed with the division on amendment 1.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08609, in the name of John Swinney, on the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill. I invite members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now, but I indicate at this stage that we are extremely tight for time and it is likely that I will be able to give back-bench members only three minutes. I call John Swinney to speak to and move the motion. Cabinet secretary, you have no more than 10 minutes.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08612, in the name of Shona Robison, on violence against women. We are incredibly short for time, so members will have to keep to their times. If the opening speeches could be slightly less than indicated, that would be helpful. I call Shona Robison to speak to and move the motion. You have a maximum of 10 minutes in which to do so, Ms Robison.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08484, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on Moray library closures. The debate will be concluded without any questions being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament condemns Moray Council’s decision to remove a mobile library from service and close the libraries in Findochty, Hopeman, Portknockie and Rothes; believes that the decision to close four of its 15 libraries could have an adverse impact on families with young children and both older and disabled people; believes that libraries play a valuable role in communities and that the proposed closures would have a detrimental impact on education and learning and restrict access in rural communities to information technology services; further believes that this is particularly concerning as, it understands, the UK Government is increasingly making access to many services online only; notes that the Scottish Library and Information Council has commissioned a review of the Public Library Quality Improvement Matrix, which examines the quality of such services, and recognises the work of the Save our Libraries Moray campaign and others, which aims to bring together the communities affected by the council’s decision.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08036, in the name of Kezia Dugdale, on the Financial Conduct Authority’s plans to regulate the payday loan industry. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. The debate is somewhat oversubscribed. We have a two o’clock start this afternoon for consideration of legislation, so if I am going to be able to call everyone who would like to speak, members must try to keep their speeches to three minutes. Kezia Dugdale, who will open the debate, has seven minutes. Motion debated, That the Parliament supports the Financial Conduct Authority’s latest plans to regulate the payday loans industry as set out in its initial report on consumer credit; welcomes stricter requirements for payday lenders, which include a mandatory affordability check on borrowers, limiting the number of loan roll-overs to two and tighter restrictions on what payday lenders can say in adverts; considers that the payday lending sector represents an increasingly problematic issue in the Lothians and throughout the rest of Scotland; is concerned that advisors at Scotland’s Citizens Advice Bureaux (CAB) are seeing over a hundred people a week with payday loan related issues; notes that CAB provide advice to anyone who believes that they have been unfairly treated by a lender or who has problems with debt; considers it important that the lending industry is open and transparent and offers consumers a fair deal but also protects them from financial ruin, and believes that these proposals go some way toward beginning to address these issues.

We move to group 9, on the rights of children to make victim statements and receive information on offender release. Amendment 32, in the name of Elaine Murray, is grouped with amendments 33, 18, 18A, and 18B.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08562, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. I advise the chamber that we are incredibly tight for time. The cabinet secretary has a maximum of 10 minutes.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is portfolio question time. In order to get in as many members as possible, it would be helpful if questions and answers could be short and succinct.

Time is extremely tight. If members could take less than their six minutes, that would be incredibly helpful. Cabinet secretary, you have a maximum of 10 minutes.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08445, in the name of Alex Johnstone, on the Arbroath community alcohol free environment—CAFE—project. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament commends the CAFE Project in Arbroath on what it considers the wide range of activities and opportunities that it offers to young people in the area, including street football, guidance on training and employment, health advice and active citizenship; understands that the project has achieved national and international recognition for its success in providing a comprehensive alternative to alcohol, drug use and crime; welcomes that what it considers the innovative CAFE Project model has been adopted elsewhere in Scotland and the UK, and wishes it every success as it continues its pioneering work.

Conclude, please, Mr Johnstone.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08540, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the end-year fisheries negotiations.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08546, in the name of Shona Robison, on the youth sport strategy.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08016, in the name of George Adam, on YouthLink Scotland. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates YouthLink Scotland on the publication of what it considers the very positive recent inspection report by Education Scotland; notes the recognition in the report of the high quality contribution that YouthLink Scotland and its member organisations make to the achievement of Scottish Government outcomes; recognises the work that it undertakes in local authority areas such as Renfrewshire, where it considers the YMCA, the Scouts and Play the Game make an important difference on a daily basis to the lives of the young people of Paisley, Renfrew and Johnstone by working with particularly vulnerable groups of young people to provide them with opportunities to undertake new challenges and adventures and, as a consequence, help them toward recognising and fulfilling their potential as individuals and as active members of society, and considers that YouthLink Scotland and its member organisations from the voluntary sector, uniformed youth organisations and local authority youth services across Scotland that apply the principles and values of youth work, have been very successful in their engagement with young people through encouraging them to use a range of life skills, assisting them in their journey to adulthood and successful futures and making Scotland the best place in the world in which to grow up as a successful learner, a confident individual, an effective contributor and a responsible citizen.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08202, in the name of Elaine Murray, on all aboard the Food Train. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the award of a £59,474 Investing in Communities: Supporting 21st Century Life grant to Food Train Limited in Dumfries and Galloway; congratulates Food Train on its progress from its beginnings in Dumfries in 1995 as a service to assist older people with their weekly grocery shopping to a multi-award-winning charity supporting older people in six local authority areas in Scotland, with the intention of expanding further; notes that Food Train now also offers home support and befriending services, and understands that this award will support the continuation of Food Train Friends in Annandale and Eskdale and its expansion into other parts of Dumfries and Galloway, supporting at least 160 vulnerable people aged 65 and older to reduce social isolation and support their independence.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08480, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, on decision making on whether to take children into care. I call Stewart Maxwell to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Education and Culture Committee.

Good afternoon. The first item of business today is portfolio question time. In order to get as many members in as possible, I would be grateful for short and succinct questions and answers to match, please.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08470, in the name of Mary Fee, on housing. The member has 14 minutes, although the debate is very tight for time.

I am afraid that you must close. Your six minutes is up.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08110, in the name of Rhoda Grant, on world prematurity day 2013 and world-class neonatal care in Scotland. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament celebrates World Prematurity Day on 17 November 2013 and understands that 8,000 babies are born sick or premature each year in Scotland; welcomes Neonatal Care in Scotland: A Quality Framework, which creates new standards for neonatal care that aim to help ensure improvements to the care of premature and sick babies, ensuring that they receive the world-class treatment that they and their families deserve; commends Bliss Scotland and the health professionals involved in drawing up the new standards, which include increasing the number of staff in units, involving parents in the care of their baby and offering proper support and facilities to families, and looks forward to the implementation of these standards.

Mr Hepburn, I am having difficulty in hearing you. Will you move your microphone slightly?

Order, please.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-08144, in the name of James Dornan, on St Andrew’s First Aid’s “First aid? Count me in” campaign. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates St Andrew’s First Aid on its Count Me In Campaign; notes that it is seeking 34,000 signatories to its pledge, which it understands is the equivalent of the number of household accidents reported on a yearly basis that are taken to hospital where basic first aid would have sufficed; understands that the campaign seeks to educate the almost three-quarters of people in Scotland, including in Glasgow Cathcart, who do not have basic first aid skills, and considers that these skills are crucial in saving lives and removing unnecessary strain on emergency services.

We now turn to the closing speeches. I remind all members who have participated in the debate that they should be in the chamber for the closing speeches.

The member is in her final minute; I mention that because we are tight for time.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08348, in the name of Johann Lamont, on the future of the defence industry in Scotland. I advise members that we are tight for time in all this afternoon’s debates.

A week past on Saturday, as the constituency member for Coatbridge and Chryston I hosted the Conforti Institute’s intercultural dialogue conference here, which included delegates from home and abroad, gay, straight, Catholic, humanist, Protestant and pagan. They all recognised that we have to share this planet for the short time that we are here and that, while we may not all agree on issues such as same-sex marriage, we can surely disagree in a respectful fashion. Indeed, Alex Neil asked that the debate “be conducted in a good spirit and civilised manner, with respect on all sides.” Since I indicated that I did not intend to support the redefinition of marriage, my religion has been disparaged, I have been branded homophobic and bigoted, I have been likened to the Ku Klux Klan and it was suggested that I be burned at the stake as a witch. The irony is that I spent 12 years serving on the Equal Opportunities Committee, when we removed section 2A, permitted same-sex adoption and introduced civil partnerships. No one accused me of homophobia then—indeed, quite the opposite. Most of the people who have engaged with me on the issue are not homophobic. They have the sincerely held beliefs that marriage means one man and one woman as the social construct that forms the basis of family life and that, by altering that reality, the state will fundamentally affect our society with as yet unknown consequences. Catholics and other Christians who believe that marriage is a sacrament cannot support the redefinition. Of the 77,000 respondents to the Government’s consultation, which is the biggest response ever, 67 per cent were against redefining it. Those people need a voice in the Parliament tonight. As we have heard, amendments to the Equality Act 2010 will be sought to try to protect the clergy from legal action. That clearly recognises that court cases are likely, but those protections should be for everyone. Freedom of worship and freedom of religion are two different things, and both need to be protected. Section 14 of the bill could be amended to give wider protection, but I am not convinced that that would be unassailable. In evidence, Alex Neil said: “Sometimes, it depends on the judge.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 3 October 2013; c 1597.] Previously, we were given promises by ministers that they did not foresee unintended consequences of same-sex adoption and that Catholic adoption agencies specifically would be able to continue their work. I was in the chamber then and voted for the legislation on that basis. We now know that that is not the case, and the closure of agencies means that many children will suffer as a consequence. The problem with the threat of legal challenges is that the churches cannot afford to fight them, even if they ultimately win. Both the Catholic church and the Church of Scotland have therefore stated that they may be forced to separate religious ceremonies from state ceremonies. The consequence of that would be that thousands of heterosexual couples would need to get married in a registry office and then seek a religious blessing so that a few same-sex couples would have the full ceremony in a church. Those who support the bill and think that it will have no impact on them and most of us who just want to live and let live need to understand that they may be directly affected.

I do not have time. There are wider implications and consequences, both intended and unintended. Aidan O’Neill QC’s legal opinion says that parents with children in faith schools could be affected, and teachers, chaplains, registrars and other public sector workers may be subject to disciplinary action. Despite Government promises, no additional measures have as yet been included to safeguard freedom of speech and religion. The Lord Advocate’s guidance to prosecutors for those who oppose same-sex marriage also gives cause for concern and suggests the expectation of legal challenges. As the constituency MSP for Coatbridge and Chryston, I have been approached by hundreds of constituents who have asked me, either individually or as part of the numerous local religious organisations, to vote against the bill. It does not seem that many members will speak against it, but MSPs have a responsibility to ensure to the best of their ability that they are not introducing legislation that will have consequences—albeit perhaps unintended—that will negatively impact on society. Some members may believe that, as a result of signing a pledge, they must support the bill. Indeed, it is worrying that the director of the Equality Network claimed in Holyrood magazine a few weeks ago that “Over two-thirds of MSPs have now signed the Equality Network’s ‘Equal Marriage Pledge’ committing themselves to voting in favour of same-sex marriage.” It is important to clarify that signing a pledge and voting for legislation are two very different things. Members signed that pledge before they set eyes on the legislation or before they scrutinised the proposal. The bill may well have detrimental consequences for many people, and their representatives need to be clear about that when they vote. The committee report deals with the oral evidence, but it seems to be silent on the vast amounts of written evidence, including mine. In my submission, I cited Professor Tom Gallagher, who is a gay man who lives with his partner of 31 years and is the author of “Divided Scotland: Ethnic Friction & Christian Crisis”. He had hoped to give oral evidence, but he was not called. He would like his remarks to be put on the record. He said: “The arrival of gay marriage only benefits a small group of activists, who have the ear of part of the media, the civil service & of politicians who naively think there are a few votes in it for them. Some gays and lesbians feel they have been hi-jacked by these campaigners. Many more are bound to be upset by the hurt caused to un-bigoted fellow citizens as they see one of mankind’s most important social structures—marriage—become a battleground in schools & almost certainly the courts. This is no liberation for gay Scots: instead it creates unnecessary distrust between them and a large swathe of the population.”

In conclusion, my considered view is that, while attempting to tackle a perceived inequality, we will create the conditions for discrimination and legal action against many of our citizens. In perhaps striving for an enlightened position that makes everything for the best in the best of all possible worlds, the bill will bring consequences that will have a detrimental impact on our fragile society. I hope that MSPs have not been bounced into voting yes because of the fear of being branded homophobic, because they signed a pledge or because they have not reflected on all the arguments presented to the Government and the committee.

I have no doubt that the majority of MSPs who vote for the bill will do so with good intentions, but unfortunately, as Karl Marx pointed out in “Capital” with regard to unforeseen consequences, the way to hell is paved with good intentions. I will be voting no this evening.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07752, in the name of Colin Keir, on 100 years of conservation, research and education at Edinburgh zoo. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament commemorates the centenary of Edinburgh Zoo, which was opened by Thomas Gillespie, founder of The Royal Zoological Society of Scotland (RZSS) in July 1913 and which remains the only zoological park in the UK to have a Royal Charter; notes what it considers the varied programme of events planned to commemorate the centenary year, including exhibitions, lectures and interactive events for children and adults; considers that the legacy of Thomas Gillespie has been continued into the 21st century, with Edinburgh Zoo a world-recognised centre of conservation for threatened domestic and international species, undertaking projects such as the Scottish Beaver Trial, the Pantanal Conservation and Research Initiative, the Cairngorm Wildcat Project Nyungwe Ecology Project, African Wild Dog Conservation, Water Vole Conservation, the Budongo Conservation Field Station and the Henderson Island Restoration Project; commends the in-the-field research and what is considered the highly significant international conservation work that the RZSS undertakes, most notably, the China/UK Giant Panda Project, a world-first research project to reintroduce giant pandas into the wild; considers that Edinburgh Zoo has a particular focus on education and has, as such, garnered an international reputation for excellence in the study of animals and their environments both in captivity and in the wild, with teams of experts working at the vanguard of scientific research to further investigate applied conservation genetics, population management, veterinary science, animal behaviour, ecology and nutrition, and understands that the design of the animal enclosures, which were originally based on the idea of the open zoo at Hamburg designed by Carl Hagenbeck, are constantly evolving in line with the continually expanding knowledge of physical and psychological animal welfare.

I call Drew Smith, who has eight minutes.

I remind members to speak through the chair.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07932, in the name of Claire Baker, on national parks: unfinished business. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the recent report by the Scottish Campaign for National Parks and the Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland, Unfinished Business: A National Parks Strategy for Scotland; notes that the report states that “Scotland’s landscapes rank amongst the best in the world”; further notes its claim that “there are further areas of outstanding importance for landscape and recreation in Scotland worthy of National Park designation, and that this would best be done in the context of an overall agreed national strategy”; understands that the report identifies seven areas that should be considered for designation as a national park: the Ben Nevis/Glen Coe/Black Mount area, the Cheviot Hills, an area based around Mull, Coll and Tiree, Galloway, Glen Affric, Harris and Wester Ross; believes that, by protecting the environment, attracting tourists and providing social and economic benefits to the communities that they serve and the rest of the country, the national parks at Loch Lomond and the Trossachs and the Cairngorms have proved to be successful in meeting the aims set out by the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, and notes calls for a Scotland-wide debate on the way forward for national parks.

Before moving on to the closing speeches, I remind members that all members should be in the chamber for closing speeches if they have participated in a debate. I note that Margaret McDougall is not in the chamber.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-06623, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b) of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[John Swinney.]

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08254, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on Dundee, city of culture. I call Fiona Hyslop to speak to and move the motion. Cabinet secretary, you have eight minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08265, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Water Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Water Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 27 June 2013, relating to the treatment of applications for a water supply or sewerage services licence or in connection with safeguarding the movement of fish through the border River Esk, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Margaret Burgess.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08240, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07731, in the name of Mike MacKenzie, on the best buildings in Scotland. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates the 12 winners of the 2013 Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland (RIAS) awards who make up the shortlist for the RIAS Andrew Doolan Best Building in Scotland Award, which will be presented on 7 November 2013 at the Parliament; understands that there were 75 submissions for the RIAS awards, ranging from £0 to over £30 million in contract value; commends the quality, ingenuity and innovation of the projects on the shortlist for the award throughout Scotland; recognises the contribution that both Scottish and international architects make to the quality of the built environment in the Highlands and Islands and across the country and the international contribution that Scotland’s architects make, and considers that RIAS and the architectural profession stand ready to help design and build a better and more prosperous future for Scotland, ensuring a higher quality built and natural environment.

That brings us to the closing speeches. Annabel Goldie, you have seven minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-08225, on committee membership, and motion S4M-08226, on substitution on committees. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that— Christian Allard be appointed to replace Colin Keir as a member of the Justice Committee; Christian Allard be appointed to replace Mark McDonald as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Stewart Stevenson be appointed to replace Dave Thompson as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; Colin Keir be appointed to replace Mark McDonald as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Stuart McMillan be appointed to replace Christian Allard as a member of the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee; and Mark McDonald be appointed to replace Stewart Stevenson as a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Stewart Stevenson be appointed to replace Christian Allard as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Local Government and Regeneration Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08145, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill.

Order, please.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08172, in the name of Graeme Pearson, on justice. I will allow only a few seconds for members to change places, as we are extremely tight for time in the debate. I call Graeme Pearson to speak to and move the motion. Mr Pearson, you have a maximum of eight minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-08185, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 12 November 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Stage 1 Debate: Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Dundee, City of Culture followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Water Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 13 November 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs followed by Scottish Government Debate: Modernising Scotland’s Transport Infrastructure, Meeting the Challenges of the 21st Century followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 14 November 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Independence Referendum Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 19 November 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 20 November 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 21 November 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-08186, on the designation of a lead committee, and motion S4M-08187, on the office of the clerk. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Defective and Dangerous Buildings (Recovery of Expenses) (Scotland) Bill at stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Office of the Clerk be closed on Friday 27, Monday 30 and Tuesday 31 December 2013.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on transport, if the amendment in the name of Keith Brown is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-08173.2, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S4M-08173, in the name of James Kelly, on transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Does the member recall that our Equal Opportunities Committee conducted an inquiry into sexualised goods that are aimed at children?

I add that ordinary people can challenge these issues in supermarkets, often very effectively. I have done it myself.

I do not often get the opportunity to speak in debates, which might explain my keenness to intervene on members. I thank Jackie Baillie for bringing the matter to the chamber for debate and I congratulate the campaigners, but it is sad that we are still debating page 3 in 21st century Scotland. It is not always easy to raise such issues due to the backlash from the industry. I know that well, having served on the Equal Opportunities Committee for 12 years, trying to tackle pornography as part of the spectrum of violence against women and children. Pornography, prostitution and other forms of commercial sexism are all parts of an industry that makes millions of pounds out of human misery, and the industry is predicated on female subordination and objectification, as we have already heard this evening. Some people argue that women choose to participate in the industry. We need to be clear that pornography exists not because of women’s choices but because men use it for sexual gratification at the expense of women. It causes harm to those who are involved, it affects respectful sexual relations and it underpins women’s inequality. Page 3 is undoubtedly a part of that industry. Although research on the effects of pornography has been somewhat limited, a report in the early 1990s that was published by the Home Office acknowledged that women find pornography distressing and that women who suffer domestic violence frequently have partners who use it heavily. I refer to that report in this evening’s debate because it stated: “it might be that sexually violent pornography is the most dangerous but that newspaper nudity is still to a small degree harmful and because newspapers are more everyday than extreme pornography their aggregate effects might be greater.” As we heard, in the late 1980s, Clare Short introduced a bill to try to ban page 3, and she received thousands of letters supporting her. Some of the letter writers told personal stories of rape, others told of the damage and insult that they felt when their partners used pornography, and some even spoke of the humiliation of watching their partners looking at topless women in newspapers when they had lost a breast to cancer. Men, too, said that they had changed their views when they had children and started to think about the world in which their children would grow up. Members talked about that. Clare Short described pornography in everyday newspapers as depicting “women in poses which really say take me, use me, throw me away.” Pornography, whether we are talking about page 3 or Playboy or soft or hard core, says the same thing: women for sale. As Jackie Baillie said, Clare Short suffered at the hands of the newspapers for bringing forward her bill. Busloads of page 3 girls parked outside her house and she was harassed and vilified. I know about that and about the examples that she used because I used them when I was preparing for a speech at the University of Durham debating society in 2007. At that debate, I argued, along with Frances Curran, that “This house believes that pornography is degrading to women.” We were debating with a student and a certain Martin Daubney, who was editor of Loaded magazine at the time. We were narrowly defeated, but that was not surprising. In fact, the result was better than I expected, because pornography was becoming ever more mainstream, creeping into everyday media and becoming more normalised and more extreme. Although we were defeated in the debate, we might have had a lasting effect on Martin Daubney, who now campaigns against pornography. He said of Loaded: “With its frequent nudity and lewd photo spreads, I’d long been accused of being a soft pornographer, and after leaving Loaded I agonised that my magazine may have switched a generation onto more explicit online porn.” Martin Daubney’s conversion came about while he was making a documentary and listening to a talk about sex with a group of young people aged 13 to 14. He said: “In the past I’d even defended pornography in university debates, on TV and on radio. I claimed it was our freedom of choice to watch it and said it could actually help add to adult relationships. But what I saw during the making of the film changed my opinion of pornography forever.” He went on to say: “The moment I knew internet pornography had cast its dark shadow over the lives of millions of ordinary British teenagers will live with me for ever.” It is good that Martin Daubney had a conversion on the issue. His voice is undoubtedly that of a high-profile man who was previously involved in the industry, so it is powerful. It is important that we support the campaign. Page 3 helps to normalise pornography, and eradicating it would be a good start to eradicating pornography from our society and lifting the dark shadow from future generations of teenagers. It would at least start to take pornography out of the main stream. I will finish by asking this: what kind of society is it where images of bare breasts that objectify women are accepted as everyday images, while breastfeeding is expected to be discreet? It does not make sense. I congratulate Jackie Baillie on bringing this debate to the Parliament.

Does the minister agree that it is somewhat astonishing that the media—in popular soap operas, for example—cannot show women’s beautiful breasts feeding babies if the nipple is on show, and yet we can have all those breasts everywhere else?

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Mrs Manjit Kaur Jheeta.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08155, in the name of Alex Neil, on person-centred healthcare.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07773, in the name of Sandra White, on Glasgow Women’s Aid’s 40th anniversary celebration. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates Glasgow Women’s Aid, which will celebrate its 40th anniversary on 1 November 2013; commends this organisation, which provides information, support and refuge for women, children and young people who experience the many forms of domestic abuse; understands that this help can take the form of signposting to other support organisations, providing information about legal, housing and financial rights, supplying interpreting services and providing access to safe refuge accommodation; notes that it also provides a service that allows people to talk to its staff members confidentially; considers that its work with women and children, through group work and support, is hugely important in the recovery process from domestic abuse, and hopes that it, and its staff, enjoy every success in providing meaningful and lasting support to women and children across Glasgow who face some of the most challenging times in their lives.

I must ask Jayne Baxter to draw to a close.

The question should be about HMP Grampian and the north-east, but I invite the cabinet secretary to answer if he wishes.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-08079, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s inquiry into community transport.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07627, in the name of Aileen McLeod, on Scottish Woodlot Association, a first for Galloway. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes that a new form of forest tenure has been introduced in Galloway with the establishment of what it understands is Scotland’s first woodlot licence on the Corsewall Estate near Stranraer; considers that the concept of woodlots as a means of ensuring a diverse forestry sector has been proved over 30 years in British Columbia; considers that promoting a diverse Scottish forestry sector that encourages people to become involved in managing woodland for themselves is a positive development for rural Scotland; congratulates the Scottish Woodlot Association and the owner of Corsewall Estate, Angus Carrick-Buchanan, on agreeing the first Scottish woodlot licence, and hopes that this will be the first of many more to come.

We now turn to the winding-up speeches. I remind members that if they have participated in the debate they should be back in the chamber for the closing speeches.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-07167, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill. I call on the cabinet secretary to move the motion. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill, agrees to— (a) any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b) of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act, and (b) any charge or payment in relation to which Rule 9.12.4 of the Standing Orders applies arising in consequence of the Act.—[John Swinney.]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-08039, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. I call on the cabinet secretary to move the motion. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any charge or payment in relation to which Rule 9.12.4 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders applies arising in consequence of the Act.—[John Swinney.]

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-08040, in the name of John Swinney, on the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill.

What progress is being made on the Scottish crime campus, which is being built in my constituency, given that it is a key part of the Scottish Government’s strategy to tackle serious and organised crime? When is it due to open and how many jobs will it bring?

Order. I ask guests in the public gallery to leave the chamber quietly, please. The Parliament is still in session. The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07862, in the name of Jim Hume, on citizens advice bureaux-run innovative youth outreach projects. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates Scotland’s citizen’s advice (CAB) service on its work; notes what it sees as the success of the many CAB projects that reach out to and support young people in their community; believes that one of the best examples of this is Roxburgh and Berwickshire CAB’s highly successful Youthinfo@CAB, project; considers that this provides excellent work in offering free, impartial and confidential help and support to 16 to 25-year-olds in the Borders on issues that concern them, including money, housing, jobs and relationships; applauds it on being awarded an extension of funding, which, it understands, will allow it to continue into its fourth year; commends it on its principle of involving young people from the community directly in its governance and operations; believes that the success of the project is due not just to the hard work of those involved, but also to their imaginative use of many different ways of engaging with people, including face-to-face advice sessions, interactive workshops in schools and colleges and extensive use of information technology and social networking; welcomes the news that, thanks to funding from the Bank of Scotland Foundation, the project has now extended its area of operations to Roxburgh as well as Berwickshire, and believes that it is an excellent example of innovative work that enables young people to support and help others of the same age through the problems of life.

Through the chair, please, Mr MacDonald.

I ask members to ensure that their mobile devices are switched off, unless they are being used to deliver a speech, in which case they should be on silent.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07952, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 29 October 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Stage 1 Debate: Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 30 October 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Portfolio Questions Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee Debate: Inquiry into Community Transport followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 31 October 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Play Strategy Action Plan followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 5 November 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 6 November 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 7 November 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-07954 and S4M-07955, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments; and motion S4M-07956, on the designation of a lead committee. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Glasgow Commonwealth Games (Trading and Advertising) (Scotland) Regulations 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the National Health Service (Cross-Border Health Care) (Scotland) Regulations 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-07954, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Glasgow Commonwealth Games (Trading and Advertising) (Scotland) Regulations 2013 [draft] be approved.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07939, in the name of Angela Constance, on the interim report by the commission for developing Scotland’s young workforce. I advise members that the debate is oversubscribed and that we are extremely tight for time.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07036, in the name of Nigel Don, on Energy Action Scotland marks its 30th anniversary. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament acknowledges that the national fuel poverty charity, Energy Action Scotland, marks its 30th anniversary in 2013; understands that the charity campaigns for warm, dry homes that are affordable to heat; believes that, during its 30 years of campaigning in Angus North and Mearns and across the country, much progress has been made in tackling the major causes of fuel poverty; understands that Energy Action Scotland estimates that there are 900,000 fuel poor households in Scotland, and, while it considers that much has still to be done if the statutory duty of eradicating fuel poverty by 2016 is to be achieved, welcomes what it sees as the positive moves by successive Scottish administrations to tackle fuel poverty.

We turn to the open debate. Can I have speeches of six minutes, please?

A simple “No, thank you” would suffice, Ms Baillie.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07630, in the name of Aileen McLeod, on supporting Teenage Cancer Trust’s education programme. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises the importance of early diagnosis of cancer in Scotland’s young people; acknowledges what it sees as the key role of Teenage Cancer Trust’s education programme and its innovative and unique partnership with the Detect Cancer Early Programme in educating young people in South Scotland and across the country about cancer; notes that Teenage Cancer Action Week takes place across the UK from 14 to 20 October 2013; understands that the key aim of the week is to raise awareness of the five most common signs of cancer in 13 to 24-year-olds and for this knowledge to be shared among family and friends, and commends Teenage Cancer Trust on its efforts to raise awareness of cancer among young people, educating them on the importance of early diagnosis and improving the wellbeing of young people who are diagnosed with the condition.

Before I call Sandra White I reiterate that we have time in hand, if any members wish to intervene on other members’ contributions. It is of course entirely up to members if they wish to take interventions.

As was notified to members earlier, I will put the question on the motion from Thursday 26 September first. I will then put the question from today’s business. That means that there are two questions to be put. The first question is, that motion S4M-07799, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on a variation of standing orders, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that, under Rule 12.3.3B of Standing Orders, the Justice Sub-Committee on Policing can meet, if necessary, at 1.00pm on a Thursday until 20 December 2013 for the purpose of conducting a meeting of the sub-committee and that any meeting held under this rule is concluded before the commencement of a meeting of the Parliament that afternoon.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07521, in the name of Richard Baker, on the safety of offshore oil and gas workers. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament offers its condolences to the families of those who lost their lives in the Super Puma helicopter crash off Shetland on 23 August 2013; considers that the impact of this tragedy will be felt across the oil and gas industry and by the thousands of workers in the North Sea; believes that this event has been a sad reminder of the crucial importance of health and safety in the industry; recognises the concerns that have arisen as this is the fifth incident in four years involving a Super Puma helicopter; believes that the fact that a fatal accident inquiry has still to commence into the Super Puma crash that took place in 2009 in which 16 people lost their lives shows the need for new legislation to overhaul the current fatal accident inquiry system, and notes that a draft member’s bill that would include provision for such action to be taken is currently out for consultation.

We come to the closing speeches. Members who have participated in the debate should be in the chamber for closing speeches unless they have given a reason not to be here.

Final minute.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07783, in the name of Liz Smith, on named persons. The debate is oversubscribed and we are extremely tight for time. Liz Smith, you have a maximum of 10 minutes.

We come to the open debate. We have a bit of time in hand, therefore I can give all members up to seven minutes.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07188, in the name of Gordon MacDonald, on Al-Anon Family Groups, supporting families with alcohol-related issues. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament understands that Al-Anon Family Groups, a charity that receives no external financial support, has only one focus, which is to help and support families and friends of problem drinkers; believes that for every problem drinker it is estimated that at least five other people are adversely affected; understands that there are over 120 Al-Anon Family Group meetings in Scotland, including in Edinburgh, for people who are or have been affected by someone else’s drinking to meet and gain understanding and support in order to resolve their common problems, and commends the work of Al-Anon Family Groups over the last 60 years in supporting families dealing with alcohol-related issues.

You are in your last minute, Mr Brown.

Briefly, Jim Eadie.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-7599, in the name of Nanette Milne, on Marie Curie, signpost to palliative care. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the publication in the European Journal of Palliative Care on 9 September 2013 of the study, How good is primary care at identifying patients who need palliative care?; notes that the study was carried out in partnership by Marie Curie Cancer Care, the University of Edinburgh and NHS Lothian; understands that only 20% of patients with a non-cancer diagnosis were identified for palliative care before dying; further understands that patients who were identified for palliative care received it too late to fully benefit; considers that patients and primary care staff find it difficult to discuss death and dying; believes that more needs to be done to offer supportive and palliative care to more people with life-threatening illnesses in North East Scotland and across the country, and supports the Good Life, Good Death, Good Grief initiative as a way of tackling what it sees as the Scottish taboo of talking about death.

Full names, please.

Order.

Minister, you are approaching your last minute.

I apologise for not being able to stay for the whole debate. Does the member agree that pornography in general is part of the spectrum of violence against women and children and that it must be challenged as such?

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leaders today are Vann Smith and Ciara Bradley, pupils of St Ambrose high school in Coatbridge, who are representing the healthy lifestyle Scotland Malawi project.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07648, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for today. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Tuesday 10 September 2013— after followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scotland’s Historic Environment, The Way Forward insert followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Debate: Amendment to the Scottish Parliament Salaries Scheme—[Joe FitzPatrick]

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07622, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on Scotland’s historic environment—the way forward.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07331, in the name of Graeme Dey, on Scotland more aware of fair trade. The debate will be concluded without any questions being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the findings of a new poll suggesting that almost nine in 10 people in Scotland are aware of fair trade; believes that this reflects the country’s status as a fair trade nation; notes the findings that the number of people aware of the concept has increased from 64% in 2006 to 87% in 2013; understands that the poll of over 1,000 adults also suggested that more than a third of people in Scotland regularly purchase fairly traded products, compared with one in five in 2011; is pleased that, by being one of the first countries to achieve Fair Trade Nation status, Scotland is now considered by the Scottish Fair Trade Forum to be at the forefront of what it considers this ethical movement, and commends the community-based groups in Angus and elsewhere in Scotland that are helping to promote fair trade products and that aim to ensure a better deal for developing countries.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-06993, in the name of Graeme Pearson, on enhancing enterprise for Scotland and China. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises and celebrates both the historical and contemporary links that exist between Scotland and China; notes that China is currently the second largest economy in the world, with many experts predicting that it will overtake the US as the largest within the next decade; supports all efforts to foster trade links between Scotland and China, including establishing a direct flight path from Scotland to China, but is concerned that visa regulations are not conducive to Chinese businesses operating in Scotland and vice versa; endorses the educational links that exist between Scotland and China, including what it understands is the high number of Chinese students who choose to study at Scottish universities and the links between schools in the south of Scotland and their Chinese counterparts; welcomes these links, and notes calls for the encouragement of the learning of Mandarin and Cantonese in Scottish schools and their twinning with Chinese schools.

You must conclude.

Given Scottish ministers’ decision to refuse the pyrolysis plant in Perth, can the minister explain why a Perthshire businessman has been given the go-ahead by the Scottish Government to build one of these monstrosities in my constituency at Carnbroe in Coatbridge, and could the merit of that particular plant now be reconsidered?

Cabinet secretary, you must begin to wind up.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-07111, in the name of John Wilson, on welcoming Oxfam’s “Our Economy” report. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the report by Oxfam, Our Economy, which sets out Oxfam’s vision for the economy in Scotland; notes that this report calls on policymakers, politicians and people in business to look toward the poorer sections of society who still do not benefit from economic growth in Scotland; recognises the report’s recommendation for greater control to be given to communities over how regeneration happens in local areas, such as Central Scotland; applauds Oxfam’s commitment in encouraging employers to pay a living wage, and praises Oxfam’s ongoing work on reducing what it considers the ever-widening salary gap between those at the top and those at the bottom.

Does the minister agree that it is unacceptable that unaffordable water charges are acting as a barrier to the setting up of a food bank in Coatbridge? Is charitable exemption under the Government’s scheme an option to allow that desperately needed facility to open?

I remind members that there is a little bit of time in hand if they wish to take interventions.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is consideration of business motion S4M-07171, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during stage 3 of the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2 30 minutes.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Paul Wheelhouse on “Low Carbon Scotland: Meeting our Emissions Reduction Targets 2013-2027—The Second Report on Proposals and Policies” and “The Scottish Greenhouse Gas Emissions Annual Target 2011 Report”. The Minister will take questions at the end of his statement and therefore there should be no interventions or interruptions.

Order, please. As Mr Rennie is no doubt aware, that is not a matter for me. However, I am sure that the Scottish ministers will have heard his point of order. It is for ministers to respond to the points that he has made, if they wish to do so. Willie Rennie has the opportunity to raise the matter with his business manager, who is able to raise the issue at the next Parliamentary Bureau meeting, in relation to future business.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have: the bill as amended at stage 2, SP bill 24A-revised; the marshalled list, SP bill 24A-ML; and the groupings, SP bill 24A-G. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds; thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Section 2—Those entitled to vote in an independence referendum

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07109, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill.

We move to the division on amendment 5.

I call Michael Russell to wind up the debate. Cabinet secretary, you have a maximum of eight minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07139, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 3 September 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 4 September 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 5 September 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 10 September 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 11 September 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 12 September 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-07144, on the designation of a lead committee; motion S4M-07145, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument; and motion S4M-07156, on parliamentary recess dates. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill be referred at stage 2 to the Justice Committee in terms of sections 1 to 25 and 28 to 31 and to the Health and Sport Committee in terms of sections 26 and 27. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Functions of the Common Services Agency for the Scottish Health Service) (Scotland) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 8 to 16 February 2014 (inclusive), 5 to 20 April 2014 (inclusive), 28 June to 3 August 2014 (inclusive), 23 August to 21 September 2014 (inclusive), 11 to 26 October 2014 (inclusive) and 20 December 2014 to 4 January 2015 (inclusive).—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-07108, in the name of Michael Russell, on the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Reverend Matthew Bicket, who is minister at Carnoustie Panbride church.

The next item of business this afternoon is consideration of business motion S4M-07138, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the following revision to the programme of business for Tuesday 25 June 2013 and Thursday 27 June 2013— Tuesday 25 June 2013 delete 2.00 pm Time for Reflection – Reverend Matthew Bicket, Minister, Carnoustie Panbride Church followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business – S4M-06245 Dave Thompson: Review of Specialist Heart Failure Nurse Services and insert 2.00 pm Time for Reflection – Reverend Matthew Bicket, Minister, Carnoustie Panbride Church followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Member’s Oath/Affirmation – Mark McDonald followed by Topical Questions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.40 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business – S4M-06245 Dave Thompson: Review of Specialist Heart Failure Nurse Services Thursday 27 June 2013 delete 5.00 pm Decision Time and insert 4.30 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

I invite Mark McDonald to make a solemn affirmation.

A number of members want to ask a supplementary question, but I am afraid that there will not be enough time for everyone to do so. However, if we have quick questions and answers, I might get in a couple of members.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07106, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, on the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-07107, in the name of John Swinney, on the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-06730, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution in respect of the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[John Swinney.]

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-07106, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, on the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-06245, in the name of Dave Thompson, on review of specialist heart failure nurse services. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the Review of Specialist Heart Failure Nurse Services by the Scottish Heart Failure Nurse Forum supported by Chest Heart & Stroke Scotland and the British Heart Foundation Scotland; understands that heart failure is a life-limiting condition for which there is no cure, that, unlike other cardiac conditions, its prevalence is rising and that it is estimated to affect up to 100,000 people in Scotland; considers that specialist heart failure nursing services reduce unnecessary hospitalisation for people with heart failure by around 35%, resulting in savings of around £1,826 per patient to the NHS; understands that NHS Highland meets the minimum Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) guidelines ratio of 1:100,000 specialist nurses per head of population and provides specialist support to nearly 300 patients per year, but, given that NHS Highland covers 41% of NHS Scotland’s geographical area, travel times inevitably reduce the capacity of the service; considers that these pressures mean that there is limited capacity to deliver education and share skills and expertise with community staff to ensure that heart failure patients receive the support that they need; is concerned that, despite the strength of the evidence base, only four out of 14 NHS boards meet the minimum ratio of specialist heart failure nurses to population level laid out in SIGN guidelines from 2007, that the overall number of whole-time-equivalent posts in Scotland has fallen since 2008 despite the rising prevalence and that one board has no specialist heart failure nursing service in place at all, and notes calls for all NHS boards to ensure that, as a minimum, they meet the SIGN guidelines on whole-time-equivalent posts for what it sees as these crucial services.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-07089, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the suspension and variation of standing orders. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Rule 12.3.3A of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of allowing the Justice Sub-Committee on Policing to meet from 1.00 pm until 2.10 pm on Thursday 27 June 2013.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business this morning is general questions. In order to call as many members as possible, I would prefer short and succinct questions, with answers to match, please.

Order.

Cabinet secretary, could you come to a conclusion?

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-06283, in the name of John Wilson, on the credit union expansion project. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the announcement that the Association of British Credit Unions Limited has been awarded a contract to deliver the £38 million Credit Union Expansion Project; understands that this investment will allow credit unions across Britain, including those across central Scotland, to achieve economies of scale, offer a wider, more advanced and more competitive range of products and services and, on a sustainable basis, offer affordable credit to consumers who might otherwise have no alternative to using high-cost lenders, and considers that the project will be of significant benefit to credit unions in Scotland by helping them to upgrade their systems.

Mr Stevenson, will you begin to conclude, please?

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-06551, in the name of James Kelly, on Parkinson’s nurses in Scotland providing effective, safe, person-centred care. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the report, Parkinson’s nurses in Scotland: providing effective, safe, person-centred care, which outlines what it considers the central role of Scotland’s Parkinson’s nurses in helping people with Parkinson’s to manage their condition; understands that these specialist nurses make financial savings to the NHS by preventing unnecessary hospital and care home admissions, reducing waiting times, improving symptom control and medication management and supporting people to manage their own condition; understands that there are about 10,000 people with Parkinson’s in Scotland and that this number is expected to increase over the coming years; supports the Healthcare Improvement Scotland clinical standards for neurological health services, which state that everyone with Parkinson’s should have access to a Parkinson’s nurse from the point of diagnosis onwards; understands that Parkinson’s UK has made significant investment in providing pump-prime funding to develop Parkinson’s nurse posts across Scotland; welcomes the progress that NHS boards have made and continue to make in providing access to Parkinson’s nurses, with recent appointments in NHS Ayrshire and Arran, NHS Borders, NHS Dumfries and Galloway, NHS Grampian and NHS Lothian and active negotiations underway in NHS Highland and NHS Western Isles; understands that, despite this progress, there are some areas of Scotland where it is difficult or impossible to access a Parkinson’s nurse, and looks forward to a future where everyone with Parkinson’s has ongoing access to a Parkinson’s nurse, no matter where they live.

Following an outcry in the Moodiesburn area of my constituency about shale gas exploitation, will the cabinet secretary guarantee that communities’ views will be fully considered and taken into account, with proper consultation processes, before decisions are taken on granting permissions for such controversial gas extraction schemes?

The next item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-06307, in the name of Roderick Campbell, on sales of interest-rate swap agreements. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with concern that banks throughout the UK, including some banks in Fife and across Scotland, may have mis-sold interest rate swap agreements to small and medium-sized businesses; further notes the campaign by bullybanks.co.uk to further highlight this issue, and notes calls for banks to adequately compensate businesses that have been affected and for the Scottish Government to engage appropriately with stakeholders to ensure that customers throughout Scotland are offered appropriate redress.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a statement by Michael Russell on the report of the commission on the delivery of rural education. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions during the statement.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06960, in the name of Aileen Campbell, on the Scottish guardianship service, a celebration of success.

I must ask you to close.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05944, in the name of Hanzala Malik, on challenging negative racial and religious stereotypes. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the campaign, I Speak For Myself, which has been launched by Amina Muslim Women’s Resource Centre in Glasgow; understands that the campaign aims to empower Muslim women to encourage them to share their personal messages with fellow Scots in order to challenge any negative stereotypes associated with them and the Islamic faith; notes that the campaign suggests that, although Scotland is a welcoming and inclusive nation with a vibrant multicultural society, global events have caused a rise in misconceptions about and discrimination toward Muslim women and the Islamic faith and an increase in the number of citizens with negative attitudes; commends the campaign’s aims to educate, dispel myths and promote awareness about the inequalities and discrimination facing the Muslim community and its work in tackling racial and religious prejudice, and notes suggestions that, in order to create a fairer Scotland, this and other campaigns, such as Show Racism the Red Card Scotland and Nil by Mouth, would benefit from an integrated and systematic approach to tackling problems of negative stereotypes and discrimination.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, and our time for reflection leader today is Andy Hawthorne, founder and chief executive officer of the Message Trust.

We need a question.

The next item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead, which will be an update on common fisheries policy reform. He will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions while he makes the statement.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06921, in the name of Shona Robison, on supporting a sporting nation—celebrating and building on Scotland’s success in youth sport.

That brings us to the closing speeches. I note that a couple of members who participated in the debate are missing. All members who have spoken in a debate should be present for the closing speeches. I call Tavish Scott.

The next item of business in consideration of motion S4M-06924, in the name of Alex Neil, on the legislative consent motion Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. I call Alex Neil to move the motion. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Bill introduced in the House of Commons on 24 January 2013 relating to the recognition of English and Welsh same sex marriages under the law of Scotland, the dissolution by the courts in Scotland and Northern Ireland of English and Welsh same sex marriages recognised as civil partnerships in Scotland and Northern Ireland and the recognition of the ending of those relationships, provisions on transgender people who married or entered into a civil partnership in England and Wales being able to stay in the relationship and obtain a full Gender Recognition Certificate and on errors in Certificates and fraud in relation to Certificates, the repeal of the Foreign Marriage Act 1892, marriages overseas, and transitional and consequential provisions, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Alex Neil.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. There will be no pre-emptions in relation to any amendments. The first question is, that amendment S4M-06921.2, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-06921, in the name of Shona Robison, on supporting a sporting nation, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Good morning. The first item of business today is general questions. Short and succinct questions and answers would be much appreciated.

Order.

You need to begin to draw to a close.

I call the minister, Paul Wheelhouse, to wind up the debate. Minister, I can be very generous with time until 5 o’clock. However, if you feel that you have covered all the points that have been made in the debate and that you want to make, I will briefly suspend the meeting of the Parliament.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S4M-06889, on substitution on a committee. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Jackson Carlaw be appointed to replace David McLetchie as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-06798, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, on the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

I call Paul Wheelhouse. Minister, you have six minutes.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06843, in the name of Hugh Henry, on student support. I invite those members who wish to participate in the debate to press their request-to-speak button. The debate is extremely tight for time, so I advise members that they will have to be disciplined in keeping to the time allocated if we are to call everyone who wishes to speak. I call Hugh Henry to speak to and move the motion. You have 10 minutes, Mr Henry.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06861 in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 11 June 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Ministerial Statement: Update on the Reform of the Common Fisheries Policy followed by Scottish Government Debate: Supporting a Sporting Nation, Celebrating and Building on Scotland’s Success in Youth Sport followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Bill – UK Legislation followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 12 June 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Debate: Progress toward National Planning Framework 3 and the Scottish Planning Policy followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 13 June 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Ministerial Statement: Report of the Commission on the Delivery of Rural Education followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Scottish Guardianship Service, a Celebration of Success followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 18 June 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 19 June 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Infrastructure, Investment and Cities; Culture and External Affairs followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 20 June 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions S4M-06863 and S4M-06864. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Health and Sport Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill at stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Commissioner for Ethical Standards in Public Life in Scotland etc.) Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-06845.2, in the name of Paul Wheelhouse, which seeks to amend motion S4M-06845, in the name of Claire Baker, on land reform, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Order.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-06681, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on protecting tenants’ deposits. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament expresses deep concern for what it considers the many private sector tenants in Scotland who remain at risk of unfairly losing their rental deposits; notes reports in the Evening Times that most private landlords in Scotland are not yet complying with the legal requirement to lodge their tenants’ deposits with an approved deposit scheme, despite the deadline for compliance having passed on 15 May 2013; further notes the concern expressed about this issue by the Glasgow Central Citizens’ Advice Bureau, which has been receiving new clients every day seeking help in recovering deposits and which has described the issue as the biggest facing young people in the city; would welcome an end to exploitative and unscrupulous practices in the private rented sector and believes that this is vital if tenants are to have confidence in taking on tenancies, and considers that the forthcoming housing bill provides the opportunity for measures, including the regulation of letting agents, that will safeguard the interests of tenants.

Has the cabinet secretary discussed with NHS Lothian or any other health boards the recent shortage of liothyronine, on which many thyroid patients in Lothian and throughout Scotland are dependent for survival? Will he look into the reasons why one company has a monopoly on supply of the drug, at what happened to stop the drug’s production and at why the NHS is, it seems, being charged a massively inflated price compared to the price abroad?

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-06035, in the name of Alison McInnes, on the still waiting campaign. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the Age Scotland campaign, Still Waiting, which calls for the national concessionary travel scheme to be extended; recognises that many older or disabled people, particularly in rural areas such as Aberdeenshire, rely on community transport services to attend medical appointments, go shopping or engage in leisure pursuits; understands that up to 70% of people over 60 in these areas either do not have or cannot use a free travel pass, and notes calls for the scheme to be extended to include all demand-responsive community transport services.

You must draw to a conclusion.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion on suspension and variation of standing orders for the purpose of considering the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to speak to and move motion S4M-06781.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that there are a number of possible pre-emptions should amendments to motion S4M-06766, on transforming Scotland’s railways, be agreed to. If the amendment in the name of Elaine Murray is agreed to, all subsequent amendments on the motion will fall. If the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Tavish Scott and Patrick Harvie will fall. Finally, if the amendment in the name of Tavish Scott is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Patrick Harvie will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-06766.2, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S4M-06766, in the name of Keith Brown, on transforming Scotland’s railways, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Before I call the next question, I make a plea for shorter questions and answers. Otherwise, we will not make much progress.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06746, in the name of Alex Neil, on ensuring access to high-quality sustainable services for people living with chronic pain. I invite members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak button now. I call Alex Neil to speak to and move the motion. Cabinet secretary, you have 14 minutes.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-06362, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on automatic external defibrillators in Scotland. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament acknowledges the ongoing AEDs in Scotland campaign, which aims to have automatic external defibrillators (AEDs) placed in strategic locations, such as rural communities, where it is difficult for an ambulance to respond quickly, or areas where there is a high incidence of cardiac arrest and in public buildings such as cinemas and supermarkets; believes that sudden cardiac arrest is a treatable condition whereby the body “short circuits”, interrupting the heart’s regular rhythm and keeping it from pumping blood through the body; further believes that, for every minute that passes without defibrillation, the chances of survival decrease by 14% and that research shows that applying a controlled shock using an AED within five minutes of collapse provides the best possible chance of survival; understands that AEDs, which are of simple design and can therefore be used without specialist training, can help to stop the heart’s arrhythmia, allowing the heart to re-establish an effective rhythm, but that CPR should also be administered; believes that 12 young people die in the UK each week as a result of a sudden changes in cardiac rhythm, but that only 10% of UK schools currently have AEDs; further understands that North Lanarkshire Council has recently purchased 25 defibrillators, one for each of its secondary schools, but that in March 2013 Samantha Clinton from Bellshill, North Lanarkshire, started a petition as part of Sudden Arrhythmic Death Syndrome (SADS) UK’s Big Shock Campaign to have a defibrillator placed in every school in the local authority area; notes that, in order to raise awareness, Samantha has designed colouring sheets for primary school children to take home to their parents with information about sudden cardiac arrest and a copy of the petition; is of the view that AEDs save lives and triple the chances of surviving a sudden cardiac arrest, and notes calls for AEDs to be located in all schools across Scotland as well as in public places and remote locations.

Good afternoon. The first item this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Gerard McNellis, the parish priest at St Laurence’s in Greenock.

The next item of business is an Equal Opportunities Committee debate on “Having and keeping a home: steps to preventing homelessness among young people”. I invite members who wish to participate in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons. There is some time available at this stage for interventions. I call Mary Fee to open the debate on behalf of the committee—14 minutes, please.

Thank you, minister. I now invite Marco Biagi to wind up on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee. You have 10 minutes, Mr Biagi.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06693, in the name of Dave Thompson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on implementing Scottish Law Commission reports. I call Dave Thompson to speak on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee and to move the motion. You have around four minutes, please.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-06694, in the name of Dave Thompson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on changes to standing order rules on Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body membership.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-06693, in the name of Dave Thompson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on implementing Scottish Law Commission reports, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 2nd Report 2013 (Session 4), Implementing Scottish Law Commission reports (SP Paper 307), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in the annexe of the report be made with effect from 5 June 2013.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what action is being taken to assess the health implications of waste incineration. (S4O-02162)

I thank the minister for his answer, but I am afraid that it will not give huge comfort to my constituents. He may be aware that one of the new studies is research by the Health Protection Agency in England on the potential links between incinerator emissions and health outcomes. Will the minister consider conducting a similar study in Scotland to look at possible health impacts of waste incineration and, in particular, technologies such as pyrolysis plants, one of which Shore Energy proposes to build in my constituency?

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05921, in the name of Anne McTaggart, on Mary Barbour commemoration. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates moves to build a monument in honour of Mary Barbour, Glasgow City Council’s first female councillor; understands that Barbour pioneered the city’s first family-planning clinic and pushed for major welfare changes, including free milk for schoolchildren, pensions for mothers, municipal banks, wash houses, laundries and public baths; understands that the former MP, Maria Fyfe, will chair a formal group involving all Glasgow City councillors local to Govan aimed at raising money for the monument; expresses disappointment that very few women are honoured by monuments in Scotland; considers that this is a fantastic way to celebrate the groundbreaking work that Barbour undertook, including in relation to the Increase of Rent and Mortgage Interest (War Restrictions) Act 1915, which it understands she instigated, and wishes the group every success in fundraising.

The next item of business is a statement by Fergus Ewing on the Scottish coal industry task force. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it. I note that not all the members who indicated that they wished to participate in the question session are in the chamber, and express disappointment at that.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06524, in the name of Fiona McLeod, on the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill. No amendments to the bill have been lodged so we move straight to the debate on the motion to pass the bill. I invite Fiona McLeod to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee.

Order.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06658, in the name of Richard Baker, on ferry services. I inform members that timing is extremely tight, so any interventions must be taken in members’ own time. If members could take slightly less than the time allocated, that would be helpful. I call Richard Baker to speak to and move the motion. Mr Baker, you have a maximum of 10 minutes.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Right Rev Christine Sime, Minister at Dalgety Parish Church.

That concludes topical question time.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06643, in the name of Dr Alasdair Allan, on supporting a science nation: celebrating Scotland’s public science engagement initiatives. I ask members who wish to participate in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons. I also remind the chamber that debates on Tuesdays are follow-on debates. We do not have present all members who are supposed to be in the chamber for the opening speeches, but we are just going to have to go ahead with the debate and hope that those members join us. I call Dr Alasdair Allan to speak to and move the motion. He has around 14 minutes, although at this stage of the proceedings we have some time in hand for interventions.

Could members speak through the chair, please, and not directly to each other?

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-06645, in the name of Aileen Campbell, on the Children and Families Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-06644, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Public Bodies (Abolition of Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council) Order 2013.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-06661, on substitution on committees. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Jayne Baxter be appointed to replace Rhoda Grant as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-06643, in the name of Dr Alasdair Allan, on supporting a science nation: celebrating Scotland’s public science engagement initiatives, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament values Scotland’s science centres and science festivals; notes the efforts made by them and other organisations to make science accessible to a public audience of all ages, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s continuing support for a range of public science engagement initiatives through annual funding.

Could members speak through the chair, please, and not directly to each other?

I remind members to speak through the chair.

We turn to the open debate. Speeches should be of six minutes. We are quite tight for time. I ask members who wish to speak in the debate to ensure that their request-to-speak buttons are pressed. That is particularly important after members have taken interventions. You must repress your button.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05676, in the name of Christina McKelvie, on “Voices from the frontline ... Digital by default”. The debate will be concluded without any questions being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the recent report from Citizens Advice Scotland (CAS), Voices From the Frontline, Digital by Default, which was published in response to the UK Government’s digital strategy; notes CAS’s concerns that moves toward services being applied online only could exclude those in society who are vulnerable and marginalised from receiving the benefits that they rely on to survive; understands that the digital strategy admits to not covering local government services or the NHS and does not consider ways to increase the digital capability of citizens; believes that a citizen’s advice bureau in West Scotland has reported that a client, a 60-year-old ex-labourer with dyslexia with limited computer literacy or access to a computer, was penalised for failing to apply for jobs online, and notes calls for more work to be carried out to ensure that any moves toward online applications are implemented in an open manner that is fully mindful of the needs of those who do not have internet access or are less able to use it to apply for benefits or jobs.

Question 1, from Murdo Fraser, has not been lodged, but an explanation has been provided.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06492, in the name of Angela Constance, on young people: supporting Scotland’s economy today and tomorrow.

I will give Iain Gray his time back.

We move to closing speeches. We still have a small amount of time in hand for interventions.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-06492.2, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S4M-06492, in the name of Angela Constance, on young people: supporting Scotland’s economy today and tomorrow, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

That brings us to the open debate. Speeches should be four minutes, please.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-06401, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on the importance of the freshwater pearl mussel. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises what it considers to be the importance of the freshwater pearl mussel (Margaritifera margaritifera); understands that the presence of freshwater pearl mussel is an indicator of high water quality in rivers in the Highlands and Islands and across Scotland where they are known to contribute to the ecology of areas by continuously filtering rivers and keeping the waters pure; believes that high water quality benefits other species and other wildlife associated with rivers, including salmon and otters; understands that the River Spey has one of the most significant populations of freshwater pearl mussels in the world but is concerned that they are reported to be one of the most critically endangered molluscs in the world, partly due to illegal pearl fishing, and that, over the last 100 years, more than one third of the rivers that used to contain freshwater pearl mussel have ceased to do so and that an additional third only contain old ones, with no sign of reproduction, and notes calls for agencies and the public to work together to protect what it sees as this remarkable species and increase its population.

I call Angus MacDonald, to be followed by Richard Lyle.

The next item of business is decision time. There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-06455, in the name of Chic Brodie, on behalf of the Public Petitions Committee, on petition PE1441, on flood insurance problems, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes petition PE1441 in the name of David Crichton on the issue of flood insurance problems; welcomes the petitioner’s efforts to highlight what it considers to be an important matter, and commends the issues raised in the petition to the Scottish Government for further consideration.

I have a registered interest: I am a member of Unite. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this important debate, which comes at an apposite time, just after international workers memorial day and as we celebrate May day. I commend Neil Findlay for his hard work to ensure that the odious practice of blacklisting is fully exposed and stopped in Scotland. In 2009, concrete proof was found, at last, that the construction industry was rife with blacklisting, but blacklisting first made the headlines when the shady Economic League’s activities were unearthed in the early 1990s, as John Wilson said. At that time, Tony Blair was a shadow secretary of state, and he proposed a law to ban blacklisting. However, the Tory Home Secretary, Michael Howard, opposed a ban and said: “There is no reason to make the activities of those organisations illegal.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 20 January 1990; Vol 165, c 44.] I am pleased that all members who have spoken in the debate have said exactly why such a disgraceful practice should be illegal. Workers are on blacklists simply for being members of trade unions, fighting for better pay and conditions and raising health and safety issues that save lives. No worker should be punished for speaking out for their rights and the rights of their workmates to enjoy decent working conditions, fair pay and acceptable standards of health and safety. Blacklisting’s victims are not just the thousands of workers who have been prevented from gaining employment but the many workers who have been killed and injured at work because the people who spoke out about unsafe practices were silenced. Why were they silenced? So that the multimillionaire owners of big construction firms could milk even more profit out of their operations, often at the expense of health and safety. I naively thought that such practices went out with the match girls’ strike. In 1888, women at Bryant and May’s match factory were working a 14-hour day for a pittance. They were fined for crimes such as talking, dropping a match or daring to go to the toilet without permission. They suffered from cancer caused by yellow phosphorus, which had been banned in the United States of America but which the British Government had refused to ban, in case a ban created a restraint on free trade. The familiar rule of putting profit before people was alive and flourishing in 19th century Britain, just as it is now, when blacklisting is going on. More than a decade ago I wrote an article for The Citizen in which I said: “Unlike our comrades of two centuries ago, at least we don’t have to lose our liberty for fighting for socialism and decent conditions for the workers.” I was wrong to assume that things are so different now. Many trade unionists have been unable to secure work because of big business blacklists. That has resulted in poverty, family breakdown and mental ill health. It is unfortunate that, when he became Prime Minister, Tony Blair did not outlaw blacklisting, despite his earlier promise. It was assumed that, because the Economic League had gone, blacklisting had stopped. If only. We know now that the Consulting Association continued the disgraceful practice, ruining people’s lives. I am pleased that Johann Lamont has signed up to a trade union anti-blacklisting agreement; the firms that blacklisted trade unionists should suffer as ordinary workers have suffered. I support the call by the GMB, Unite and UCATT that the firms involved should not be awarded public sector contracts until those damaged by their vile blacklisting are compensated. It is a scandal that, even now, big companies such as Balfour Beatty, Skanska and McAlpine are gaining public contracts—they are being rewarded for their use of illegally held blacklisting information rather than being penalised for their shocking behaviour. We should send a strong message that we stand in solidarity with the trade unions and all those affected by this scandalous conduct and we should stop the companies at the heart of it being rewarded with lucrative public contracts. I know that Neil Findlay will not give up until the workers are compensated and the companies are made to pay. I congratulate him again on leading the debate and I support his call for an inquiry.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06433, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on redesigning the community justice system.

Before I call Ken Macintosh, I note that the debate is heavily oversubscribed. If all members were to take three minutes rather than four minutes for their speeches, I might just fit in all members. Otherwise, I am afraid that some members will probably not be called.

Thank you. That brings us to the open debate. Members have speeches of around six minutes with time for interventions.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05625, in the name of John Mason, on social tourism. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament affirms the economic and social value of social tourism, a term that describes efforts to include people living on low income, dealing with physical or mental impairment or experiencing other disadvantage, in holiday and leisure activities; highlights what it considers the positive enhancement of the quality of family life through equitable access to high value rest and recreation regardless of disadvantage or poverty; believes that partnership working between tourism and welfare sector partners can improve the quality of family life for those parents and children who experience disadvantage as a result of poverty through the provision of and by promoting access to holidays and other recreational activities; notes what it considers the significant economic and social benefits brought by social tourism programmes in countries such as France, Spain and Belgium; considers that increased social tourism initiatives in Glasgow Shettleston and across Scotland would be of benefit to both struggling individuals and families, contribute to the work of social welfare organisations and strengthen the wider tourism sector, and would welcome the growth of social tourism in Scotland.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05930, in the name of John Pentland, on workers memorial day 2013. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. I ask people who are leaving the public gallery to do so quietly, as Parliament is still in session. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes International Workers’ Memorial Day on 28 April 2013, an annual day of global action to defend and promote health and safety rights and to “Remember the dead; Fight for the living”; applauds the numerous events being organised to remember those who have died in or been made ill by the workplace; supports the proposal for a steelworkers memorial to be erected at Ravenscraig; understands that, in the UK, over 20,000 people die prematurely every year as a result of injuries or accidents caused by their work and that, worldwide, there are two million people, more than are killed in wars; notes what it considers the important role of trade unions, with research suggesting that, without union involvement, workplace injury and illness increases significantly; understands that many trade unionists were included in the Consulting Association blacklist because they had expressed health and safety concerns; expresses deep concern over so-called low-risk workplaces, which will no longer receive unannounced inspections despite reportedly accounting for almost half of workplace deaths, and hopes that this annual day will continue to grow in stature and observance and thereby further the cause of workers’ rights and safety.

I remind members to use full names, please.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-06294, in the name of John Swinney, on the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill. Meeting closed at 17:00.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is portfolio questions on finance, employment and sustainable growth.

The next item of business is a statement by Keith Brown on making the most of Scotland’s canals. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement. There should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06306, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, on access to justice. I invite members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now, and I remind the chamber that debates in the afternoon are follow-on debates and therefore do not have set times. I call Lewis Macdonald to speak to and move the motion. Mr Macdonald, you have 14 minutes.

Mrs Mitchell, I am afraid that we cannot hear you because you are not speaking into your microphone.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06309, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 30 April 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Implications for Scotland of the Royal Charter on the Self-regulation of the Press followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 1 May 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 2 May 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Redesigning the Community Justice System followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 7 May 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 8 May 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 9 May 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions on the designation of lead committees at stage 1 of the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill and of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-06317 and S4M-06318. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Finance Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill at stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Education and Culture Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, if the amendment in the name of Kenny MacAskill is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Margaret Mitchell will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-06306.2, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S4M-06306, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, on access to justice, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

You have less than a minute, Ms Dugdale.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06243, in the name of Fiona McLeod, on behalf of the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee, on the preliminary stage of the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill. I call Fiona McLeod to speak to and move the motion, with a very tight six minutes.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-06244, in the name of Michael McMahon, on behalf of the Welfare Reform Committee, on the impact of welfare reform on Scotland, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Welfare Reform Committee’s 2nd Report, 2013 (Session 4): The Impact of Welfare Reform on Scotland (SP Paper 303), commissioned from Sheffield Hallam University.

Order.

Thank you. Before I call John Mason, I just want to say that the building work is not supposed to be taking place while Parliament is sitting, so we are having the noise investigated.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-06236, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 23 April 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Welfare Reform Committee Debate: Impact of Welfare Reform on Scotland followed by Preliminary Stage Debate: The National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc.) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 24 April 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Ministerial Statement: Making the Most of Scotland’s Canals followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 25 April 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Stage 1 Debate: Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 30 April 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 1 May 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and the Law Officers followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 2 May 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion on the designation of a lead committee at stage 1 of the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-06238. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee be designated as the lead committee and that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee be designated as a secondary committee in consideration of the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-06153, in the name of Maureen Watt, on behalf of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, on public procurement reform, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, in advance of the introduction of the Scottish Government’s proposed Procurement Reform Bill and in order to inform any future work in this area, would welcome members’ views on the efficacy of current public procurement processes and on the scope and potential for improvements to be made to these processes.

The member is not giving way.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05710, in the name of David Torrance, on congratulating Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates the Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society on its efforts to preserve the caves for future generations; understands that the caves are of significant historical value and that further study of the symbols and carvings, which include an unusually high quantity of Pictish art work, could progress understanding of Scottish cultural history, and believes that the caves have the potential to be a major tourist attraction in the Wemyss area and Fife.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05656, in the name of Sandra White, on bowel cancer—don’t take a chance, take the test. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the launch of the campaign to encourage people between the ages of 50 and 74 to participate in bowel screening; understands that bowel cancer is the third most common cancer in Scotland with early detection resulting in nine out of 10 people surviving the cancer; further understands that Glasgow has the highest rate of deaths from bowel cancer in Scotland; welcomes what it sees as the success of other campaigns such as the breast cancer campaign, part of the Scottish Government’s £30 million detect cancer early drive, which aims to increase the early detection of cancer by 25%, and hopes that the bowel screening campaign will be as successful in raising awareness and early detection of bowel cancer.

I advise members that there is a little bit of time in hand at the moment—not much, but a bit—for interventions.

Order.

I am sure that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the special envoy for the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Scotland branch, Annie Lennox OBE. [Applause.] The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05547, in the name of James Kelly, on celebrations of the bicentenary of Dr David Livingstone’s birth. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament commemorates the life and legacy of Dr David Livingstone, considered Blantyre’s most famous son and Scotland’s greatest explorer and missionary; understands that, at the age of 10, Dr Livingstone began working in the Blantyre Cotton Mill as a piecer and, despite working a 14-hour day, he persevered with his studies and, after qualifying as a doctor, became a missionary and explorer in Africa, where he played a key role in ending slavery, especially in Malawi, which continues to have strong links to Scotland; applauds Dr Livingstone’s contributions in Africa generally and Malawi specifically and considers that, during his 30 years in Africa, he contributed enormously in the fields of education, healthcare, trade and commerce; notes that the bicentenary celebrations in Blantyre are being supported by funding from the National Trust for Scotland, Scottish Government, South Lanarkshire Council and the Scotland–Malawi Partnership, which promotes links between the two countries; believes that the 200th anniversary of Dr Livingstone will give people the opportunity to learn of the explorer’s early home life in Blantyre and encourage further interest in his achievements and explorations; considers that Scotland enjoys important links with Malawi and reaffirms its commitment to the cooperation agreement between the countries that was signed in 2005 by Lord McConnell and President Mutharika, which pledges engagement on “civic governance and society, sustainable economic development, health and education”, and looks forward to what it hopes will be a series of successful events in honour of a man whom it believes to be one of Scotland’s greatest figures and whose legacy continues to have a positive impact on the people of Malawi.

We turn to the open debate. Speeches are to be five minutes long.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-06016, in the name of John Swinney, on Scotland’s financial strength. I remind members to speak through the chair and use the full names of other members.

Mr Eadie, please sit down. The member is not taking the intervention.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05568, in the name of Mark McDonald, on count us in. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the report, Count us in: it pays to listen, by the National Autistic Society Scotland as part of its Count us in campaign to give people with autism more of a say in decisions that directly affect them; understands that there are approximately 50,000 people with autism in Scotland, with an estimated 6,000 of these living in the north east of Scotland, and autism directly affects around 200,000 people every day; further understands that only 15% of adults with autism are in full-time employment and 39% of those interviewed for the Count us in report said that they had lost a job as a result of their autism; welcomes the Scottish Government’s investment of £13.4 million over four years to implement the first autism strategy to improve support services for adults and children with autism and their families; further welcomes the input of the Count us in campaign, and looks forward to working with a range of organisations to continue to maximise the opportunities created by the strategy and by involving people with autism more closely in the decision-making process.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05152, in the name of Neil Findlay, on lessons from Orgreave. The debate will be concluded without any questions being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with concern the revelations regarding the actions of South Yorkshire Police and the alleged duplication of statements and fabrication of police reports and witness accounts at both Hillsborough and Orgreave; further notes that South Yorkshire Police has referred itself to the Independent Police Complaints Commission for investigation, and wonders whether there is a need for concern in relation to arrests and convictions in Lothian and across Scotland during the 1984-85 miners’ strike and as to whether miscarriages of justice took place.

We move to closing speeches.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05924, in the name of John Swinney, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument—the draft Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2013.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05934.3, in the name of Neil Bibby, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05934, in the name of Aileen Campbell, on Scotland—the best place to grow up, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Mr McMahon, you must finish.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05899, in the name of Alison McInnes, on police centralisation. I invite members who wish to speak to press their request-to-speak buttons and indicate at this stage that the debate is extremely tight for time. I call Alison McInnes to speak to and move the motion. Ms McInnes, you have a very tight 10 minutes.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05533, in the name of Bob Doris, on Dr David Livingstone’s bicentenary. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises the achievements of the missionary and explorer, Dr David Livingstone, and the bicentenary of his birth; understands that the bicentenary celebrations at his birthplace of Blantyre will build on his legacy; notes that the Scottish Government has contributed £250,000 toward ensuring a sustainable legacy for the celebrations, particularly emphasising the creation of Livingstone exhibitions in Scotland and Malawi, preservation of a shared Malawi-Scottish heritage, development of skills that aid in that preservation and assistance to the Malawi Government to protect its own monuments, historic buildings and heritage; hopes that Livingstone’s legacy can be further strengthened through the funding of a David Livingstone Bicentenary Scholarship Programme, toward which the Scottish Government has already approved £100,000; understands that such a fund would assist academically gifted but underprivileged Malawians to continue to study topics relevant to the Government of Malawi’s growth and development strategy, and understands that Malawi has the lowest rate of university enrolment in the world and that the David Livingstone Bicentenary Scholarship Programme will be of immense help to Malawi and Scotland’s development and the long-term continuation of Livingstone’s legacy.

I have a little time in hand for interventions.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that in relation to the debate on Scottish Government food policy, if the amendment in the name of Claire Baker is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alison Johnstone falls. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05892.3, in the name of Claire Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05892, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on Scottish Government food policy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

If the closure of Coatbridge JP court goes ahead in an area of low car ownership, reducing bus services and unemployment, does the cabinet secretary have any comment on how my constituents will be able to meet the extra costs that will be incurred in gaining access to justice?

I am not convinced that that ties in with Kezia Dugdale’s question. Mr McArthur, do you want to make any comment?

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05838, in the name of Alex Neil, on the integration of adult health and social care. I remind members to speak through the chair by referring to other members by their full names and not as “you”.

Order. Murdo Fraser—I will give you 30 seconds.

Indeed you will.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05450, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on enough food for everyone if Scotland plays its part. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the recent figures from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations suggesting that 870 million people, or one in eight, were affected by chronic undernourishment in the period 2010 to 2012; welcomes the campaign, Enough Food for Everyone IF, which was launched on 23 January 2013; understands that this has the support of nearly 100 organisations across the UK; notes that a number of these bodies are also members of the Network of International Development Organisations in Scotland, which recently organised the Scotland v Poverty Exhibition that travelled to various venues around the country, including the Lothians, to draw attention to Scotland’s response to global poverty and hunger; understands that the Enough Food for Everyone IF campaign calls on the UK Government to meet its promise of spending 0.7% of national income on overseas aid and to use its presidency of the G8 in 2013 to push for global action to tackle tax dodging by multinational companies, end land grabs affecting poor farmers in developing countries and introduce greater transparency by companies and governments in order to enable citizens to hold the powerful to account and ensure that resources are used to help poor people; understands that the campaign has also launched a Scottish manifesto that argues that the country can play its part in ensuring that there is enough food for everyone if it supports the Climate Justice Fund, actively supports fair and ethical trading through its procurement processes, contributes to the global debate on land rights, invests in global citizenship education and audits the impact of Scotland’s public and private sector on developing countries, and hopes that the Enough Food for Everyone IF campaign is a success.

Thank you, minister. I advise members that time is extremely tight and that there is no extra time. I call Rob Gibson to speak on behalf of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. You have a maximum of nine minutes, Mr Gibson.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05742, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during stage 3 of the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 6: 50 minutes Groups 7 to 10: 1 hour 20 minutes—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is portfolio questions on education and lifelong learning. In order to get in as many people as possible, I prefer short and succinct questions—and answers to match, please.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have before them the bill as amended at stage 2, the marshalled list and the groupings—documents SP bill 15A, SP bill 15A-ML and SP bill 15A-G, respectively. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Members who wish to speak in the debate on any group of amendments should press their request-to-speak button as soon as possible after I call the group. I remind members to speak through the chair, by referring to other members by their full names and not as “you”. Members should refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Section 1—Duty of the Scottish Ministers

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04456, in the name of John Mason, on Families Need Fathers. The debate will be concluded without any questions being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the Scottish Government’s national parenting strategy, National Parenting Strategy: Making a positive difference to children and young people through parenting; considers that parenting is one of the most important jobs that anyone could have in their life; welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to developing a national parenting strategy that includes an investment of £18 million to improve access to information, advice and support for parents; notes the comments from Families Need Fathers, which, following the publication of the strategy, said that it “welcomes the emphasis on fathers in this new strategy, including fathers who live apart from their children”, and considers that Glasgow and Scotland as a whole would benefit from a debate on the role of fathers and their rights and responsibilities.

You are in your last minute, Mr McMillan.

Do the renewables targets mean that the Scottish Government is likely to overturn a local planning decision, which accords with the wishes of my constituents, to reject a wind turbine at Annathill in my constituency?

Please be brief, Mr MacKenzie.

You are in your last minute.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05652, in the name of Michael Russell, on tuition fees.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04877, in the name of Jim Eadie, on Lothiansound talking newspaper celebrating its 25th anniversary. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates Lothiansound on its 25th anniversary on 18 February 2013; applauds the dedicated work of all the volunteers at Lothiansound who bring talking newspapers to people who are blind or partially sighted; understands that it serves over 600 listeners, providing them with news and current affairs taken from the Edinburgh Evening News; commends Lothiansound on its work to provide high quality recordings from its recording studio in Newington; recognises that recordings are provided in different formats to suit the needs of individual people, and wishes Lothiansound well as it continues what it considers its valuable work, providing a lifeline service directly to people in the community.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05350, in the name of Margaret McCulloch, on retail in Scotland. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes what it considers the continued and important contribution that the retail sector makes to the Scottish economy through investment in skills, jobs and local communities, including in Central Scotland; understands that, despite a challenging economic climate, retail remains the largest private sector employer in Scotland, accounting for 240,000 jobs; believes that one in eight Scottish households includes someone who works in retail and that the sector invests an average of £1,275 annually on providing training for each member of staff; recognises that the retail sector often provides flexible employment opportunities for those who would otherwise be excluded from work, including younger people and women, and commends the Scottish Retail Consortium on the publication of Retail in Scotland: The Nation’s Favourite Job.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05549, in the name of John Swinney, on approval of the draft Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2013.

I call Fergus Ewing to wind up the debate. Minister, you have until just before 5 o’clock.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-05595, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exclusions and Exceptions) (Scotland) Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-05549, in the name of John Swinney, on approval of the draft Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2013, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Order.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05218, in the name of Annabel Goldie, on street stuff. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the exciting Street Stuff project, a youth diversionary scheme, based in Renfrewshire, which it understands has helped to reduce youth crime by offering activities such as street football, “The Box” and the Street Stuff buses; notes that Street Stuff is a partnership between St Mirren Football Club, Renfrewshire Council, Strathclyde Police, Strathclyde Fire and Rescue, Engage Renfrewshire, McGill’s Buses and Reid Kerr College; supports the Kick and Collect programme run by Street Stuff, which sees youngsters take part in voluntary work in the community and be rewarded with prizes; congratulates all those involved who, it considers, work tirelessly to ensure that the scheme benefits local young people who learn about social engagement and mutual respect, and believes that Street Stuff is an asset for the whole community.

Has further consideration been given to locating the HQ at the Scottish crime campus at Gartcosh, in my constituency? The cabinet secretary said that the campus “would provide a purpose-built national facility for the police service of Scotland”.—[Official Report, 19 September 2012; c 11585.]

You must conclude.

The next item of business is consideration of Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body motions. First, we will consider motion S4M-05541, in the name of David Stewart, on the reappointment of the chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission. I call David Stewart to move the motion on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-05535, in the name of Mark McDonald, on the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill.

Is the minister aware that local councillors’ rejection of planning permission for a pyrolysis incinerator in my constituency was overturned by reporters? Will he meet my constituents to hear their case for stopping that development?

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04971, in the name of Drew Smith, on work not play. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the launch of the Musicians’ Union’s Work Not Play campaign; understands that this campaign aims to highlight the growing trend of professional musicians in Glasgow and across Scotland who are expected to work for no fee; notes that this builds on the work done by the Musicians’ Union in respect of the London 2012 Olympics, which highlighted that the London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games had offered many professional musicians unpaid gigs; considers that in an era of illegal downloading, live performance revenue is incredibly important; believes that many people seem to think that music and entertainment are a hobby rather than a career and are unaware of the years of training and hard work that it takes to become a professional performer; further understands that the campaign website, WorkNotPlay.co.uk, is available for musicians to post such experiences, and notes that the Twitter hashtag, #WorkNotPlayMU, is also available.

I remind members to address their remarks through the chair.

I would be grateful if you could begin to conclude.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05504, in the name of Kezia Dugdale, on the cost of living. I call Kezia Dugdale to speak to and move the motion. You have 10 minutes, please.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05112, in the name of Joan McAlpine, on television in the south of Scotland. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the decision of Maria Miller, the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, not to block the renewal of Channel 3 television licences in 2014; understands and welcomes that this means that STV will continue to hold the licences for central Scotland and Grampian; expresses concern that ITV, which holds the Channel 3 licence for the former Border Television area, has limited public service content obligations; understands that local news in the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway comes mainly from Gateshead; notes that recent Ofcom research reports dissatisfaction in the area with the ITV local coverage; welcomes Ms Miller’s acknowledgement of the deficiencies in ITV’s local and Scottish news coverage in the Border Television region in her letter to Ofcom of 16 November 2012; further welcomes Ms Miller’s request that Ofcom work with ITV plc. to find a solution, and would welcome real choice for viewers across the south of Scotland.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leaders are Beth Nicoll and Stevie Low, who are both pupils at St Machar academy in Aberdeen.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05505, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during stage 3 of the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 4: 40 minutes Groups 5 to 8: 1 hour 40 minutes.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Paul Wheelhouse on RPP2—the draft second report on proposals and policies. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have before them the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 13A; the marshalled list, which is SP bill 13A-ML; and the groupings list, which is SP bill 13A-G1. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Members who wish to speak in the debate on any group of amendments should press their request-to-speak button as soon as possible after I call the group. Section 2—Functions of the Council

I will give you back a bit of time, Ms Grahame.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-05479, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

I call Marco Biagi, who has a supplementary question.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a debate on motion S4M-05444, in the name of Michael Matheson, on Scotland’s mental health strategy.

You must close, Mr Stewart.

There is a point of order from Jim Hume.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05444.2, in the name of Richard Simpson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05444, in the name of Michael Matheson, on Scotland’s mental health strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is portfolio questions on finance, employment and sustainable growth. As ever, if questions are short and succinct and we have answers to match, we may get through everyone.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05424, in the name of Margaret Burgess, on tackling fuel poverty.

Order.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05402, in the name of Dave Thompson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on the “Review of Cross-Party Groups”. [Interruption.] Could I have order in the chamber please, Mr Johnstone? Mr Thompson, you have a maximum of six minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-05403, in the name of Dave Thompson, on the “Review of Section 7 of the Code of Conduct”. I call Dave Thompson to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-05426, in the name of John Swinney, on the Public Bodies (Abolition of British Shipbuilders) Order 2013. Motion moved, That the Parliament consents to the making of the Public Bodies (Abolition of British Shipbuilders) Order 2013, a draft of which was laid before the United Kingdom Parliament on 1 November 2012 and which makes provision that would be within the legislative competence of the Parliament if it were contained within an Act of that Parliament.—[John Swinney.]

I received notification that the member wished to raise that point. Although it is an important point, it is not a point of order for the chair. However, it is a matter for ministers and I understand that they wish to clarify the matter for the Parliament now.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05452, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 29 January 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Ministerial Statement: 2nd Report on Policies and Proposals (RPP2) followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 30 January 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Rural Affairs and the Environment Justice and the Law Officers followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 31 January 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: Child Benefit followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 5 February 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 6 February 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Budget (Scotland) (No.2) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 7 February 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motions S4M-05428, S4M-05429 and S4M-05430, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, en bloc. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Planning) (Pre-application consultation) (Scotland) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Planning etc. (Scotland) Act 2006 (Supplementary and Consequential Provisions) Order 2013 [draft] be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Planning) (Local Review Procedure) (Scotland) Order 2013 [draft] be approved.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I would therefore appreciate the best of order as I put the questions. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on tackling fuel poverty, if either the amendment in the name of Richard Baker or the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Liam McArthur will fall. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05424.2, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05424, in the name of Margaret Burgess, on tackling fuel poverty, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The next question is, that amendment S4M-05424.1, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05424, in the name of Margaret Burgess, on tackling fuel poverty, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

You must come to a close, please.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05318, in the name of Alex Johnstone, on safer social networking for children. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament acknowledges the work done by organisations such as respectme to highlight and combat cyberbullying; understands that one survey of children and young people in Scotland found that 16% of respondents thought that they had been cyberbullied, with 63% stating that the aggressor was known to them and also found that 25% of respondents were concerned about cyberbullying online, and commends Mr Jamie Tosh of Arbroath, whose daughter’s experience of cyberbullying has led him to develop Kibooku, which he believes provides a safe social networking experience for children and young people.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05188, in the name of Bob Doris, on day centre reform in Glasgow. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with concern the current proposals by Glasgow City Council to close three of the city’s seven day centres for adults with learning disabilities; believes that this is a straightforward cut to services for vulnerable people, leaving no adequate alternative service on offer, that there is evidence that many of the people affected by previous day centre closures in Glasgow are still not receiving an appropriate alternative and that a new round of closures would not bring any improvement; further believes that learning disability day services in Glasgow will not continue to meet people’s needs into the future; recognises calls to halt the present process and instigate a full and comprehensive consultation exercise involving the active participation of service users and carers in any proposed service redesign, thus conforming to the general principles of self-directed support, which has choice as a fundamental principle, and believes that the proposals undermine this principle.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05320, in the name of Rob Gibson, on biodiversity. I call Rob Gibson to speak to and move the motion on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s behalf.

Mrs McDougall, please stop for a moment. I remind members that I have to listen to the member to judge whether her point is a point of order. Members have up to three minutes in which to make a point of order. Mrs McDougall, under which standing order are you making your point?

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-05391, on committee membership. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Alex Johnstone be appointed to replace Annabel Goldie as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-05320, in the name of Rob Gibson, on biodiversity, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee will be examining the analysis of the responses to the Scottish Government’s consultation on the 2020 Challenge for Scotland’s Biodiversity as the government looks to update its current biodiversity strategy against a backdrop of a global failure to meet biodiversity targets set for 2010, the revised target to halt biodiversity loss by 2020 and the related Aichi targets.

We move to the division on amendment 7.

The question is, that amendment 14 be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05362, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quickly and quietly, please, and I invite members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now. I call Nicola Sturgeon to speak to and move the motion. You have a tight 10 minutes, cabinet secretary.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04966, in the name of Rhoda Grant, on sustainable biomass. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government’s stated intention that sustainable biomass should be recognised as a limited resource and that it should be used at an appropriate scale and primarily for heat and high-efficiency combined heat and power; notes that the EU renewable energy directive calls for a minimum efficiency rating of 70% for industrial applications; also notes concerns in the wood processing industry throughout Scotland and particularly in the Highlands and Islands regarding wood supply and understands that wood products provide a carbon store; looks forward to the outcome of and would welcome a widespread response to the Scottish Government’s supplementary consultation on the Renewables Obligations Banding Review, for which the deadline for views on the proposals on biomass sustainability criteria is 11 January 2013.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Tom Welsh, Xaverian missionary and director of the Conforti Institute, Interfaith and Intercultural Dialogue Centre, Coatbridge, which is in my constituency.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05358, in the name of Derek Mackay, on planning reform, next steps.

We have a bit of time in hand for interventions, if members wish to take them.

Order.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business—[Interruption.] Could I have order, please? The first question is, that amendment S4M-05358.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05358, in the name of Derek Mackay, on planning reform, next steps, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

Question 3 has been withdrawn for understandable reasons.

Order.

Mr Findlay, you must conclude.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is portfolio question time. The first section is on infrastructure, investment and cities. In order to get in as many members as possible, I would be grateful for short and succinct questions and answers to match.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-05310, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on oil and gas—the success and opportunities. The debate is oversubscribed, so I expect members to be succinct and to include interventions within their time limits.

You are in your last minute.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05312, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 15 January 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Planning Reform, Next Steps followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 16 January 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Education and Lifelong Learning followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 17 January 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee Debate: Biodiversity followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 22 January 2013 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 23 January 2013 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 24 January 2013 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-05310.2, in the name of Rhoda Grant, which seeks to amend motion S4M-05310, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on oil and gas, the success and opportunities, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

We now come to the open debate. I ask for speeches of six minutes, although at this stage there is a little time in hand for interventions.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-05128, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on the origins of addiction. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament highlights the Adverse Childhood Experience study, The Origins of Addictions, which bridges a relationship between adverse childhood experiences, including childhood sexual abuse, and the development of addiction problems in later life; understands that the American study analysed 17,000 adults and discovered that the compulsive use of nicotine, alcohol and injected street drugs increases proportionally to the intensity of adverse life experiences during childhood, whereby the risk of becoming an injected drug user increased as much as 46-fold when compared with no exposure to adverse experiences; notes the significance of the Addictions Psychology Audit by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, which found that 49% of patients receiving counselling had suffered from childhood sexual abuse; acknowledges the dependency of addictions for survivors of childhood sexual abuse in which resorting to drugs or alcohol often allows survivors to escape from the horrific and traumatic memories and flashbacks, and believes that addiction services and psychological support would treat addiction more effectively as an experience-dependent and not just a substance-dependent condition.

You have one minute left.

I would be grateful if you could come to a conclusion.

I remind members to use full names.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04857, in the name of Christina McKelvie, on migrants’ rights day. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Christina McKelvie cannot be with us this evening, for understandable reasons, so I call Sandra White to open the debate on her behalf. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the Migrants’ Rights Day celebrations that will take place across the country on 18 December 2012; notes that the date marks the 22nd anniversary of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1990; appreciates the continuing contribution that migrants from around the world make to Scotland, both economically and culturally, and continues to support people seeking sanctuary and solace in Scotland; commends the work of the organisation, Migrants’ Rights Scotland, in its bid to promote the rights of all migrants, regardless of where they are from and acknowledges their commitment to providing support for migrant community organisations (MCOs), and understands that Migrants’ Rights Scotland supports MCOs in representing themselves more effectively in the immigration system by sharing information and building on existing knowledge and campaigns on their behalf for justice across all social policy areas.

The first item of business this afternoon is a debate on motion S4M-04354, in the name of Richard Baker, on Edwards syndrome and support for babies with palliative care needs. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament considers that there is a need to support families in Scotland affected by Edwards syndrome; notes the establishment in Aberdeen of the Caoimhe’s Trust for Edwards Syndrome; understands that the majority of babies with the condition die before birth and those who are born are expected to survive for only a matter of weeks; believes that in those families where a child is born with Edwards syndrome there is a need for specific support and care; recognises the importance of early diagnosis of Edwards syndrome to inform parents as soon as possible; believes that there is a need for bereavement services for families who lose children because of it, and recognises the benefits of a framework for care in Scotland that meets the needs of babies requiring palliative care and supports their families and a care pathway approach to delivering care and support to these children and their families from diagnosis to end of life and bereavement.

We turn to the closing speeches. Jamie McGrigor has five minutes.

Recently, in Moodiesburn in my constituency, an unconventional gas exploration planning application was withdrawn following significant public objections. In light of the recent press reports, will the Scottish Government give any reassurance that gas extraction will not happen in Moodiesburn against the community’s wishes?

Watch your language, please.

Mr Findlay, you accepted the intervention, but I will give you the time back.

We move to the open debate, with speeches of four minutes. Time is tight this afternoon.

I will start, like others, by congratulating Margaret Mitchell on securing this important debate. I apologise that I was unable to make the Samaritans party but, when I knew that the debate was taking place, I contacted a friend who is a Samaritan volunteer to talk about some of the general issues. For obvious reasons, Samaritans volunteers do not speak specifically about the work that they do, so they tend to be unsung heroes. It is consequently easy to forget the vital part that they play in society. Their work can quite often mean the difference—literally—between life and death. Therefore, the chance to commend the work of the Samaritans in Lanarkshire and right across Scotland is extremely welcome. The Samaritans were started in 1953 by Chad Varah, who was a young vicar in London. Throughout his time in different parishes, Chad witnessed the struggles that people experienced. He made particular reference to one example of a parishioner who took her own life—this particularly struck me. The parishioner was a young girl of 14 years of age and she had started her menstrual period. She did not know what was happening to her—she had no one to speak to—and she feared that she had a disease. Chad felt that that tragic loss of a young life could have been prevented if only she had had someone to talk to. Chad Varah was later inspired to set up a phone line and a face-to-face service and, over time, he was amazed by the number of people who wanted to speak with strangers about their problems. Although Chad was a vicar, I emphasise that the Samaritans are not religiously affiliated. Although volunteers can listen, they cannot advise and therefore it is imperative that there are services in place to back up the work of the Samaritans. It is therefore concerning that, in this time of austerity, some of those services are under threat. Many of those who contact the Samaritans suffer from emotional distress and mental ill health. I am told that addicts, including drug, alcohol and gambling addicts, make up a large percentage of those who contact the charity. As Margaret Mitchell mentioned, the current economic downturn is no doubt having a detrimental impact on mental health and wellbeing and we know that high unemployment rates have a bearing on suicide rates. That is the kind of pressure that can drive people to consider suicide. In addition to that, I want to mention companies such as Wonga and QuickQuid, because such companies are taking advantage of people’s vulnerabilities. They are charging up to 4,000 per cent interest rates per year on pay day loans. Other companies are offering access to online bingo services, which is becoming a huge problem in society—people are developing gambling addictions easily because of it. Unfortunately, such issues drive people into such debt that suicide may seem to be the only way out. Those are some of the people who need the care, support and listening ear that the Samaritans give them. As Margaret Mitchell said, the Samaritans’ work can only increase at the moment because of the austerity and the economic situation that we are in. Of course, the Samaritans are not the only charity to carry out such work. Christina McKelvie mentioned that ChildLine released figures today that demonstrate a rise in 13 to 16-year-olds contacting ChildLine about self-harm. Websites that glorify self-harm were thought to be part of the reason for that rise. I think that similar trends will also be seen by the Samaritans. In Lanarkshire, we have the only health board area in which suicide rates have consistently risen while rates in all other health board areas have come down. That is a worrying exception to the national trend. Although those who are considering suicide are not the only callers to the Samaritans—such calls make up about 20 per cent of the total calls—it is nonetheless essential that we have services such as the Samaritans in areas such as Lanarkshire to help people who are feeling suicidal and point them in the direction of professional help and services. Over the past 40 years, since the Samaritans opened in Lanarkshire, thousands upon thousands of people in my constituency will have benefited from the service, which is literally lifesaving. I wish the Lanarkshire Samaritans a happy 40th anniversary and once again commend my colleague Margaret Mitchell on securing the debate.

You must come to a conclusion, Mr Rennie.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-4855, in the name of Jamie Hepburn, on the White Ribbon Campaign’s 16 days of action to tackle violence against women. The debate will be concluded without any questions being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises the 16 Days of Action to tackle violence against women that takes places from 25 November to 10 December 2012; commends the continued work of those promoting awareness of this issue and campaigning for an end to violence against women in places such as Cumbernauld and Kilsyth and across the rest of Scotland; also recognises White Ribbon Scotland’s work to challenge attitudinal problems around this issue; believes that it is wholly unacceptable that an estimated one in four women will experience violence from a man at some point in their lives; considers that this is not solely a women’s issue and that everyone has a role to play in preventing violence against women, and restates its commitment to tackling domestic abuse and all forms of violence against women.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02899, in the name of Christine Grahame, on a Scottish media panel. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament would welcome a panel of experts to provide advice to ministers on Scotland’s media industry to help identify a strategy and direction, to help enable stability and growth and ensure that there is no democratic deficit in reporting on the Parliament and politics at what it considers this most important time of social and political change in the Scottish Borders, Midlothian and elsewhere in Scotland; while acknowledging that this is a time of financial restraint, believes that funding such a panel would have longer-term benefits for both the industry and democracy, and understands that such a proposal is currently under consideration by the Welsh Assembly Government.

Will you come to a conclusion?

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is consideration of business motion S4M-05011, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during stage 3 of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 30 minutes Groups 3 to 5: 1 hour Groups 6 to 8: 1 hour 20 minutes.—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is portfolio questions on education and lifelong learning. In order to get as many members in as possible, I would be grateful for succinct questions and answers.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the United Kingdom Public Service Pensions Bill—legislative consent motion. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, the marshalled list and the groupings. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Members who wish to speak in the debate on any group of amendments should press their request-to-speak buttons as soon as possible after I call the group. I advise members that time is very tight. Members should now refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Section 1—General principles

We now turn to the open debate. Time is very tight, so members have four minutes maximum. If members can speak for a shorter time, I might get everyone in.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-05021, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 4 December 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Annual EU Fisheries Negotiations followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 5 December 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Labour Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 6 December 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Debate: The Modernisation of Scotland’s Career Services followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 11 December 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 12 December 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 13 December 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Motion agreed to.

There is one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S4M-04995, in the name of Michael Matheson, on the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Cabinet secretary.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04579, in the name of James Dornan, on celebrating St Andrew’s First Aid week. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates St Andrew’s First Aid on its Scottish First Aid Week, which runs from 24 to 30 November 2012 and aims to raise public awareness of the importance of first aid and promote the message that people working together can save lives; understands that some 20,000 people a year take part in first aid courses in Scotland but that there is still much to be done; is concerned that 77% of people feel that they lack the knowledge and confidence to administer basic first aid at the point of need and that this plays a part in the 34,000 cases of common household accidents such as falls, choking and burns that attend hospital rather than being dealt with by a first aider, and considers that this places an unnecessary strain on emergency services.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04864, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on open your eyes to destitution in Scotland. Motion debated, That the Parliament believes that many volunteers and organisations, including churches, charities and community groups, work hard to try to alleviate some of the problems experienced by asylum seekers living in destitution; commends the campaign, Open your Eyes to Destitution in Scotland, by the Scottish Refugee Council and the Refugee Survival Trust, which argues that current UK laws can force asylum seekers, many of whom have fled war and torture in their own countries, to beg or leave them with no home, money or food; recognises calls for an improved decision-making process in dealing with asylum claims, for proper support for asylum seekers waiting to be granted protection or returned home safely and for those asylum seekers who have been in the UK for more than six months to have the right to work, and welcomes support for the campaign.

I call Mark McDonald to be followed by Alison Johnstone. Time is very tight.

Order!

You need to start to conclude.

The member is in his last minute.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04027, in the name of Jim Eadie, on caring for and curing boys and men with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament commends the work of Action Duchenne in supporting boys and men across the Lothians and the United Kingdom who are living with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), which affects one in every 3,500 male births in the UK; welcomes what is considered groundbreaking research such as the AAV U7 trial being conducted at Royal Holloway College, University of London, into potentially highly effective “exon skipping” treatment for the currently incurable muscle-wasting disease; recognises that DMD is caused by a genetic variation in the dystrophin gene and can result in boys affected requiring a wheelchair by the ages of 8 to 11; notes that the current research is expected by Action Duchenne to produce the first wave of genetic medicines by 2014, with the potential to benefit at least 14% of patients, and has the potential to realise even more successful treatments in the future; believes that a simplified means of clinical trials for genetic medicines should be explored to promote further research, and looks forward to continued work toward improvements in the care and treatment of the boys and men living with DMD and the ultimate goal of an effective cure.

Good morning. The first item of business is general question time. In order to get as many members in as possible, I would be grateful for short and succinct questions, and answers to match.

Order.

The member must conclude.

I ask Mike MacKenzie to use members’ full names, please.

I congratulate my comrade, Neil Findlay, on securing this important debate. Unfortunately, I was unable to visit the tax justice bus, but I fully support Christian Aid and the Church Action on Poverty’s aims in alerting people to the importance of tackling tax dodging and in the fight against poverty, both at home and abroad. Neil Findlay told us that the tax gap was estimated to stand at £120 billion, and Dave Thompson pointed that out, too. However, that figure of £120 billion is worth repeating because it is seriously undermining public services and the development of a more equal society, both in the UK and globally. Of course, that is partly due to cuts in HMRC—since 2005, it has shed half of its staff and it is set to lose 10,000 more over the next few years. I contend that more, not less, tax officers are needed if we are to deliver tax justice at home. Alongside Christian Aid and Church Action on Poverty, the Public and Commercial Services Union is campaigning against global injustices in the tax system. The economies of developing countries are being hit hard because essential public services rely on the taxes collected by their Governments. It is estimated that about £250 billion is being denied to those economies because of corporate tax dodging. World-wide, big businesses are undoubtedly making a huge success of dodging taxes. Every year, poorer countries lose three times more money to tax havens than they receive in aid. Those funds are urgently needed to pay for things such as education and healthcare and to fight poverty. That is an absolute scandal. At home, multinationals have been lobbying hard for some time to have the anti-tax haven rules watered down. The Treasury seems to be sympathetic to that, because—I imagine—it hopes that multinationals that have moved their headquarters to tax havens abroad will move them back to the UK. However, the Government does not have to offer such concessions to attract business, because tax is only one of a number of factors that determine where a company locates. In fact, the level of corporate tax is rarely the deciding factor when a company decides where to locate its real headquarters. I say “real”, because that is where hundreds or thousands of high-quality jobs are. The only companies that are likely to be attracted by such reforms are small outfits that would be just big enough to qualify for UK registration, but just think how much would be lost. It is undoubtedly the case, around the world and in this country, that ordinary people are getting poorer while the rich get richer. In this country, much time and effort is put into attacking so-called benefit cheats. I certainly do not condone benefit fraud, but if as much time and effort were put into tackling tax dodging and closing loopholes, we could go a long way towards tackling poverty and deprivation at home and abroad. At the moment, the poor are paying for tax breaks for the rich, which is completely outrageous. I again commend Neil Findlay for bringing the debate to the chamber and for offering alternatives to the current arrangements.

The member said, “No thanks.”

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04327, in the name of John Scott, on the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly’s autumn plenary. The debate will be concluded without any question being put.

As previously notified, if Margo MacDonald takes three minutes, that will allow me to give John Finnie three minutes as well.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is portfolio questions on rural affairs and the environment. I would be grateful if questions and answers were succinct.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04694, in the name of Humza Yousaf, on Scotland’s relationship with Malawi. I invite members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons and I call Humza Yousaf to speak to and move the motion.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-04702, in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Tuesday 13 November 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Debate: Universal Benefits followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 14 November 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 15 November 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Questions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Tuesday 20 November 2012 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Topical Questions (if selected) followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 21 November 2012 2.00 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.00 pm Portfolio Questions Culture and External Affairs; Infrastructure, Investment and Cities followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 22 November 2012 11.40 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions 11.40 am General Questions 12.00 pm First Minister’s Questions 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[Joe FitzPatrick.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-04707, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, and motion S4M-04708, on the office of the clerk. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Fishing Boats (Satellite-tracking Devices) (Scotland) Scheme 2012 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Office of the Clerk be closed on Thursday 27, Friday 28 and Monday 31 December 2012—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

The first question is, that amendment S4M-04694.2, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04694, in the name of Humza Yousaf, on Scotland’s relationship with Malawi, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

We come to the open debate. Speeches should be of six minutes, but there is a little time at this point in the debate for interventions.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04226, in the name of Adam Ingram, on William Murdoch, the Scot who lit the world. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the celebrations surrounding the 200th anniversary of the gas industry and, in particular, the opportunity to recognise the singular contribution made by William Murdoch, 1754-1839, who was born and grew up in the Ayrshire village of Lugar where his inventive engineering genius first became evident; notes that he was responsible for the production of the first steam carriage as well as what is considered his greatest innovation, which rapidly transformed society, gas lighting; further notes that the great scientist, Lord Kelvin, on unveiling a marble bust of Murdoch in the Hall of Heroes at the Wallace Monument in 1892, remarked on the benefit of his work not just to Scotland but to the whole world, and regards the gas@200 anniversary as an ideal time to highlight the life and work of William Murdoch whose gift of gas lighting was freely offered to the world.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04418, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on time to introduce presumed consent. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament regrets what it considers the tragic death of 43 people in Scotland last year while awaiting an organ transplant; applauds the Respect My Dying Wish campaign by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde urging people who wish to donate their organs after death to tell their loved ones of their desire so that their wishes can be respected, and recognises calls to introduce a system of presumed consent to help save the lives of more people awaiting organ transplant.

I call John Mason. There is time if you wish to take interventions, Mr Mason.

The next item of business is three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Joe FitzPatrick to move motion S4M-04649, on committee membership, and motions S4M-04650 and S4M-04651, on substitution on committees. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that Alison Johnstone be appointed to replace Patrick Harvie as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Bill Kidd be appointed as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee; Richard Baker be appointed as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee; John Lamont be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee; Willie Rennie be appointed as the Scottish Liberal Democrat substitute on the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee; and Alison Johnstone be appointed as the Scottish Green Party substitute on the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Patrick Harvie be appointed to replace Alison Johnstone as the Scottish Green Party substitute on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee.—[Joe FitzPatrick.]

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-04627.2, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S4M-04627, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on drink-driving, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

I must ask you to finish.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04598, in the name of Derek Mackay, on the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill. Before I invite the Minister for Housing and Welfare to open the debate, I call the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth to signify Crown consent to the bill.

Order. At this stage, there is a little bit of time to give back to members who take interventions but, for those who do not, it is speeches of six minutes.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04509, in the name of Hugh Henry, on a protection of workers bill. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates the members and representatives of the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers (Usdaw) on the union’s Freedom From Fear campaign, which it understands seeks to bring together employers, police and local authorities to tackle the scourge of violence, threats and abuse against shopworkers; further applauds the work of all trade unions, including those in Renfrewshire, for running campaigns that seek to protect their members at work; believes that all public-facing workers are at risk of being assaulted and that around 80% of Scottish workers have interactions with the general public during their working day; welcomes the decrease in incidents against shopworkers, which it understands are now at less than half the 2004 levels; remains concerned that, in the last 12 months, incidents of violence and verbal assault against retail staff have increased by 83%, as recorded by the British Retail Consortium’s Annual Retail Crime Survey; is appalled that, according to the survey, in every minute of every day another shopworker is assaulted, threatened or abused, and believes that all public-facing workers deserve the same level of protection as workers covered by the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005.

On healthy eating among infants, what more can the Government do in relation to supporting and promoting breastfeeding to improve health and help save the national health service millions of pounds, as was cited in a recent UNICEF report?

Could we have Alison Johnstone’s microphone on please? Please put your card in, Ms Johnstone.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-4293, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on dyslexia. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. I would be grateful if members who wish to speak in the debate could press their request-to-speak buttons as soon as possible. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the updated version of the online Dyslexia Toolkit created by Dyslexia Scotland that was launched on 19 September 2012 and aims to increase understanding of and to support the early identification of dyslexia, ensuring that those who need support are able to receive it; considers that the toolkit is a valuable resource that will help teachers and other professionals in Central Scotland and across the country identify, assess and meet the needs of the 1 in 10 children and young people in Scotland with dyslexia; considers that, since the toolkit was first launched in 2010, it has been a great success but understands that it will need to be updated regularly in order to take account of emerging best practice; believes that use of the toolkit and the definition of dyslexia that it contains will significantly improve the effective and consistent provision of support for dyslexic children and young people; agrees with findings in the report, Teaching Scotland’s Future: Report of a review of teacher education in Scotland, that all teachers, including those newly trained, should be confident in their ability to address the additional support needs of children and young people with dyslexia; acknowledges that it is not only in schools where support for those with dyslexia is required and hopes that there may be scope for the development of similar toolkits to assist employers and service providers so that they can appreciate the needs of those with dyslexia in the workplace and the community, and welcomes support for the hard work of Dyslexia Scotland, which it considers Scotland’s national dyslexia charity.

The minister will now take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. I am afraid that we are extremely tight for time. If I am to fit in every member who has indicated that they want to ask a question, we will need succinct questions and answers.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04505, in the name of Christine Grahame, on the role of the media in criminal trials. I call Christine Grahame to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Justice Committee. You have up to 13 minutes, Ms Grahame, but it would be helpful if you used less than that.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-04081, in the name of David Stewart, on the Isle of Gigha—10 years of pioneering land reform. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates the community of the Isle of Gigha on the tenth anniversary of what is considered its pioneering community buy-out; acknowledges the efforts of the Isle of Gigha Heritage Trust to redevelop the community by introducing development projects in the area; understands that, over the 10 years, the population in the community has risen from 96 to 160; welcomes the inspirational example that it considers those on Gigha have set for other communities; believes that there is much work still to be done throughout Scotland regarding land reform; notes the recommendations of the Land Reform Review Group, and believes that valuable lessons can be learned from Gigha.

I can give you about another minute, Mr Brown.

Following the successful visit of Che Guevara’s daughter Aleida to Scotland last month, which included a visit to the Parliament, will the Scottish Government consider opportunities to develop links with Cuba as part of its international development budget plans?

Order. We cannot hear the cabinet secretary.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-03421, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on October is breast cancer awareness month. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises the important role of the Scottish Government’s Detect Cancer Early initiative; notes that the first cancer type to be targeted by this will be breast cancer; understands that 460 women in the NHS Lanarkshire area were diagnosed with the condition in 2010 and that the earlier cancer is detected, the better the chances of successful treatment; welcomes the role that Breast Cancer Awareness Month in October plays in promoting early detection and the work of all cancer charities in raising awareness, and acknowledges the work of Breakthrough Breast Cancer and its memorable breast awareness message, Touch Look Check, which promotes knowledge of the signs and symptoms of breast cancer and the importance of regular checking.

That brings us to the open debate. Speeches should be of four minutes.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-03551, in the name of Hugh Henry, on the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. For understandable reasons, Hugh Henry is unable to lead the debate. Neil Bibby will therefore take his place. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. I would be grateful if members who wish to speak in the debate could press their request-to-speak buttons now. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes that the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) was founded in 1884 by the Reverend Benjamin Waugh; understands that, over the last 128 years, NSPCC has helped more than 10 million children in the UK; agrees with its vision to end child cruelty; understands that child neglect is the most common form of child abuse in Scotland; applauds NSPCC for its new programme, Improving Parenting, Improving Practice, which aims to reduce instances of child neglect by supporting parents to better understand their children’s needs and to improve the bond between parent and child; is pleased that Renfrewshire is one of the eight areas where NSPCC is trailing the programme, which it considers to be groundbreaking; congratulates NSPCC on this initiative, and looks forward to a wider rollout.

That concludes the open part of the debate. We now turn to the closing speeches. Jim Hume has a generous six minutes.

You are in your final minute, Ms Murray.

I remind members that we have some time in hand. Although speeches must be six minutes, time will be given back for interventions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04179, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on the Health and Sport Committee’s inquiry into support for community sport. We are very tight for time and I call on Duncan McNeil to speak to and move the motion in a tight 10 minutes.

I am afraid that I must now ask for brevity in questions and answers.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-04165, in the name of Elaine Murray, on rail.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-03061, in the name of Christine Grahame, on the great Polish map. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises the historic significance of The Great Polish Map of Scotland in the village of Eddleston in the Scottish Borders, designed and built as a labour of love by a group of young Polish geographers from the Jagellionian University of Krakow in 1975 at the request of General Maczek, former Polish wartime Commander of the 1st Armoured Division, and the war veteran, Jan Tomasik; notes that this commemorates the vital role of Polish forces in the defence of Scotland in the Second World War and is a token of thanks to the people of Scotland for the hospitality and friendship given to the Polish people not only during the war years but also in the decades that followed; considers that this 50 x 40 metre, three-dimensional outdoor 1:10,000 scale model of Scotland, complete with mountains, landscape, flowing rivers, estuaries, coasts and seas located is a remarkable example of topographic landscape modelling of a complete country, with a design and layout involving pioneering survey and construction techniques with dynamic representation of major river basins using a gravity-driven water supply; further congratulates Mapa Scotland, a voluntary group established to protect and restore this unique three dimensional representation, reminding Scots of the historical heritage linking Poland with Scotland, and considers that this project deserves support.

We come to the open debate, with speeches of six minutes.

I commend Clare Adamson on her excellent motion. Does she agree that Gartcosh steelworks, in my constituency, was also an important contributor to Scotland’s steel industry until it was viciously closed in 1986 by Margaret Thatcher, who threw hundreds of steelworkers on the scrapheap and devastated the whole community?

I am afraid that the member must close.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-03921, in the name of Kevin Stewart, on Aberdeen city centre. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the result of the 2012 referendum in Aberdeen, which found in favour of the proposed City Garden Project; understands that a very generous £55 million of private sector money was offered for this scheme, and believes that, in order to thrive, Aberdeen city centre needs transformational change.

The first item of business this afternoon is a debate on motion S4M-03924, in the name of Derek MacKay, on the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill.

Yes, you are coming into your last minute.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02703, in the name of Kenneth Macintosh, on the humankind index. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament warmly welcomes the launch of Oxfam Scotland’s Humankind Index; notes that the Humankind Index is a new method of measuring Scotland’s collective prosperity, going beyond GDP; commends Oxfam Scotland for what it sees as its participatory approach and for ensuring that seldom-heard communities are given the opportunity to state what really matters to them in relation to their wellbeing; considers that the people of Scotland place great importance on values such as decent housing, good health and clean neighbourhoods, holding them above purely financial and economic values, and hopes that the Humankind Index will be a progressive tool and deliver a framework that helps spark debate and helps policymakers make more informed decisions serving the real prosperity of East Renfrewshire and the rest of Scotland and supporting Scottish communities, individuals and the environment to achieve a truly socially just and sustainable Scotland.

The next item of business is a debate on the Scottish Government’s programme.

I ask for Ruth Davidson’s microphone to be switched on.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S4M-03926, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out an extension to a stage 1 deadline. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the deadline for consideration of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 21 September 2012.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of five Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-03927, on committee membership; motion S4M-03928, on substitution on a committee; motion S4M-03929, on the designation of a lead committee; motion S4M-03930, on the office of the clerk; and motion S4M-03931, on parliamentary recess dates. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that— George Adam be appointed to replace Sandra White as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Sandra White be appointed to replace George Adam as a member of the Public Audit Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Colin Beattie be appointed to replace George Adam as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Education and Culture Committee; Bob Doris to replace Sandra White as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee. That the Parliament agrees that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that between 6 January 2013 and 31 January 2014, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays, 29 March and 1 April 2013, 6 May 2013, 24 May and 27 May 2013, St Andrew’s Day (29 November 2013), 24 December (pm), 25 and 26 December 2013, 1 and 2 January 2014. That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 9 to 17 February 2013 (inclusive), 30 March to 14 April 2013 (inclusive), 29 June to 1 September 2013 (inclusive), 12 to 27 October 2013 (inclusive), 21 December 2013 to 5 January 2014 (inclusive).—[Bruce Crawford.]

Earlier today, Neil Findlay MSP raised a point of order regarding the alleged use of a social networking site by the First Minister during the debate on the Scottish Government’s programme. The Presiding Officer wrote to all MSPs in March reminding them about the use of electronic media in the chamber. The letter stated that the Presiding Officer did not consider that the use of electronic devices for purposes such as social networking sites was compatible with the requirements on conduct in the chamber. Having investigated this particular matter, I can inform the chamber that the First Minister has confirmed that the relevant tweets were sent on behalf of the First Minister from this account. [Interruption.] Order. Details of how the account is managed can be found on the First Minister’s networking site.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S4M-03927, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that— George Adam be appointed to replace Sandra White as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Sandra White be appointed to replace George Adam as a member of the Public Audit Committee.

A number of members wish to speak. I ask them to take around two minutes.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03408, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill. Before I invite the minister to open the debate, I call the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment to signify Crown consent to the bill.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-03049, in the name of Christina McKelvie, on the success of the armed services advice project. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates the Armed Services Advice Project (ASAP) on what it considers two successful years of delivering advice, information and support to the armed forces community in Scotland; notes that ASAP is delivered by Citizens Advice Bureaux (CAB) across Scotland, including by Hamilton CAB; understands that ASAP has dealt with over 6,000 issues for more than 1,400 clients in its first 21 months and gained £893,000 for its clients; believes that this is an important project and commends the group of service and non-service charities that fund it, including Poppyscotland, the Royal Air Force Benevolent Fund, the Maritime Charities Funding Group, ABF the Soldiers’ Charity, Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen and Families Association Forces Help, the Robertson Trust and Turn2us; considers that, while the majority of servicemen and women make a successful transition to civilian life following discharge, for a minority of veterans or their family members who experience significant problems, ASAP provides a vital source of advice and support; notes that getting the right help at the right time can make a significant contribution to helping veterans recover from problems, and looks forward to the forthcoming Citizens Advice Scotland report on veterans’ issues, which will be published to coincide with Armed Services Day.

Can the cabinet secretary take action to ensure that broadband infrastructure is improved in places like Moodiesburn and Mollinsburn in my constituency, where internet speeds are prohibitively slow and cause problems for households and local businesses?

We come to the open debate. We are slightly tighter for time than we were at the beginning of the debate, so we will have speeches of four minutes, with a bit of leeway for interventions.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have before them the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 8A, the marshalled list, which is SP bill 8A-ML, and the groupings, which is SP bill 8A-G. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the morning. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. All other divisions will be 30 seconds. Members who wish to speak in the debate on any group of amendments should press their request-to-speak button as soon as I call the group. Members should now refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Section 2—Functions of the Authority

Mr Lamont, you must come to a conclusion.

We now move to the open debate. Time is tight, so speeches should be a strict four minutes.

Given the efforts of manufacturers to circumvent the law preventing the advertising of their artificial milk and their complete disregard for the principles of the Innocenti declaration and the international code, what action can the minister take to help to mitigate the damage of such advertising and to ensure—given that next week is national breastfeeding awareness week—that parents are in no doubt about the unique health benefits of breastfeeding?

Can the minister clarify that he intends to remove the outrageous indemnity clause, which uses public money to undermine workers and disrupt industrial relations? Does the fact that the Government welcomes not-for-profit bids mean that there could be a restructuring of the railways on a public ownership model?

We move to the open debate and I ask for speeches of six minutes.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02884, in the name of Jamie Hepburn, on time for an international arms trade treaty. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament understands that, in July 2012, the UN will begin negotiations on a treaty to better regulate the arms trade; notes that the process toward this was instigated in December 2006 when the UN General Assembly adopted resolution 61/89, Towards an Arms Trade Treaty: establishing common international standards for the import, export and transfer of conventional arms; understands that, although the trade in arms is not illegal, campaigning organisations, such as Amnesty International and Oxfam, have expressed concerns that such weapons are often used to violate human rights; considers that this view was echoed by Sergio de Queiroz Duarte who, in December 2010, in his then capacity as the UN High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, told the Arms Trade Treaty Preparatory Committee that, “in all parts of the world, the ready availability of conventional weapons and ammunition has led to human suffering, repression, crime and terror among civilian populations”; notes that Amnesty International has estimated that more than 1,500 people die every day from armed violence and 85% of all of the killings it documents involve guns; further notes that Amnesty International claims that two out of three people killed as a result of armed violence die in countries that are not at war and 60% of all of the human rights abuses it reports involve the use of arms; notes what it understands to be the concerns of many Scots, including those in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, regarding the impact of such human rights breaches; welcomes the support that has been shown by many member states of the UN, such as the UK, France and Germany, to the concept of an arms trade treaty, but understands that these three countries are among the world’s biggest arms exporters; further welcomes the change in stance of the US Government, under President Obama, indicating that it is now in favour of a treaty; would welcome a strong arms trade treaty that all member states of the UN can ratify, which restricts the trade of arms to regimes that are likely to use them to violate human rights, and believes that such a treaty is necessary to achieve a more human rights-centric international arms trade.

We now move to the open debate. I can allow speeches of around five minutes, with some time in hand for interventions.

I ask front-bench members to pay attention to members who are speaking in the debate.

Come to a conclusion, please.

The first item of business this afternoon is themed question time. The first theme is rural affairs and the environment. I would be grateful for short and succinct questions and answers to allow as many questions as possible to be asked.

The next item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead on the reform of the common fisheries policy. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-03295, in the name of Angela Constance, on young people and economic growth. I advise members that the debate is very tight for time. Minister, you have 13 minutes.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02988, in the name of John Park, on celebrating Fife’s outdoor education centre. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament warmly welcomes the reopening of Ardroy outdoor education centre in Lochgoilhead; congratulates the Ardroy Ambassadors group, which ran what it considers to be an excellent campaign to reopen the centre after its closure in July 2011; notes that many school groups have already enjoyed adventures at Ardroy since its reopening and that it is already fully booked until the end of the summer school term; recognises that the Ardroy centre is now run as a charity; understands that the Ardroy team hopes to raise enough funds in the short term to upgrade the facility and in the long term to purchase the building from Fife Council, and celebrates what it considers the significant and valuable contribution that outdoor education centres like Ardroy make across the whole of Scotland through the diverse programmes that they run for children, young people and adults.

Finally, Jamie Hepburn has a generous six minutes.

You are in your last minute, Mr McGrigor.

We come to the open debate. Although the debate is short, I can give members speeches of up to five minutes.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. It gives me particular pleasure to welcome today’s time for reflection leader, Father Thomas Devine, from Our Lady and St Joseph’s, Glenboig, in my constituency.

The next item of business is a statement by Alex Neil on fuel poverty. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement; there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions during the statement.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02575, in the name of Colin Keir, on the Royal Highland Education Trust. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the Royal Highland Education Trust’s work to promote Scotland’s rural and agricultural environment, farming and countryside activities and food education to Scotland’s young people; considers that Scotland’s urbanisation over recent decades has meant that many children have no direct link with the countryside or experience of environmental issues and that this is a gap in young people’s education; notes that the Edinburgh-based charity has received funding from the Scottish Government to educate children about the role that food plays in their lives through farm visits, working with local companies and introducing food topics in the school curriculum; considers that food education has an important role to play in improving Scotland’s health, helping people to make healthier choices and making them aware of the importance of eating sustainably; further notes that the programme will highlight the career opportunities available to young people in Scotland’s food and drink sector, which provides an increasing boost to the Scottish economy, and welcomes the trust’s aim to deliver its programme of farm and estate visits for 15,000 young people per year by 2015.

Order!

Can we hear Mr Brown, please?

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02949, in the name of Aileen McLeod, on Rio+20. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the upcoming Rio+20 summit in June 2012, which will see world leaders, governments, the private sector, NGOs and other groups come together to discuss how they can reduce poverty, advance social equity and ensure environmental protection for the world; notes that, ahead of the summit, the seven key areas that have been identified as needing priority are decent jobs, energy, sustainable cities, food security and sustainable agriculture, water, oceans and disaster readiness; further notes that Rio+20 is in cooperation with the entire UN system; acknowledges the role of CIFAL Scotland in bringing together the public and private sector to advance the green growth agenda in Scotland and supports its ambition to give Scotland a powerful voice in promoting greater sustainability worldwide, including for organisations in the south of Scotland; considers that the original Rio Summit, held in 1992, was a milestone in global environmental talks, and believes that Rio+20 has the potential to go further in providing guidelines for long-term sustainable development worldwide.

We come to closing speeches. I remind members that, if they have participated in the debate, they should be in the chamber for the closing speeches.

Under rule 7.5 of the standing orders, members should not refer to any matter in which legal proceedings are active except with the consent of the Presiding Officers. I consider the Aberdeen western peripheral route plan, which is currently before the Supreme Court, to be such a matter. 3.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have before them the bill as amended at stage 2, the marshalled list and the groupings—documents SP bill 4A, SP bill 4A-ML and SP bill 4A-G, respectively. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Members who wish to speak in the debate on any group of amendments should press their request to speak button as soon as possible after I call the group. Members should refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Section 1—Minimum price of alcohol

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02485, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on Glasgow epilepsy genetics service. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates what it considers the outstanding work undertaken by the Glasgow Epilepsy Genetics Service, which was established in the Duncan Guthrie Institute of Medical Genetics at RHSC Yorkhill in 2005 with support from the Muir Maxwell Trust; commends Yorkhill for being the principal testing centre for the UK and several other countries; understands that 2,500 individuals have already benefited from a growing number of investigations, currently across six genes, leading to a genetic diagnosis of epilepsy; notes that his work aims to help individuals and families understand the cause of their own or their child’s epilepsy, save unnecessary tests and that it may change clinical management and improve outcomes; applauds this NHS National Services Division-funded service while welcoming further plans to offer a comprehensive genetic panel of epilepsy genes from mid 2012, earlier testing for children and adults, and a Scottish Paediatric Epilepsy Origins and Outcome Study; notes that the service also offers genetic counselling to assist families and individuals in moving forward from their diagnosis, and believes that a greater availability of epilepsy specialist nurses, such as in Ayrshire and Arran, would allow both new and existing cases of epilepsy to benefit from tailored information on taking medications and the opportunity of making informed lifestyle choices to maximise their physical, emotional and mental wellbeing.

Cabinet secretary.

We come to the open debate. We are tight for time so, unfortunately, I will not be able to give time back for interventions. Speeches should be of four minutes.

Does the minister agree that our efforts to tackle obesity must start long before school? Given that research suggests an increased probability of formula-fed infants being obese by the age of three, what action is the Scottish Government taking to encourage and support breastfeeding as part of the measures to tackle obesity among children?

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02904, in the name of Shona Robison, on meeting the challenge—physical activity and its contribution to tackling obesity. I call Shona Robison to speak to and move the motion. Minister, you have 13 minutes.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02253, in the name of Christine Grahame, on commemorating James Graham, Marquis of Montrose and member of the first Scots Parliament. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes that 2012 is the 400th anniversary of the birth of James Graham, fifth Earl and first Marquis of Montrose, considered to be one of Scotland’s finest battlefield commanders, poet and political thinker, and, as a member of the first Scottish Parliament from 1636 until 1641, he was a commissioner on the Committee of Estates, which acted to some extent as a committee of public safety, and became the formal opposition to the king; notes that there will be a service of commemoration at St Giles Cathedral on 21 May where his embalmed heart and bones are interred; considers that this important period of 17th century Scotland is little known and little taught despite its relevance to the current constitutional debate in Scotland, and believes that it is further evidence that Scots should be more aware of their own distinct history as the constitutional present and the future are the progeny of the past.

We now come to the closing speeches.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the National Library of Scotland Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, the marshalled list and the groupings to which I have agreed. Those documents—SP bill 2A, SP bill 2A-ML and SP bill 2A-G, respectively—should be available at the back of the chamber. If there is a division, the division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. Members who want to speak in the debate on a group of amendments should press their request-to-speak buttons as soon as possible after I call the lead amendment in the relevant group. Members should refer to the marshalled list of amendments. Section 3—Acquisitions, deposits and disposal of objects

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02878, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the National Library of Scotland Bill.

The final item of business is a member’s business debate on motion S4M-01763, in the name of Alex Fergusson, on “A Road to Health”. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament commends the Dumfries and Galloway Third Sector Forum for its participation in the Parliament’s Third Community Partnerships Project and the report on its public consultation entitled Road to Health, which has identified a number of issues relating to the transport of older people to and from hospital and clinical appointments; notes that the forum’s conclusions highlight a belief that there is a need for NHS boards and local authorities to work together to maximise the effectiveness of transport for older patients and their carers attending hospital appointments and day care centres, and that adequate transport provision in remote and rural areas is vital for the health and wellbeing of older citizens; further notes the findings of the report that different regions of Scotland have different approaches to this issue, and believes that there is a need to develop a national strategy with best practice guidelines for the adequate provision of such transport to address the issues highlighted in Road to Health as soon as is practicable.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Allan Forsyth, chair of the Bahá’í Council for Scotland. Allan Forsyth (Bahá’í Council for Scotland): It is a great honour and joy to speak to you today on behalf of the Scottish Bahá’í community, and it is extra special because the next 12 months mark the centenary of the most significant event in our community’s history. A century ago, Abdu’l-Bahá, the son of Bahá’u’lláh, founder of the Bahá’í Faith and head of the community, had just been released from a lifetime as a prisoner of conscience in the Ottoman empire. Despite advanced age and poor health, he undertook a journey to the west to share his father’s message about the oneness of humanity. On 6 January 1913, Abdu’l-Bahá’s journey brought him to Edinburgh, where he stayed at 7 Charlotte Square as a guest of Dr Alexander Whyte, then moderator of the Free Church of Scotland. Although Abdu’l-Bahá was received well wherever he travelled, I am very proud that in Scotland his reception was particularly warm and enthusiastic. At a talk at Freemasons hall, hundreds had to wait disappointedly outside a packed venue. The Scotsman and the Edinburgh Evening Dispatch gave extensive and positive reports. Even our weather relented: for four days in early January it was mild and sunny! In a packed schedule, Abdu’l-Bahá met and talked with all—city officials, clerics, academics and schoolchildren. He talked about many subjects: the necessity of the equality of men and women; the harmony of science and religion; the reality that all the world’s faiths have the same divine source and purpose. I would like to leave you with one idea Abdu’l-Bahá shared that inspires the work of Bahá’ís in communities all around Scotland as we seek to assist children, youth and adults from all backgrounds to recognise and develop their spiritual capacities and to become agents of constructive and lasting social change. He taught that true happiness lies in service to others. His father, Bahá’u’lláh, said: “Blessed and happy is he that ariseth to promote the best interests of the peoples and kindreds of the earth … Man’s merit lieth in service and virtue and not in the pageantry of wealth and riches.” The implications of that for society are profound. If we assume that every human being has the potential to find fulfilment through their unique contribution to their community, Scotland will flourish. If we treat ourselves as primarily interested in material gain, insurmountable obstacles will abound. As Abdu’l-Bahá left Edinburgh for London, he dictated a telegram with these words: “Scotland is illumined”. He was in no doubt where our destiny lies.

The next item of business is a statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment on the future of European structural funds from 2014. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02777, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on behalf of the Finance Committee, on fiscal sustainability.

I thank the members who signed the motion and those who have stayed behind to take part in the debate this evening. This is the first debate about Cuba in the Scottish Parliament, and as convener of the cross-party group on Cuba, I am delighted that important guests have joined us in the gallery tonight—the Cuban ambassador, Her Excellency Esther Armenteros, and two Cuban family members of the Miami five: Antonio Guerrero, who is the son of Antonio, and Rosa Aurora Freijanes, who is Fernando’s wife. We are also joined by members of the Scottish Cuba solidarity campaign, including Kath Campbell. I take this opportunity to personally pay tribute to John McAllion, who set up the cross-party group on Cuba in 1999. I took over as its convener in 2003. The motion was inspired by the beyond the frame art exhibition at the Lighthouse in Glasgow, which will be on until 13 May. The person who made sure that it happened in Glasgow is Jan Pietrasik, and I pay tribute to Jan for that. I attended the opening last night, and the exhibition contains some amazing works of Cuban art by acclaimed Cuban artists as well as works donated by 20 celebrated artists who are mainly based in the United Kingdom. Again, one of the artists is with us this evening—Lesbia Vent Dumois. The exhibition also features art by two of the Miami five, Antonio Guerrero and Gerardo Hernández. Last week, I had the privilege of hosting some of that work in the Scottish Parliament’s garden lobby to help to raise awareness among MSPs and staff. Proceeds from the exhibition will go to support the campaign to free the Miami five. Before giving a short explanation of the plight of the five, I will quote the words of their families from the brochure: “The project will reach out to new people in Europe who will be able to see first-hand the tremendous determination that all Cubans have to achieve the return of our 5 heroes. It will help again to break the media silence that we have suffered over the years with our just fight.” The Miami five are serving long prison sentences in the USA having been arrested while trying to gather information on Miami-based groups that are responsible for terrorist attacks against the Cuban people. The attacks have caused hundreds of deaths and included a 1990s bombing campaign in Havana hotels and clubs aimed at stopping the flourishing holiday industry. At the time of the trial, lawyers made the point, albeit unsuccessfully, that a fair trial in the toxic anti-Castro setting of Miami was impossible. The case of the Miami five is a terrible miscarriage of justice that reflects badly on the United States. Innocent men are being used as pawns in a political game. Amnesty International recently produced a report on the unsafe convictions of the Miami five that shows that the injustice extends to the refusal of visas, contrary to human rights, for some wives and children to visit their loved ones. This miscarriage of justice should be set against the scene of the 50-year economic blockade of Cuba by the USA. The progressive revolution in Cuba, led by Fidel Castro and Che Guevara, swept to power in 1959 on a wave of popular support, overthrowing the previous barbaric regime under Batista. Prior to the revolution, Cuba was a playground for America’s rich elite and gangsters; meanwhile, the island’s people were desperately poor. Three years later, in 1962, the USA imposed an economic blockade that has, in the 50 years since, tried to strangle socialism in Cuba—tried but failed. The embargo has, though, affected the normal functioning of the Cuban economy and has cruelly impacted on its citizens by banning imports and exports between the US and Cuba. It also impacts on other countries—extraterritorial powers can extend to fines on banks and businesses that trade with Cuba. I believe that that is something that the Scottish Government could look into. Indeed, I found out last night that a Scottish business has had its transactions with Cuba, which is its main market, stopped by its bank, the Royal Bank of Scotland. It is ironic that in the land of the free US citizens are barred from travelling to Cuba. It really is time that the embargo, which is a cold war relic, was consigned to the dustbin of history. It is illegal and inhumane and has been condemned by the United Nations General Assembly for the past 20 years. Last year, of 188 countries, only two disagreed with that: the USA and Israel. However, ordinary US citizens do not disagree with it, because earlier this year an Angus Reid Public Opinion poll found that 51 per cent of Americans would lift the trade embargo and 62 per cent want to re-establish diplomatic relations with Cuba. It is unbelievable that the USA should keep up its obsession with Cuba when it does not do so with other countries with which it has fought vicious wars. Indeed, Wayne Smith, former diplomat and head of the US special interests section in Havana under President Carter, recently wrote: “U.S. policy toward Cuba is irrational and inconsistent with what it does elsewhere. We have normal diplomatic and trade relations with China, and even with Vietnam, with which we fought a bitter and bloody war, but not with Cuba.” When Fidel Castro was in New York in 1995 for the UN 50th anniversary celebrations, he asked: “How much longer must we wait for a world without ... cruel blockades that kill men, women, children and the old like silent atomic bombs”. By punishing ordinary people, the USA has hoped for 50 years to overthrow the Government of Cuba, but it quite simply has not worked. Despite the blockade, US hostility and being a third-world country, Cuba has flourished, particularly in the fields of education, sustainable development and health, with Cuba exporting its health professionals across Latin America and the developing world. I think that others will touch on those issues, because I do not have time. I want to make three specific points about Cuban children, as cited in “Cuba, the untold history.” They are that almost 120 million children of primary school age in the world do not go to school—not one of them is Cuban; 250 million children under 13 years in the world are forced to work to survive—not one of them is Cuban; and over 1 million children are forced into child prostitution—not one of them is Cuban. Here in Scotland we can help the Cubans in the struggle against the blockade, even in small ways. Recently, two premises in Coatbridge—The Mint and Owen’s Bar—committed to being Cuba friendly by supplying Havana Club rum. I hope that others might follow in their footsteps. Last year, the UK Government signed a formal co-operation agreement with Cuba to promote closer dialogue and economic, scientific, technical, educational, cultural and sporting links. Many of those fields are devolved to Scotland and we already have a link with a formal twinning between Glasgow and Havana. It would be fantastic if, this evening, the Scottish Government could commit to looking into having a similar agreement in the devolved areas to inspire more co-operation between our two countries. We can learn much from Cuba, particularly on education, sustainable development and healthcare, and we can share our good practice. Spain has a formal university exchange with Cuba, and Scotland could easily look at pursuing that. Unlike other third-world countries, Cuba has no one who is starving, homeless or dying because they cannot afford healthcare. The people there are warm and friendly, which helps to underpin Cuba’s popularity as a holiday destination. The people simply want to assert their right to their sovereignty and to see an end to interference in their affairs by foreign Governments. Cuba shows that another world is possible. I hope that the debate will help to highlight the case of the Miami five alongside Cuba’s righteous struggle against the US blockade and that it will encourage more Scots to visit Cuba for three good reasons: sun, salsa and socialism. ¡Viva Cuba!

I declare an interest as a member of the board of the Scottish Left Review, the parent board of the Jimmy Reid Foundation. Is the First Minister minded to set up the commission that the report asks for to look into democracy at the local level? If so, will he ensure that it considers the democratic deficit of a lack of women’s participation in local government and ensure that any proposed change does not result in greater inequality between poorer and richer communities, which is also cited in the report?

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02738, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the national performing companies. I call Fiona Hyslop to speak to and move the motion.

Speak through the chair, please.

I remind members and ministers that brevity in questions and answers will allow me to get more people in.

During his deliberations, will the cabinet secretary consider the outcomes of the Equal Opportunities Committee’s 2009 report?

Does Mr McLetchie accept that the impact of going to prison is much greater on women than it is on men, given that women have care of the children and they can lose their homes and their social support? That is much more the case for women than it is for men.

I commend the cabinet secretary for setting up the commission. However, as he recognises, there have been at least 10 reports and inspections since devolution, and none has been fully implemented. None of those reports and inspections seems to have had the impact that it should have had. In the meantime, women, many of whom are victims, have continued to go to jail in increasing numbers and, as a result, they have lost their homes, jobs and social supports, and their children have suffered. Around half of the children of women prisoners end up in prison, which is deeply disturbing. I have served in the Parliament for 13 years, and women offenders have been a major issue in that time. In 1999, I was a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee’s women’s sub-group, which first met on 26 October that year. It decided to consider two main issues: the treatment of women victims of crime in the judicial system and the treatment of women offenders by the judicial system. Much of the evidence that we considered then has been repeated in the commission’s report some 13 years later, and Helena Kennedy raised many of those issues in her book “Eve Was Framed: Women and British Justice”. In 1992, she proposed alternatives to custody. Some positive steps forward have been taken over the years—I refer to the 218 centre, for example—but it is deeply depressing to realise that, after all that time, the issues have not only remained the same but worsened in some cases. In 2000, women made up 3.5 per cent of the total prison population; by 2010-11, the figure had risen to 5 per cent. That is depressing. I am passionate about achieving change in how we treat women in the justice system, so I was pleased when the Equal Opportunities Committee in the previous session agreed to take forward my suggestion to have an inquiry into the subject. The report of that inquiry, which I mentioned in my intervention on the cabinet secretary, helped to inform the report that we are discussing, but many of its recommendations have simply been repeated. I make a plea for action. Why should we be bothered about the increasing number of women who are being imprisoned? Perhaps because of prison overcrowding, the price of keeping someone incarcerated, or even the costs associated with looking after dependent children—those are all good reasons. It makes economic sense to stop sending women to prison, but the real reason why we should be bothered is that most of those women are victims, and their children go on to suffer. As a society, we need to take that on board and consider it. Of course I accept that some women have to be in prison, particularly those who have been convicted of serious violent crime and might be a danger to society. Christina McKelvie pointed that out in her speech. However, those women would also fare better if prisons were less crowded and more time and effort was put into their rehabilitation, as the report suggests. Last year, those women made up only 2 per cent of the total female prison population, so I want to concentrate on the other 98 per cent, many of whom, as we have heard, have suffered abuse and have mental health problems. Many are addicts because of abuse in their chaotic lifestyles or, indeed, to cope with those lifestyles. In evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee, Sue Brookes, who is an ex-governor of Cornton Vale, said: “More than once, women arrived at ... Cornton Vale clearly not knowing who they were, let alone where they were”.—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 5 May 2009; c 1005.] She went on to question the ethics of that. For those women, alternatives such as the 218 centre are vital. Some women are detained in prison only because they need to be kept safe and nowhere else is available and, in that respect, the report suggests a different approach, which I hope will be accepted. Alternatives are particularly relevant for women incarcerated on remand, only around 30 per cent of whom receive a custodial sentence. By being on remand, those women can lose their homes, their jobs and their children; their children suffer and they, too, suffer from mental distress and are at risk of committing suicide. It is all a bit reminiscent of Lewis Carroll’s White Queen, who said that, quite often, subjects are punished before they commit a crime rather than after and, sometimes, they are punished when they commit no crimes at all. A note of caution is required on community alternatives, because they need to be suited to women and cannot simply be tagged on to men’s services. One of my main motivations for wanting the Equal Opportunities Committee to examine the matter was the fact that the criminal justice system was set up with men in mind and has continued to develop in that fashion and I believe that any new women’s prison must be built with proper consideration of the needs of women and dependent children. I also urge caution over holding women in men’s prisons. There are good reasons for keeping women in facilities in local communities, but they cannot be simply an add-on; they must be designed with women’s needs in mind. Going back to a point made by Mr McLetchie, I note that the report says that there is no evidence to suggest that the courts are biased against women. However, in her evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee, Baroness Corston said: “Sentencers do not like to hear this, but they have been giving women harsher sentences for less serious crimes.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 19 May 2009; c 1048.] The cabinet secretary, too, has touched on that issue in the past and I really think that it needs to be considered further. Over many years, political parties have been guilty of reacting to a tabloid agenda with a macho contest over who is tougher on crime. Actually, it is tougher to have the courage to do the right thing with regard to women offenders. After 13 years of a devolved Parliament and five years of his Government, the cabinet secretary has got to find the courage to take action and, when he does, I will be the first in line to congratulate him. Indeed, I hope that I can do so in six months’ time when he reports back to Parliament and annually thereafter.

Does Mark McDonald agree that that is preventative spending—that it is spending to save?

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01932, in the name of Richard Baker, on UCAN’s campaign for robot-assisted surgery. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates UCAN, the north-east-based urological cancer charity, on its bid to raise £2.5 million by 2013 in order to bring to the area pioneering robotic equipment for the provision of keyhole surgery; understands that three of the four most common cancers, prostate, bowel and bladder, as well as gynaecological conditions such as endometriosis, can be treated using robotic equipment; believes that this equipment will enable the use in Scotland of the most advanced technologies for minimally invasive surgery and that this will be of huge benefit to patients in minimising the impact of surgery; welcomes the aim of UCAN, which is to create a theatre suite at Aberdeen Royal Infirmary with two integrated operating theatres that will have the capacity for robot-assisted surgery, and hopes that this campaign will receive support throughout the north east.

We move to the open debate, with speeches of four minutes. There is a little bit of time for interventions, but not too much.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02639, in the name of Elaine Murray, on transport. I advise members that the debate is tight for time and that, therefore, speeches in the open debate must be limited to five minutes. I call Elaine Murray to speak to and move the motion. Ms Murray, you have 14 minutes.

That brings us to closing speeches. I remind members who were in the chamber for the debate that they should be here for closing speeches. I have a little bit of time in hand for interventions. I call David McLetchie—I can give you up to seven minutes, Mr McLetchie.

I remind all members to speak through the chair.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02419, in the name of David Stewart, on devolution of the Crown estate. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the Scottish Affairs Committee report, The Crown Estate in Scotland, and endorses the committee’s conclusion to recommend ending the Crown Estate Commissioner’s responsibilities for the administration and revenues of the ancient crown property, rights and interests in Scotland; supports the Scottish Affairs Committee view that marine and coastal assets in Scotland should be removed from the Crown Estate Commissioner’s responsibility and devolved down to the level of local communities, and notes the extent of marine and coastal assets throughout the Highlands and Islands and the potential to maximise the benefits to local communities through devolution.

We come to the closing speeches.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02523, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on local energy companies.

I now call David McLetchie. Mr McLetchie, you may have a very generous six minutes.

The ministerial statement was relevant to two major planning cases in my constituency. North Lanarkshire Council listened to local communities and said no to an incinerator in Coatbridge and no to building on green-belt land in Chryston, but a Scottish Government reporter then said yes to both developments. Will the proposed reforms mean that in future people will be put before private profit, or will the emphasis be on helping developers rather than on local democracy?

Can we have Gil Paterson’s mike on?

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-02265, in the name of Jim Eadie, on violence in Syria. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises the growing humanitarian crisis in Syria; supports the call by Ban Ki-moon, United Nations Secretary General, for the world to speak with one voice on this issue; condemns the violence in Syria and notes the need for immediate and full access to humanitarian relief for vulnerable people in the country; acknowledges the work of organisations such as Oxfam for their campaigning efforts in Lothian and across Scotland; pays tribute to the work of all non-governmental organisations that are already present in countries bordering Syria and preparing to deal with the humanitarian crisis, and considers that the impact of violence on civilians is a clear example of the need for an international arms trade treaty that would stop arms transfers.

I am afraid that you will have to conclude.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is themed questions. In order to get in as many members as possible, I would prefer short and succinct questions and answers.

The next item of business is a statement by Fergus Ewing, which is an update on Scotland’s fossil fuel levy. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement; therefore, there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02431, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the United Kingdom Government’s response on the future of Remploy.

I am afraid that I must ask you to conclude.

The member must close now.

You must come to a close.

The member has 30 seconds left.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01999, in the name of Sandra White, on Commonwealth week 2012. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. I am delighted to welcome to the Parliament the special envoy for the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Scotland branch, Annie Lennox. You are most welcome. [Applause.] Motion debated, That the Parliament considers that the Commonwealth has a valuable role in strengthening relationships between nations across the world; welcomes the continued contribution of Scotland and its people to those relationships; reaffirms its support for the work of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA); notes that the CPA Scotland Branch and the Scottish Government have, as a key focus, continued to develop relationships with Malawi; notes Scotland’s longstanding links throughout the Commonwealth; acknowledges the work of organisations such as the British Council Scotland; notes that 2012 is also the Year of Creative Scotland, and therefore commends the theme of Commonwealth Day this year, Connecting Cultures.

Mr Maxwell, Mr Findlay is not taking an intervention.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02246, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on Aberdeen City Council.

I would be grateful if the member could come to a conclusion.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-02185, in the name of David Stewart, on petition PE1408, which is on the understanding and treatment of pernicious anaemia and vitamin B12 deficiency. This, too, is an extremely tight debate. I call David Stewart to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Public Petitions Committee. Mr Stewart, you have 10 minutes, but if you are able to take less time, I might fit in back benchers.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion number S4M-01982, in the name of Humza Yousaf, on saving Gadburn school. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with concern the decision by Glasgow City Council to close Gadburn School, which teaches children in the north east of Glasgow who have additional support needs; understands the importance of additional support schools with regard to the wellbeing and education of many of Scotland’s young people and believes that the parents and teachers of these young people are best placed to understand the children’s educational needs; commends the parents of the Gadburn pupils for what it considers to be their tireless campaign in trying to keep the school open and secure adequate educational facilities for children with additional support needs, and believes that the decision-making process for the future of Gadburn has been flawed.

Mr Gibson, you really must come to a conclusion.

We need a question, Mr Park.

The next item of business is a debate on the living wage in Scotland. I call on Joe FitzPatrick to open the debate on behalf of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee.

I remind members that they must speak through the chair when they make interventions.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-02156.1, in the name of Claudia Beamish, which seeks to amend motion S4M-02156, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on climate justice, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to.

Ms Marra, I would be grateful if you could come to a conclusion and move your amendment.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01654, in the name of Iain Gray, on access to justice across Scotland. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the content of the Scottish Court Service document, Future Court Structures; expresses concern that the paper proposes closing up to 15 of Scotland’s 49 sheriff courts, including Haddington, and reducing the number of sheriff courts hosting jury trials from 47 to 14; has grave reservations about the potential impact that such a reduction in service could have on access to justice for communities across Scotland; believes that these proposals could make it harder for victims of crime and witnesses to get to court, and considers that any proposals for major changes to the court structure merit a full and robust consultation process to allow communities across Scotland to play a meaningful role in determining how justice is delivered in their areas.

Could you conclude, please?

Can we hear the member’s last 30 seconds, please?

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01728, in the name of George Adam, on take a step in 2012 for fair trade. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises the Fairtrade campaign, Take a Step in 2012, which launches Fairtrade Fortnight on 27 February 2012; welcomes the campaign, which encourages everyone to take a step toward using fairly traded products; understands that such products support millions of farmers and workers in developing countries; congratulates local authorities, such as Renfrewshire, in achieving fairtrade status, and looks forward to a time when Scotland becomes a fairtrade nation.

We come to the open debate. Members can have a generous six minutes and I am in the happy position of being able to give back some time for interventions.

Normally, we do everything possible to encourage breastfeeding. However, given that the French regulatory authorities have recommended that women with PIP implants should not breastfeed their children, what advice can the cabinet secretary give mothers in Scotland with PIP implants?

I can give you a bit of time back.

Can we have Clare Adamson’s microphone on, please?

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01532, in the name of Jamie McGrigor, on the designation of special areas of conservation. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with alarm concerns expressed by local communities in the Western Isles regarding procedures and scientific data used by Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH) for designating special areas of conservation (SAC) in East Mingulay and the Sound of Barra; notes that the concerns were assessed by SNH, which, in the case of the East Mingulay consultation process, deemed them to be unfounded, and notes that the designation process is continuing for both sites, despite continuing local concerns and what it understands to be government-sponsored evidence of substantial economic damage and little quantifiable benefit as a result of SAC status.

You have only a few seconds left. Please conclude.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01878, in the name of Annabel Goldie, on prison visiting committees. This debate is every bit as tight as the previous one, so I ask members to keep strictly to their times.

In her discussions with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, has the cabinet secretary discussed the positive contribution made by Scotland’s only breast milk bank, which is based at Yorkhill, to the health of sick and premature babies? Will she urge other health boards to consider providing such a service?

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01655, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on assistance dogs are working dogs too. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes that, under current VAT legislation, food for assistance dogs is not VAT exempt but that food for other working dogs, such as sheepdogs and greyhounds, is; notes that working dogs’ food is exempt as they require a high-protein diet but that such a diet is not appropriate for assistance dogs as they work in a different manner; considers that, where a charitable organisation, such as Guide Dogs Scotland, which works with clients in East Kilbride and across Scotland, was to supply food for assistance dogs from donations, an exemption from VAT would result in significant savings, which could be used to assist its client group, and believes that this issue could be easily resolved to the benefit of relevant charitable organisations and individual owners who feed their own assistance dogs.

Given the tight timescale that has been announced for the regionalisation, does the cabinet secretary share my concern that Coatbridge College was excluded from the recent joint statement by the management of the other three colleges on the creation of a Lanarkshire federation? Most importantly, what is the likely impact of the situation on my constituents with regard to course provision, travel and jobs? Will the cabinet secretary meet me to discuss my concerns?

I must ask you to close.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S4M-01865, in the name of Christine Grahame, on behalf of the selection panel on the appointment of the Scottish Information Commissioner.

This debate matters to my constituents in a direct way. Coatbridge and Chryston has one of the lowest levels of car ownership in the country—nearly 40 per cent of households have no car. Also, as Labour’s motion intimates, people on low incomes rely heavily on public transport. Unfortunately, as has been proven time after time, services for the poor are often poor services. That is clearly shown in the case of buses in my constituency. For people who cannot afford a car, reliable and affordable public transport is a necessity. If the buses are unreliable, non-existent or overpriced, those who can do so will choose not to use them. However, those with no choice depend on buses to get to their work, the shops or their leisure activities and, without buses, they are trapped. Also, the better the bus links, the more accessible an area becomes and the easier it is for people to find work. The opposite is also true, of course, which is particularly worrying during this time of rapidly rising unemployment in Scotland. Because of the bus issues that have been brought to my attention, I undertook to campaign for bus reregulation, and thousands of my constituents joined me in signing a petition for better buses. One thing that was perfectly clear during that campaign was that the current, deregulated system is not working in terms of providing those lifeline services in my constituency.

I will come to the model that I would recommend in order to reregulate the buses, but one thing is for sure: they certainly are not working. I will give the chamber examples of that, in case members are in any doubt. What is happening in Coatbridge—about which the minister should not be in any doubt, as I have written to him about it often enough—is causing concerns due to services being cancelled or altered at short notice, which causes major problems for commuters. For example, when the Moodiesburn bypass was suddenly opened early, the buses just bypassed my constituents and left them standing at bus stops. Similarly, in Carnbroe and Townhead last year, people were left with no buses at all. On that occasion, I contacted Councillor Fagan at the SPT, which ensured that bus services were quickly provided. However, the SPT cannot always step in, as it has a fixed budget. Bus timetables and routes are often changed at short notice with no regard for the needs of passengers, and in Coatbridge there is little or no information at bus stops. In November, I addressed a public meeting on buses that was organised by Coatbridge Federation of Tenants & Residents Associations.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. At that meeting, the SPT advised a further withdrawal of services from Coatbridge by private operators this month. The 62 service, which connects Coatbridge with Glasgow, will cease, cutting off south Coatbridge in the evenings and at weekends. That is completely unacceptable. Following the 2003 manifesto commitment, which is mentioned in the motion, the SNP conference in 2006 pledged to take bus services out of the control of private profiteers, but that promise was dropped. The Scottish Government is not standing up for ordinary people on the issue. The sad reality is that the SNP seems to be on the side of the big bus companies. If it wants to change that perception, it should immediately evaluate the privatised bus industry and ensure that its focus is on accountability, affordability and service provision. That would show us that the big private profiteers operate simply to boost their already swollen coffers, not to provide a public service. It is obscene that we allow a few massive private operators to follow a systemic impulse to produce wealth for themselves at the expense of the travelling public. As Karl Marx put it: “Accumulate, accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets!”

Will the member consider an innovation that the SPT and Councillor David Fagan are considering? It is a franchise arrangement, like London Buses, which would not necessarily cost the earth.

We come to the open debate. Speeches should be a maximum of four minutes.

Is the minister aware that in North Lanarkshire in March 2011, more than 17,000 households were on the waiting list for a council house and that 472 households were living in temporary accommodation? Given the scale of the housing shortage, how does the Scottish Government intend to help local authorities to meet the Government’s 2012 commitment on homelessness?

The first item of business this afternoon is themed question time on education and lifelong learning. To fit in as many members as possible, I would prefer succinct questions and answers to match.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01822, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the claim of right. I call Michael Russell to speak to and move the motion in the name of Nicola Sturgeon—no, I am sorry. I call Nicola Sturgeon to speak to and move the motion in her name.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01690, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on save Glasgow’s local train services. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament recognises the importance of local train services to commuters in Glasgow; notes Transport Scotland’s publication, Rail 2014 - Public Consultation, which calls into question the future of railway stations within one mile of another station; expresses concern that nine of the 14 stations identified in this category, Ashfield, Barnhill, Duke Street, Gilshochill, Kelvindale, Kennishead, Maryhill, Mosspark and Nitshill, are in Glasgow and that five of these are on the Anniesland to Queen Street via Ashfield line; notes that each of the nine stations has seen an increase in passenger numbers over the last two years, with Ashfield seeing a 32% increase during this time; further notes that passenger numbers have increased by 189% and 145% at the threatened Gilshochill and Possilpark and Parkhouse stations since 2005; also notes the ongoing Edinburgh Glasgow Improvement Plan consultation, which, it understands, threatens the future of a direct train service to Glasgow Queen Street on the Ashfield line, and believes that these changes would restrict access and deter the use of local rail services in Glasgow and will inevitably make it more difficult for local residents to travel to work and access health and leisure facilities.

I am afraid that I have to ask you to close.

I can give you about another minute.

Please do not do it, Mr Carlaw.

I call Richard Lochhead, who has a tight nine minutes.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01596, in the name of Elaine Murray, on the independence referendum and let Wallace vote. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes that for generations Scots have taken up opportunities to work in other parts of the UK and beyond and that many have subsequently returned to Scotland to use the skills and experiences that they have gained elsewhere; understands that Scots working outwith Scotland at the time of the independence referendum will not be eligible to vote on Scotland’s constitutional future whereas anyone eligible to be on the electoral register in Scotland will be entitled to vote; believes that Scots living outwith Scotland should be able to register to vote in the independence referendum on the same basis as expatriate UK citizens can vote in UK elections, and congratulates Dumfries-born James Wallace on his online campaign, letwallacevote, to bring this issue to the attention of the public.

Thank you Mr Stevenson. Your point is on the record. Members are aware that, if any mistakes are made in the chamber, there are opportunities for them to correct the Official Report if they so desire.

I am afraid that the member is about to finish.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01558, in the name of Margaret Burgess, on high-interest pay day loans. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with concern the recent report from R3, the trade body for insolvency professionals, regarding high-interest payday loans; understands that the report suggests that there is a likelihood that many people have turned to such loans as a last resort in the run-up to the Christmas period; highlights that the report also claims that the interest rates on such loans can be up to 5,000% per year and that the payday loan sector is worth £2 billion; notes that the UK Government could introduce stronger crisis loan regulation to protect consumers, especially vulnerable people, and that it could tackle the issue of dishonest and irresponsible lending; further notes that that those in need of assistance can seek advice from National Debt Line Scotland or their local citizens advice bureau or money advice centre before taking out such loans, and welcomes the development of credit unions such as the Kilwinning-based 1st Alliance, which, it understands, offers affordable credit and encourages saving.

I ask the member to come to a conclusion.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to prevent hospital-acquired infections. (S4O-00509)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her answer and for assisting me in getting information from NHS Lanarkshire about the norovirus outbreak at Monklands hospital. Is she aware that Professor Hugh Pennington has said: “A much higher number of ward infections in a single health board also raises the question about the effectiveness of norovirus outbreak control at that board”? Given the massive scale of the outbreak at Monklands, which is not yet over, is she minded to order an inquiry into the cause of the outbreak and the effectiveness of the actions that have been taken?

When the cabinet secretary next meets NHS boards, will she impress on them her stated commitment to the need for the highest standards of cleanliness in our hospitals, to help to stop the spread of infections such as norovirus, which, although it is initially brought in from outside, quickly spreads if wards are dirty and control measures are not robust enough?

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01042, in the name of Jim Eadie, on child trafficking in the chocolate industry, 10 years on from Harkin-Engel. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament acknowledges the 10th anniversary of the signing of the Harkin-Engel Protocol on 19 September 2011, signifying the chocolate industry’s apparent commitment to abolishing the trafficking of workers in West Africa into deplorable conditions; condemns the industry’s apparent failure to take the appropriate action as pledged in the protocol, thereby perpetuating some of the worst forms of child labour in the cocoa sector of Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana; understands from a report on the protocol by Tulane University that none of the six articles calling for action has been fully implemented and that the required industry-wide reform in the cocoa sector has not taken place; commends the 10 Campaign run by civil society groups across the world, including the International Labor Rights Forum, World Vision and Stop the Traffik, and would welcome widespread support for the petition to end the trafficking of children in the cocoa industry.

The member needs to conclude.

Yes.

The next item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead on the outcome of end-of-year fishing negotiations. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

We turn to the closing speeches. I remind all members that, if they participated in the debate, they should be in the chamber for the closing speeches. We have a little time in hand for interventions if members want to take them. I call Jackson Carlaw, who has approximately six minutes.

Mr Macdonald, please draw to a conclusion.

The question is, that amendment 8 be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01524, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01340, in the name of Stuart McMillan, on commending petrol and diesel watch. Motion debated, That the Parliament commends the Greenock Telegraph’s Petrol and Diesel Watch feature, which advises motorists on a daily basis of the fuel prices at filling stations throughout Inverclyde and the west of Scotland; acknowledges that this was established in response to public outcry at rising fuel prices and also reported disparities of as much as 7p per litre between filling stations in nearby towns, and is concerned that dramatically rising fuel prices threaten to exacerbate an already challenging economic situation for households and business operations in Inverclyde, the west of Scotland and across the country as a whole.

Will you come to a conclusion, please?

Can the Deputy First Minister give an update on the worrying norovirus outbreak at Monklands hospital? It is affecting numerous patients and staff and has resulted in the closure of a number of medical wards. Will she instigate an inquiry into the cause of the outbreak, the way in which it is being dealt with and the issue of cleanliness at the hospital?

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is themed questions on education and lifelong learning. In order to get as many people in as possible I would prefer short, succinct questions and answers to match.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the local government finance settlement 2012-13. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of the statement, therefore there should be no interventions or interruptions.

We now come to the open debate: speeches of four minutes, with a little bit of time for interventions.

Mr Rennie, please conclude.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00851, in the name of Sandra White, on the truth about youth project. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament acknowledges Young Scot, the national youth information and citizenship charity for Scotland that provides people aged 11 to 26 with information and incentives supporting them to become informed and active citizens; supports the project, Truth About Youth, run by Young Scot and funded by The Co-operative Foundation, which aims to challenge and change negative perceptions of teenagers and young adults in the wider public; commends Glasgow as being the only Scottish city to take part in the project; supports the aim of showing how young people contribute positively to society with the help of various workshops, a blogging website and a media partnership, and wishes everyone involved success with the project.

Ms Marra, I need to ask you to come to a conclusion.

Is there any action that the Scottish Government can take to assist local authorities and housing associations in installing solar panels in their houses, thus saving money for tenants and giving small businesses, such as Skyline Installations in my constituency, opportunities to grow and diversify?

I can give you some extra time for the interventions.

The final item of business is a member’s business debate on motion S4M-01284, in the name of Neil Findlay, on community benefit and the cumulative impact of wind farm developments in communities. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the contribution that renewable energy plays and will play in providing for Scotland and the UK’s energy needs; recognises that the Scottish Government’s route map for renewable energy sets a target of 100% of electricity demand equivalent from renewables by 2020; notes concerns about the ability of communities, such as Harburn in West Lothian and other communities across the southern border of West Lothian, to resist overconcentration and raise the issue of cumulative development in specific locations; expresses concern at the lack of genuine community and cooperative ownership and the increasing role of multinationals and venture capital firms in securing the profits from onshore wind projects, and would welcome a wider community benefit and lower cumulative impact  of windfarm developments in communities.

I would be grateful if the member could come to a conclusion.

The next item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00930, in the name of John Scott, on the provision of orthopaedic trauma services at Ayr hospital. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the proposals by NHS Ayrshire and Arran to close the orthopaedic trauma unit at Ayr Hospital; believes that this would be to the detriment of patient care in southern Ayrshire and constitute a particular danger to patients admitted to Ayr Hospital suffering from life-threatening neck or head injuries; is concerned that the closure of the unit undermines the long-term future of accident and emergency services at the hospital, and, therefore, condemns NHS Ayrshire and Arran’s proposals to close the orthopaedic trauma unit at Ayr Hospital.

Mr Chisholm, come to a conclusion, please.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01242, in the name of Christina McKelvie, on nuclear test veterans. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. There is a current active case in relation to this issue. To avoid straying into matters that could be considered sub judice, members are advised to avoid making specific references to that active case and to issues relating directly to it. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes that over 20,000 servicemen were involved when the United Kingdom carried out nuclear weapons tests in the Pacific Ocean and at Maralinga, Australia, between 1952 and 1967; further notes that there are now only around 1,000 surviving British nuclear veterans and 70 in Scotland, including in the Hamilton, Larkhall and Stonehouse constituency, and believes that society owes a debt to nuclear veterans and that their unique service and contribution should be recognised in the UK.

The member must conclude, please.

We move to the open debate. Speeches should be a tight four minutes. Unfortunately, we will have to stop the clock on members at four minutes.

We move to the open debate. I can allow speeches of up to seven minutes.

I congratulate Siobhan McMahon on securing this important debate. I am pleased to participate in it. The British Heart Foundation’s heartstart programme is an excellent initiative that I have supported from the outset. I was strongly encouraged to do so by Charles Fawcett, who is here tonight in the public gallery. More recently, I was pleased to attend the event in the Parliament that Siobhan McMahon mentioned, where pupils from St Ambrose high school in my constituency gave an impressive demonstration of the life-support skills that they have learned. They were a credit to themselves, to their school and to Coatbridge. They clearly demonstrate the success of the scheme and are testament to what could be achieved if the programme were to be rolled out in schools across Scotland. In a private meeting with the pupils before the event, I was impressed by the knowledge and keenness shown by the girls, who clearly were well aware of the importance of this project. I would like to welcome Gemma Daly and Vicky McDowell, who are in the public gallery this evening. One of the outcomes under the curriculum for excellence—which Siobhan McMahon mentioned—states that pupils should know, and be able to demonstrate, how to keep themselves and others safe, and should be able to respond in a range of emergency situations. It would certainly be advantageous if the Scottish Government were to agree that this potentially life-saving education should be included as part of the school curriculum, and to insist that local authorities find a way of accommodating the heartstart programme. Emergency life support can be performed without any special medical knowledge, and it can take as little as two hours of a school year to teach some basic skills. As a cross-curricular activity, it could be accommodated within the curriculum of personal and social education or community involvement, or as part of the physical education course. It may be that local authorities will require additional funding in order to implement the programme initially. However, the initial costs would be a small price to pay if the programme were to help to reduce Scotland’s poor record of heart-related deaths. In the spirit of encouraging preventative spending—which we are very keen on in this Parliament—I hope that the programme will save our national health service money in the long run. The prospect of someone close to us suffering from a heart attack is a terrifying one, and the more of our young people who are trained under the heartstart scheme the better. While attending an event earlier this year in the Time Capsule in Coatbridge to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the British Heart Foundation, I saw at first hand the confidence that this type of programme can instil in our young people. There were pupils from St Mary’s primary school in Coatbridge, from Coatbridge high school, and from St Ambrose high school, who had learned first aid and resuscitation techniques, giving them a sense of responsibility and confidence. This type of programme can also encourage pupils to learn further first aid and life-saving skills, which will assist in their personal development as well as benefiting our society as a whole. The programme in North Lanarkshire has been critically acclaimed by the chair of St Andrew’s First Aid, and it is an example of good practice that other local authorities could follow. In addition, the external evaluation report content is being used by Dr Barry Vallance, the lead clinician on heart disease in Scotland. That, in turn, will inform the on-going activity of the national advisory committee on heart disease. All 24 secondary schools in North Lanarkshire are now affiliated to the heartstart programme, and there is a strong desire to install defibrillators in those schools over the next three years. That is particularly important because North Lanarkshire has high levels of deprivation, which are strongly linked to above national average incidences of coronary heart disease and related ill health. In conclusion, I fully support the British Heart Foundation campaign and the involvement of Charles Fawcett of the healthy lifestyles project, which is based in my constituency. I have previously written to the Scottish Government on the issue, and I encourage the minister to take seriously the proposal in my colleague’s motion that every child should receive emergency life-support and CPR training in school as part of the curriculum for excellence. Once again, I congratulate Siobhan McMahon.

Mr McNeil, will you begin to wind up, please?

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-01030, in the name of Dave Thompson, on the people’s Bible. The debate will conclude without any question being put. Motion moved, That the Parliament applauds the accomplishment of the People’s Bible in travelling over 5,500 miles since June 2011 and recording 18,320 verses in over 60 towns and cities in Scotland, including Fort William and Portree; considers that the People’s Bible has prompted Scots throughout society and across the country to discover and rediscover the Bible; looks forward to the Scottish finale at Stirling Castle in November; hopes that the People’s Bible will be a catalyst for renewed interest in reading the Bible, and believes that the transformative and lasting impact of the King James Bible on Scottish language, culture and education can be mirrored in the influence of the People’s Bible on the people of Scotland today.

Dr Simpson, could you speak through the chair, please?

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-01285, in the name of Johann Lamont, on keeping communities safe. I call Johann Lamont to speak to and move the motion. Ms Lamont, you have 10 minutes.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is themed question time. The questions are on finance, employment and sustainable growth. In order to get as many members in as possible, I would prefer short and succinct questions, with answers to match.

Question 5, in the name of Hugh Henry, has been withdrawn for understandable personal reasons.

I am pleased to speak in this important debate. Architecture and place making are important not just to the economy but to our people’s wellbeing and quality of life. The cabinet secretary made that point well. My constituency, Coatbridge and Chryston, has had excellent development during the past decade, which has contributed to the local economy and improved people’s health and wellbeing. A major example is the regeneration of Coatbridge town centre. North Lanarkshire Council must be given credit for its hard work to improve the town. In particular, the new £18 million Buchanan centre development in Coatbridge has transformed a derelict site on the main street into a state-of-the-art community facility, which was delivered in partnership with the council and NHS Lanarkshire. The centre is designed to be a one-stop shop, which will increase footfall in the town centre and in turn drive growth in the local economy. Its success so far is a testament to what can be achieved through good planning and design. Architecture is a matter of taste, of course. I like the building, which is bright and airy inside and has a modern, simplistic style, which blends well with the traditional buildings around it. Also in Coatbridge, millions of pounds have been invested in new schools, leisure facilities, Coatbridge College and our environment. Indeed, Coatbridge’s rise from the ashes of its industrial past should be celebrated. It is sad that some elements among professionals and the media choose to denigrate our town. In 2007, Coatbridge received a carbuncle award and was outrageously and wrongly described by the award’s organisers as Scotland’s “most dismal” town. Such so-called architectural awards do nothing to help to promote architecture and place making in Scotland’s towns and cities. Instead, self-appointed judges give negative opinions, with no care for the consequences for local economies or the wellbeing of communities. The carbuncle judges should get out of their ivory towers and consider the harm that they do with their cynical and nasty so-called awards, which are simply a patronising publicity stunt aimed at selling architecture magazines. It is astonishing that the mainstream press helps such people by widely reporting their judgments. In particular, the plook on the plinth award is an insulting cheap shot at towns that are nominated and can do great damage in relation to future investment and people’s view of their environment. Coatbridge, like many towns in Scotland, is far from the dismal place that the posh promoters of the carbuncle award wanted to portray. Yes, we have challenges, and I would like measures to be adopted that improve the take-up of empty shops, to ensure that they do not lie empty. However, people in post-industrial towns like Coatbridge have worked hard to improve their surroundings. Their health and wellbeing has suffered enough as a result of their industrial past, and they deserve positive support and encouragement for their achievements in improving their environment. I was born and brought up in Coatbridge and I live there with my family. I am passionate about the facilities that our town has to offer to visitors, locals and people who are pursuing new business opportunities. Of course I want further improvements, but we have good facilities and friendly people. We have fantastic attractions, such as the museum of Scottish industrial life at Summerlee and the Time Capsule, both of which have enjoyed significant investment and modernisation during the past few years, and both of which have reused old buildings. This year, Coatbridge was awarded a bronze prize in the best small city category of the Royal Horticultural Society’s Britain in bloom awards. The judges were particularly impressed by the way in which the town’s industrial heritage is fused with our more modern buildings. Much of the credit for that positive award goes to volunteers in our communities who were fully involved with projects to improve their town and were assisted by council staff. The judges were full of praise for the Bank Street canal basin, which has been another beneficiary of investment by the council and British Waterways, representatives of which met me a few years ago to discuss improvements in the town centre. That particular project dramatically transformed the former derelict canal site into a vibrant public arts space, and it is now used for concerts, among other things, and as a gathering place for our young people. The site sits below our distinctive railway bridges, which are adjacent to a road bridge and the pedestrian bridge over the canal. That gathering of bridges is quite unique, and should be more widely celebrated as architecturally significant. After many years of complaints by me and my colleagues Tom Clarke MP and Councillor Maginnis, the eyesore of peeling paint and rust on the bridges was addressed when Network Rail finally repainted them. They now form an excellent backdrop to a great public space leading up to Coatbridge fountain. That project is a great testament to what can be achieved using ambition and foresight. It combines the best of our industrial past with our modern, forward-thinking town and it demonstrates perfectly the importance that place making can have in driving economic growth. Such projects also show what can be achieved through good planning, architecture and design policies, along with strategic investment and engagement with our communities. With regard to what Labour’s amendment says about greenbelt land, I want to highlight the plight of people in the northern corridor part of my constituency who are fighting an appeal by house builders to develop 39 greenbelt sites, which, for good reason, North Lanarkshire Council did not include in the local plan. My constituents are concerned that their views are not being taken into account, which would be a clear example of non-engagement with communities. They also want me to point out that they feel that this would be an attack on democracy if it is allowed to go ahead despite the massive opposition by local people. I have facilitated a lobby of the Parliament by representatives on 1 December, and I have written to request that a member of the Scottish Government—not necessarily the Minister for Local Government and Planning—meet the group to listen to people’s concerns. I hope that that request will be accepted.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00941, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on prescription medicine waste. The debate will conclude without any question being put. Motion moved, That the Parliament notes with concern the amount of prescription medicine wastage in Scotland; commends the NHS Forth Valley eWard scheme, which allows hospitals and community pharmacies to share information electronically, thereby helping to improve patient safety and reduce medicine waste; notes the report published in 2010 by the University of York that shows that better medicines management around the time of hospital admission and discharge will result in more optimal use of medicines; believes that the role of pharmacists in helping people understand their medicines will be enhanced by the Chronic Medication Service; recognises that, in order to minimise medicine waste, the electronic recording and sharing of information between hospitals, GPs and pharmacies is essential, and considers that this issue is worthy of further debate.

Mr Robertson, can you begin to conclude, please?

Does the Deputy First Minister agree that a cut of 5 per cent this year to the core funding of Coatbridge citizens advice bureau will have a huge impact on its ability to sustain its current services? What specific action can she take to ensure that my constituents do not suffer a withdrawal or curtailment of those much-needed CAB services?

Mr Findlay, you need to conclude.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00789, in the name of Sandra White, on Mordechai Vanunu, Israel’s nuclear whistleblower. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the 25th anniversary of the revelations by Mordechai Vanunu regarding Israel’s secret nuclear weapons programme, which is estimated to number over a hundred warheads with the potential to annihilate the entire Middle East; praises what it considers to be Vanunu’s courage and dedication to the cause of the elimination of nuclear weapons; considers that this saw him returned to Israel under suspicious circumstances; further notes that he had been tried for treason and sentenced to 18 years in prison, 11 of which were spent in solitary confinement; understands that, since his release, despite being nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize 17 times and holding prestigious positions such as rector of the University of Glasgow, he has experienced continued persecution by the Israeli authorities; notes that this has been described by Amnesty International as cruel, inhuman and degrading and has also been condemned by the European Parliament; believes that, rather than be vilified, Vanunu should be allowed to live peacefully in one of the numerous countries to have offered him residence, and is of the view that Israel’s arsenal of nuclear weapons is an obvious barrier in the way of nuclear non-proliferation in the Middle East.

Mr Adam, would you address your remarks through the chair, please? Thank you very much.

The cabinet secretary will no doubt be aware that I have written to her concerning the decision of NHS Lanarkshire to remove X-ray services from Coatbridge health centre. Given the Scottish Government’s policy to protect local access to healthcare, will she consider intervening to require the health board to reconsider its plans for this local health service?

Perhaps I can help out the cabinet secretary with an example of an opportunity to develop cultural links between Scotland and Cuba. Will she consider giving her support to the “Beyond the Frame” Cuban art exhibition in Glasgow next May? It will be the first time that such a large exhibition of contemporary Cuban art will be shown in Scotland.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to promote culture, heritage and the arts in Coatbridge and Chryston. (S4O-00283)

I thank the cabinet secretary for outlining those welcome contributions. Is she aware of the excellent Bazooka Arts project in North Lanarkshire that provides opportunities through the arts for adults with disabilities and mental ill-health? The project has recently opened a shop in Coatbridge—the Art Stop—to display and sell artwork that is created by its participants. Will the Scottish Government consider matching the commitment of North Lanarkshire Council, which has provided additional funding to allow the organisation to continue running the Art Stop shop at least until Christmas?

I have a wee bit of time in hand for interventions.

We come to the winding-up speeches.

Mr Hepburn, I can give you some time back for the interventions that you took.

Will the minister join me in congratulating North Lanarkshire Council on its regeneration work, which, with the efforts of community volunteers, contributed to Coatbridge winning a bronze award at the Royal Horticultural Society’s Britain in bloom awards?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to ensure that there are sufficient staffing levels at Monklands hospital. (S4O-00252)

As the cabinet secretary knows, I welcomed her decision to retain full accident and emergency services at Monklands, which I campaigned for, but A and E must be more than a name over the door. In light of the cabinet secretary’s answer, is she aware of the worrying situation whereby there were only six consultants available in Monklands A and E department this August, when NHS Lanarkshire’s aim is to have at least 10 consultants available there? Will she intervene so that our A and E department can operate at the safe level my constituents need and expect?

I am afraid that you are going to have to finish now, please.

You are in your last few seconds, Mr Griffin.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00630, in the name of Christine Grahame, on Jeremy Hunt doesn’t get the picture, so neither does the Borders. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament expresses its disappointment that the Scottish Borders has been omitted from a list of locations eligible to bid for a local broadcasting licence; notes that Jeremy Hunt, the UK minister responsible for broadcasting has stated “I want people to be able to watch television that’s truly relevant to them, about what’s happening where they live and featuring people they know”; therefore is astonished that he seems to have failed to consider the Scottish Borders and towns such as Galashiels as a location in spite of the fact that the Scottish Borders is served not by STV but by Border TV, broadcasting from Gateshead and covering also the north of England and the Isle of Man, thus depriving Borderers of both national and local coverage; considers that this is further evidence supporting devolution of broadcasting, and, in the meantime and until such time as Scotland establishes its own digital network, would welcome the Scottish Borders being included on the list of possible sites.

The member is in her final minute.

Mr McDonald, will you conclude?

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00955, in the name of Liz Smith, on Scotland’s colleges.

We have some time in hand for the debate. I call Claire Baker to speak to and move amendment S4M-00959.2. Ms Baker, you have a generous nine minutes, and I can give some time for interventions if you wish to take them.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00681, in the name of Paul Martin, on stopping the closure of Lightburn hospital. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with deep concern the decision by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to close Lightburn Hospital in the east end of Glasgow and to relocate its services to Glasgow Royal Infirmary and Stobhill Hospital; considers that this proposal will have a devastating effect for many people in the wider east end of Glasgow who rely on this local healthcare facility and believes that this will result in lengthy journeys by often unsuitable public transport; believes that local rehabilitation healthcare facilities are important in ensuring a more effective recovery; recognises the health challenges that face the communities in the east end of Glasgow and considers that the closure will have a devastating effect in their battle to improve health and wellbeing; welcomes the Scottish Government’s policy on the presumption against centralisation, and would welcome such a presumption being taken into account when the future of local facilities are being considered.

Mr Robertson, I wonder whether you could come to a conclusion. You are over your time.

It is of course entirely up to members whether they want to take interventions. However, if they wish to do so, I can be generous in giving that time back to them.

I call on Lewis Macdonald to speak to and move amendment S4M-00902.3. You have nine minutes, Mr Macdonald.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00808, in the name of Jamie Hepburn, on the Save the Children report “Making Work Pay—The Childcare Trap”. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the many families in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth and across Scotland who struggle to meet childcare costs; further notes with grave concern the findings of a survey carried out by Save the Children and the Daycare Trust that parents on low incomes are being forced out of work by a combination of high childcare costs and a lack of support to meet those costs; understands that the survey shows that a majority of families struggle to cover childcare costs regardless of income but that the burden is especially heavy for families in poverty; notes in particular the findings that a quarter of parents in severe poverty have given up work and a third have turned down a job mainly because of high childcare costs; believes that affordable childcare is an essential part of making work pay and that supporting the poorest parents into work is the best way to tackle child poverty, and believes that the conclusions of Save the Children’s report, Making Work Pay – The Childcare Trap, should be given the utmost consideration.

Could you speak through the chair, please?

I declare an interest, as I am a member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. Like other members, I congratulate Bill Kidd on securing the debate and recognise his consistent role in promoting the issue of peace in the Parliament. It is fitting that we are able to hold the debate today and join with people all over the world who will gather to promote and strengthen ideas of peace. The UN day of peace is supported by organisations across the world, including Mayors for Peace, of which a number of Scottish cities are members and which Bill Kidd also supports and promotes. Across the country, various church groups and peace organisations will mark today with prayer or quiet meditation. The Parliament has a role to play in promoting peace and fostering good relations. Although I understand what my colleague Hugh Henry meant when he referred to the pointlessness of debating the issues, it is important that we debate them. We are an open, participative and progressive Parliament and, through our UK and international relations office, we develop links with other Parliaments and organisations throughout the world, sharing our experiences and building new relationships. Of course, the Scottish Government’s international development fund also plays an important role, as it works with charities to fund new developments, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. The Scottish Government also works with the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund to assist communities in Zambia and money from the fund also helps displaced people in war-torn Darfur. By working with charitable organisations to aid development, this Parliament can play a part to help alleviate poverty and promote a peace agenda. In my constituency, the Conforti Institute is dedicated to promoting co-operation and reconciliation among all peoples—in particular the poor, disadvantaged and powerless of the world—regardless of race, gender, culture or creed. The institute offers courses that challenge sectarianism, racism and social exclusion, and which aim to equip young people and the wider community with the knowledge and skills needed to be responsible citizens. It has an inclusive vision and is open to different cultures and religions. I commend it to the Parliament and to the Government on this international day of peace. As a Parliament, we also have the ability to make strong symbolic gestures of peace. Following the Trident debate in 2007, the Parliament resolved to call on the UK Government not to go ahead “at this time” with the proposal in its white paper to renew the Trident weapons system. Like others in the chamber, I do not want Trident to be replaced at any time, so I would have preferred an even stronger motion—indeed, I tried to lodge an amendment to the motion. Nonetheless, when the motion was agreed to, it still indicated this Parliament’s opposition. A majority of Scots oppose the Trident nuclear programme for a variety of reasons, which we have heard about during the debate. Besides the abhorrent nature of such destructive weapons, the cost is overwhelming, particularly at a time of imposed economic austerity. As has been mentioned, the Government estimates that the renewal would cost in the region of £20 billion. That is money that will not be invested in new homes or in creating jobs. CND believes that the cost of replacing Trident can be paid only at the expense of jobs and public services. The threat of nuclear weapons continues to undermine efforts for peace, while Britain’s pursuit of a new generation of weapons undermines our moral authority on the world stage. The evils of nuclear warfare are indisputable. Storing our own weapons of mass destruction is wrong and using them would be an abomination. The cost of war, of course, is more than financial. The UN day of peace should serve to symbolise that. I recall Tony Benn speaking of his joy when he first read the preamble to the UN charter on returning as a young pilot from a war in which his brother and many friends had been killed. It begins: “We the peoples of the United Nations determined ... to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind”. That was the promise of his generation to those who followed. We have a responsibility to uphold those ideals and to educate our children so that they have an understanding of the importance of peace. Once again, I congratulate Bill Kidd.

In that case, does the minister agree that it is a shame that no one from the Conservative and Liberal parties is present for the debate?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The debate is vital, because how we deal with our waste will have consequences for our planet for generations to come. People recognise that. Masses of people across Scotland are engaged in disputes about safe waste disposal. In my constituency, a campaign against incineration has been run in the past few years. I have fully supported my constituents’ campaign from the start, because their research was thorough and their arguments were compelling. Recently, I spoke at a march and rally that was attended by hundreds of people, including many young people, who oppose incineration and call for environmental justice. I have raised the issue in Parliament in various ways and much of that is on the public record. On health issues, I recently received from the Scottish Government a response that said: “the evidence suggests that any potential damage to health of those living close to incinerators is likely to be very small, if detectable.” That is not good enough. We can accept no level of threat to public health, particularly in Lanarkshire, where people are 44 per cent more likely than people anywhere else in the UK are to be admitted to hospital with a chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder, which pollutants aggravate. Incinerators could have dire health consequences, which might become apparent only when it is far too late. A leading campaigner—Maggie Proctor—summed up the problem of dealing with private companies at a packed public meeting in Coatbridge when she said: “Their only risk is financial, they are asking us to risk so much more.” Waste management is too important to leave to the private sector, whose prime motive is profit—not safety or the environment. To make their money, private companies depend on volumes of waste, which they will ship in from far afield to meet their business needs. Of course, the residue goes to landfill, which completely contradicts the Government’s zero waste plans. There is no doubt that continuing to incinerate waste will have a detrimental impact on our efforts to reduce, reuse, recycle and recover. If the Scottish Government cannot guarantee the safety of incineration, it should oppose the technology and put that opposition in Scottish planning policy. If the Government now supports incineration, it should not be left to the private sector to make private profit from it. However, before the election, the Government seemed to be against incineration. Jim Mather said: “I reaffirm that the Scottish Government’s position remains that we do not support large-scale, inefficient energy-from-waste facilities.”—[Official Report, 10 March 2011; c 34244.] He did not say what the scale was or that that position applies only in some areas. North Lanarkshire Council is exceeding its waste targets. It recently refused planning permission for a pyrolysis incinerator but, when the company involved appealed, the Scottish Government referred the case to a reporter, who found in the applicant’s favour. So much for local decision making. At the inquiry in February, I gave evidence on my constituents’ behalf. I will raise concerns about that process. On the opening day, we were told that the Scottish Government had changed annex B to the zero waste plan, which materially altered the proximity principle. The reporter therefore adjourned the inquiry, and we were all told to read the new version of annex B and change our precognitions. That was totally unacceptable. Those precognitions had to be submitted a week in advance, and any changes to policy on a Government whim should have been subject to a similar cut-off date. The goalposts were moved, to ordinary people’s detriment. The situation shows that the planning system is stacked in favour of big business, which has the resources to pay for top legal advice, and is against ordinary people who are trying to defend their communities. The Scottish Government must ensure affordable access to environmental justice, in line with its commitments under the Aarhus convention. My constituents clearly say no to incineration. They are not daft—they know who is responsible, and they know that I will not stand by and allow my constituency to become Scotland’s dumping ground. We have suffered enough from our industrial past and we demand environmental justice now. MSPs who support that demand must support Labour’s motion tonight.

If that is the case, does the member think that their decisions should be agreed to and should not be referred on?

On clarity of information, can the cabinet secretary clarify for us that current planning law means that ministers can decide to accept local authority decisions and that, even if they then refer such decisions to reporters, right up until the decision letter is issued ministers could call it back and take their own decision? Unfortunately, in a recent case, the decision letter was issued just after the election, and not just before it.

I am afraid that the member is over her time.

I am afraid that I now need short questions and answers.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00856, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Scotland Bill and corporation tax.

I have registered interests that might be relevant to the debate, which I congratulate Hugh Henry on securing. At the start of the UCS work-in, my friend and comrade, the late Jimmy Reid, said: “We’re taking over the yards because we refuse to accept that faceless men, or any group of men in Whitehall or anywhere else, can take decisions that devastate our livelihoods with impunity. They’re not on ... The Shop Stewards on behalf of the workers are in control of this yard. Nobody and nothing will come in and nothing will go out without our permission.” Jimmy and the others on the shop stewards committee knew that it was important to ensure maximum unity for the work-in to succeed, and they used the slogan, “Not a yard shuts, not a man down the road”, which involved everyone directly in the dispute. They also knew that they had to win support from outside and, as Hugh Henry mentioned, they famously received a cheque for £5,000 from John Lennon. Jimmy Reid stayed with my family at our home on several occasions and he told great stories. One was about the reaction to that donation of a rather deaf comrade who, on hearing about it, said: “It cannae be Lenin—he’s deid.” The UCS workers were clear that the work-in was not an occupation. They ensured that it was about the right to work rather than about saving individual jobs. Jimmy Airlie said: “we will not occupy the yards ... we are not a foreign power ... We will work-in”. The UCS work-in is ingrained in our consciousness, with the workers serving as a symbol of solidarity and comradeship to people who are involved in industrial disputes. At the time, Jimmy Reid was a member of the Communist Party of Great Britain, but Jimmy’s various party-political affiliations over the years were incidental to his fundamental belief in socialism. In his book, “Power Without Principles”, he said: “Let the parties rise above party, politicians above party politics. Let Scots unite across the divides, and governments, and even this lot, will surely pay heed.” Just after devolution, Jimmy launched the Scottish Left Review as a focus for left-wing thinking in Scotland and he asked me to join the board. More than a decade later, the board felt that, although the magazine was a success, we now needed a strong think tank and advocacy group to generate and promote new thinking. Last month, on the first anniversary of Jimmy’s death, we launched the Jimmy Reid Foundation in conjunction with the Reid family. It is important that we remember the courage of people such as Jimmy Reid and others who were involved in the UCS so that they can continue to influence the thinking of future generations. We can draw parallels with the situations that thousands of workers in the UK face, as they lose their jobs as a result of politically motivated and unnecessary cuts. I will quote Stephen Low’s article for The Citizen, which is the journal of Scottish Labour’s campaign for socialism. Stephen also wrote and produced the BBC documentary “Fighting and Winning: The Work-in at UCS”. His article says: “The struggles facing us today may lack the dramatic architecture of a Glasgow shipyard, and possibly, the stirring rhetoric of Reid and Airlie, but they are no less serious in scale, nor any less political in nature. Despite the forty years that have passed the campaign for UCS is one that we can still learn from.” To fight the current cuts, we need to get behind responses such as the people’s charter and the Scottish Trades Union Congress’s better way campaign. We should motivate people to turn out to the march on 1 October in Glasgow and, afterwards, attend the gala concert to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the UCS work-in.

We are tight for time.

I turn to the winding up speeches. At this stage of the debate, I am in the happy position of having a couple of minutes in hand, so if members feel inclined to take interventions we can give a little bit extra for that.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is themed question time. In order to get in as many members as possible, I would prefer short and succinct questions and, of course, answers to match.

The next item of business is a statement by Kenny MacAskill on police and fire reform. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S4M-00797, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scotland Bill European Union involvement.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S4M-00813, on committee membership. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that- Richard Lyle be appointed to replace Mark McDonald as a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee Mark McDonald be appointed to replace Richard Lyle as a member of the Public Petitions Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S4M-00797.2, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, which seeks to amend motion S4M-00797, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scotland Bill European Union involvement, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00600, in the name of Aileen McLeod, on flavour fortnight 2011. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament congratulates Dumfries and Galloway-based Flavour Fortnight 2011 for a packed programme of 92 events between 3 and 18 September; notes that the programme spans the entire food and drink experience from farming and food production to fine dining and that it includes a diverse range of events including a wild food forage around an art gallery, an opportunity to enjoy the first tilapia harvest from Scotland’s first aquaponics project, full-day butchery demonstrations, the opportunity to meet local producers and take advantage of plenty of tastings of local seafood, shellfish, Galloway beef, cheeses, smoked food etc; further notes that the events take place across Dumfries and Galloway with local businesses and producers working together to provide a vibrant and enthusiastic boost for Scotland’s food and drink industry; acknowledges that Flavour Fortnight is led by Savour the Flavours and receives funding from LEADER and Dumfries and Galloway Council; considers that Flavour Fortnight is in keeping with Scotland’s first food and drink policy as introduced by the Scottish Government and would welcome similar support for local producers across the rest of Scotland, and wishes Flavour Fortnight 2011 the best of success this year and for the future.

I ask you to close now, please.

We move to closing speeches. Alex Fergusson has around seven minutes.

If members ask short questions and the cabinet secretary gives short answers, I hope to be able to get everyone in.

The next item of business is a debate on taking Scotland forward: infrastructure and capital investment. I call Alex Neil to open the debate. Cabinet secretary, you have 10 minutes.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00173, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on the Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the concern expressed by key stakeholders regarding the proposal to transfer the role of the Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland (PCCS), the office of which is currently based in Hamilton, to the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman; understands that this would leave Scotland as the only part of the United Kingdom without a free-standing and independent police complaints authority; considers that the nature of police powers, such as the power of arrest, stop and search and use of force, means that police complaints are unique and complex in their nature compared to complaints involving other public services; would welcome a review of the functions and powers of the PCCS, and considers this to be particularly important in light of the ongoing discussion on the restructuring of the Police Service in Scotland.

I call Ruth Davidson, who has a flexible six minutes.

The final item of business today is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00117, in the name of Stuart McMillan, on David MacBrayne Group supports coastguards. This debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the recent submission by the David MacBrayne Group to the UK Government’s consultation on the review of coastguard services across the United Kingdom; notes that the David MacBrayne Group is the principal operator of the Clyde and Hebrides and Northern Isles ferry services and is the UK’s largest ferry operator in terms of vessels operated and routes served and notes its view that any changes to coastguard services should be constructed on the premise of saving lives and not on saving money, and argues that it is vital that coastguard services remain based throughout the whole of Scotland in order to offer the greatest possible service to the public and that, with an ever-increasing level of seafaring traffic on the west coast of Scotland, it is ludicrous that the Clyde facility is earmarked for closure.

I would be grateful if you could come to a conclusion.

I thank those members who have stayed behind for the debate and those who have signed the motion. I should point out that I am on the Scottish organising committee of the people’s charter. I have spoken quite a bit from the chair in this new session of Parliament but this is my first opportunity to speak in a debate, and I am pleased that it is my own members’ business debate on such an important issue. I lodged the motion immediately after I was sworn in because of the importance to my constituents of the Scottish Trades Union Congress’s better way campaign and the people’s charter. Their main concerns at the moment are cuts to jobs, benefits and vital public services alongside an increasing cost of living. As the motion suggests, public sector cuts are likely to have a disproportionate effect on women, children and disabled people. That basically means that the most vulnerable people in society are being made to pay the price for the economic crisis, while those at the top who caused it do not suffer at all. Obviously, big business and the better-off do not depend on public services. They can call for cuts because less public spending on welfare and services means more chance of tax cuts to subsidise their own lavish lifestyles. It is business as usual at the major banking institutions, with bank bonuses expected to run into billions of pounds this year. At the same time, in local government there was resistance to paying the £250 one-off award to those who were deemed to be on low pay because they were earning less than £21,000. Why was that? Because 63 per cent of the workforce came into that category. That shows that low pay is ingrained in the public sector. It is an absolute myth that public sector workers are underworked and overpaid—the opposite is the truth: they are overworked and underpaid. They are the people who work in our hospitals and community centres and who look after our elderly. It is their jobs that are already being lost, which means a loss of those services. Councils face an unprecedented squeeze on budgets and extremely difficult decisions. Indeed, the chief executive of North Lanarkshire Council has stated: “These are the hardest financial pressures I have seen in local government”, and he has been around for some time. Tonight, I call on councillors up and down the country, from whatever party, to set needs budgets and to show support for the better way campaign. Such budgets would consist of what they would do if the cuts were not being imposed. If the Scottish Government is serious about opposition to the cuts, it should encourage councils to set needs budgets and mobilise our citizens against the cuts. The cause of the cuts is casino capitalism, not casualty staff, and that brings me to the fact that the health service has been reducing services for some time. In Lanarkshire, elderly people have had their podiatry services withdrawn, and they cannot afford to pay for them privately. This week is national breastfeeding awareness week, but breastfeeding mothers and their babies are losing support services. The most vulnerable are suffering disproportionately as a result of the cuts, which is simply unacceptable. Against that background, and due to vicious attacks on pensions, the Public and Commercial Services Union has voted to strike on 30 June. No one wants to strike, but these hard-working, invaluable employees clearly feel that they have no other option. It is an absolute scandal that millionaire Cabinet members are attacking modestly paid teachers and civil servants for standing up to attacks on their old-age provision. We can add to that the Scottish Government’s desire for a pay freeze across the public sector. At the same time, it wants control over corporation tax so that it can bring it down. So, the poor pay and the rich get handouts. That really does not seem like “be part of better” as far as the vast majority of workers are concerned. We all know that the deficit is not the fault of the public services or of public sector workers, and they should not be paying for it. The Scottish Government must stand up for our public services and find ways to challenge the cuts. The STUC better way campaign and the people’s charter provide a real alternative by promoting growth through investment in new jobs and public infrastructure, including housing, and by calling for tax justice. Growth is not just about creating a bigger cake. It is how the cake is divided that is important—otherwise, the fat cats just take more.

A number of the policies should be everybody’s policies, no matter the party, because they would get us out of this situation and they would stop public sector workers and public services being blamed for something that is the fault of bankers and people at the top. Most of the big unions support the people’s charter. Roz Foyer of Unite sums it up very well in an article for the Scottish Left Review in which she says: “It has the power to unite the left across party boundaries behind a positive agenda that is set out in terms all can understand and it neatly encapsulates ‘The Better Way’.” The charter provides a sensible and sustainable response to the current economic situation through six key aims and proposals. They are: a fair and balanced economy in which leading banks are run democratically and under public ownership, along with proper, progressive taxation; more and better jobs to increase spending power and to provide greater economic stimulus; decent homes for all to tackle the housing shortage and to help growth; protection for our public services and the saving of public money by bringing key services such as energy and transport back into public ownership and ending corporate profiteering in health and education; fairness and justice in society through measures such as free childcare and youth facilities and delivering equality for all; and, lastly, building a better future for all. That last section highlights the folly of spending billions of pounds on war and replacing weapons of mass destruction while people are losing their jobs, their homes and vital services. The charter will shortly be submitted to the Scottish Parliament’s Public Petitions Committee, with a focus on its Scottish dimensions. In 1945 the Labour Government mounted a crusade against injustice, even though it was operating in times of deficit. It created the national health service, undertook a massive rebuilding programme and established the welfare state. The people’s charter, if we adopt it, could provide a similar level of stimulus while solving major social problems. Recent research by the Institute for Fiscal Studies revealed that pensioners and the unemployed suffer from the highest levels of inflation, as they have to concentrate their spending on food and heating. Meanwhile, supermarkets have declared massive profit levels and, as we know, the gas and electricity companies raise prices quickly at the merest hint of higher costs. The editorial in the Morning Star last week put it well: “The supermarkets and energy companies don’t operate a free market so much as a free-for-all, using their power in the marketplace to enrich themselves and beggar the rest.” Before Labour took power in 1945, Quintin Hogg, a Tory MP, warned Parliament: “if you do not give the people social reform, they are going to give you social revolution.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 17 February 1943; Vol 386, c 1818.] The people have given the Scottish Government a mandate based on an expectation that it will provide protection from the Tory cuts. If that is not forthcoming, they will no doubt take to the streets in vast numbers to show their anger at the cuts. By supporting the people’s charter and the STUC’s better way campaign, we give a clear signal that MSPs and the Scottish Government are on the right side: the side of the workers.

Does the member think that we should take banks into public ownership only when they have toxic debt and that we should hand them back when they are making profits so that the fat cats at the top can once again benefit?

Does the member agree that this is such an important issue that we should continue to debate it until we get the people’s charter implemented and the STUC campaign fully supported?

I call Liam McArthur, who will be followed by Dennis Robertson. We are very tight for time, so members have a tight six minutes.

With regard to the proposed pyrolysis incinerator for Coatbridge, what specific factors were considered when the Scottish Government decided not to refuse the application on appeal, which would have been within its power under paragraph 3 of schedule 4 to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997? The views of the community and the local authority did not seem to be a factor.

I ask members to turn off their mobile phones and BlackBerrys because they interfere with the sound system. It is discourteous to speakers to leave them on.

I am afraid that we are now short of time, so any interventions will have to be contained within the six-minute speeches.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00007, in the name of Bob Doris, on fighting sectarianism and anti-Irish racism. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament expresses its concern at reports of racist and sectarian intimidation and high-profile related incidents in Scottish football; believes that these incidents must be investigated thoroughly; would welcome a partnership approach to tackle racism and sectarianism, and pledges to develop a long-term consistent strategy for tackling sectarian-motivated behaviour that will endure long after the latest set of media headlines have faded from memory, both in football stadiums and across Glasgow and Scottish society.

I call John Finnie, to be followed by Alex Johnstone. John Finnie is making his first speech in the chamber.

If Mr Swinney is brief.

The final item of business is a members’ business debate on motion S4M-00102, in the name of Elaine Murray, on a ban on the use of wild animals in circuses. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes the decision by the UK Government not to introduce a ban on the use of wild animals in travelling circuses; notes that in the recent past a travelling circus visiting locations including Dumfries included an elephant as one of its attractions; believes that there is sufficient evidence to support the view that life in a travelling circus does not allow for acceptable standards of welfare and quality of life for wild animals; notes the work done by animal rights activists and third sector organisations to argue for such a ban, and considers that action in this area is needed to prevent suffering to animals.

I call Margaret McDougall, who is making her first speech, to be followed by Alison McInnes.

I call Mark Griffin to make his first speech in the Parliament.

With regard to the proposed pyrolysis incinerator in Coatbridge that was—astonishingly—granted planning permission on appeal by the Scottish Government reporter despite massive community objection, will the minister consider recommending a review and a possible fresh application, given that the inquiry was interrupted due to a sudden change of Government planning policy, which resulted in presubmitted precognitions having to be rewritten overnight?

I call Graeme Dey, who will make his first speech in the Scottish Parliament.

I remind members to switch off their mobiles, please, as they interfere with the sound system.

I respectfully remind members to speak through the chair and not to each other.

I call Johann Lamont to close on behalf of the Labour Party with a generous 13 minutes.

Before taking the oath, I state that I believe that the people of Scotland should be citizens and not subjects, and that I hold firmly that my allegiance should be first and foremost to them. However, I recognise that to serve my constituents in the Parliament I must meet the legal requirement of taking the oath, and I will therefore do so.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Having served on the Equal Opportunities Committee since 1999, I am pleased that the last debate of the parliamentary session in which I will participate concerns a bill that was subject to scrutiny by that committee. Before I address forced marriages, I pay tribute to the work that my friend and comrade Marlyn Glen has carried out in her role as deputy convener. She has been on the committee since being elected and her contribution has been invaluable over the years, particularly on the bill. Marlyn is off to pursue new challenges. Knowing her ability, work ethic and commitment to her values, I am sure that she will succeed at whatever she does next. I wish her all the best. The Scottish Government accepted Marlyn Glen’s stage 2 amendments. Sadly, it did not accept mine—I note that the minister did not mention that in his opening speech. At stage 2, I put the case for replacing the term “equitable jurisdiction” with “nobile officium”. That suggestion came from the Law Society, whose reason for wishing to replace the term used in the bill was that it was not a recognised term in Scots law. What is meant by equitable jurisdiction in the context of the bill is the extraordinary equitable power to do justice where ordinary procedure would provide no remedy, which in Scotland is called the nobile officium of the higher courts. However, the Scottish Government believed and argued that equitable jurisdiction includes the nobile officium. Therefore, I did not bring the amendment back at stage 3, as it seemed we would just have the same disagreement. Overall, the Law Society was not entirely convinced that section 12 is necessary, so I helpfully suggest that it be subject to post-legislative scrutiny at a future date, which adds to the comments that Johann Lamont made about the need for such scrutiny. Aside from that minor disagreement, the committee was pleased to recommend support at stage 1 for the general principles of the bill, which is an important piece of legislation, and its suggested amendments were accepted at stage 2. There was certainly no disagreement about the need for the bill or the principle that everyone should be able to enter into a marriage or civil partnership without being forced or coerced to do so. When the bill is passed later today, it will bring us into line with other parts of the UK with similar legislation; indeed, I think that our legislation will be better. We in the Labour Party are clear that the bill is needed to try to stop the horrendous practice of forcing anyone into marriage, whether male or female. However, we know that it is mostly young women and girls who are likely to be in that situation and that forced marriage is part of the continuum of violence against women and is completely unacceptable. As Marlyn Glen pointed out, it is linked with horrendous acts of violence, rape and domestic abuse. We need to be clear that forced marriage is not a cultural phenomenon but is abuse. Sadly, the people in victims’ families who should protect them are often the perpetrators, as Anne McLaughlin pointed out. When the bill was first proposed, it was welcomed by a victim, who chose to remain anonymous, in a statement that was provided through Shakti Women’s Aid. The victim described the experience of forced marriage as surreal and immensely traumatic. She added: “We often rely on our families for support but when that family subjects you to marry unwillingly you feel it is impossible to escape.” It is up to us as a society to protect vulnerable people, and we have a duty as lawmakers to ensure that appropriate legislation is in place to help to do that. We also need to raise awareness about the issue of forced marriage and ensure that victims know what support is available to them, as other members have said. If the number of victims coming forward increases, we may need to consider the resources for support agencies. I thank all the witnesses who helped the committee with the work of scrutinising the bill and I acknowledge that all committee members worked together in a non-partisan fashion to ensure that the bill would be the best legislation possible. I note the consensual way in which the Government accepted most of the amendments that were proposed to improve the bill, which meant that there was no need for a great deal of amendments at stage 3 today. Last but not least, I thank the clerking team who, with the Scottish Parliament information centre, helped to draw information together for the committee. The bill is not a major piece of legislation in parliamentary terms, but it will have a major impact. It will not affect vast numbers of people but, for those whom it helps, its impact will be substantial. With the passing of the bill later, the Parliament will send out a clear message that forced marriages are completely unacceptable, are part of the spectrum of violence against women and girls and will not be tolerated in Scotland.

Will the minister join me in thanking Jean McFadden for my knowledge of Latin? She taught me at St Patrick’s high school in Coatbridge.

The issue of transport, and in particular buses, is extremely important to people in my constituency and in similar communities throughout Scotland that rely completely on public transport. Public transport is vital in Coatbridge and Chryston because we have one of the lowest levels of car ownership in the country. For people who cannot afford a car, a reliable and affordable public transport system is a necessity and a good bus service is essential. For those who can afford a car, a good bus service is probably the only way to get them to leave the car at home and travel in a much greener way. We should encourage that. I start on a positive note. I am delighted that the new Airdrie to Bathgate rail link, which was approved under the previous, Labour-led Executive, has finally opened, although in the interests of safety and security, particularly for women, I am disappointed that there are no guards on those trains.

No, thank you—Stewart Stevenson had the opportunity as a minister to put guards on the trains. In a transport debate, I cannot miss the opportunity to mention that the Parliament should examine ways of renationalising the railway when the ScotRail franchise comes up for renewal.

I certainly will, but we need to consider transport in the round to see how important buses are. The number of trains from Coatbridge to Edinburgh on the new line has just increased to two an hour. As the frequency increases, passenger numbers will increase. My constituency lacks buses, but the public transport of the trains provides access to a new job market. The railway has opened up Coatbridge and its surrounding areas to a new population of potential visitors. I encourage people to come to Coatbridge, because we have fantastic attractions such as the Time Capsule, the Summerlee museum and Drumpellier country park. Those attractions are now more accessible by rail. As I said, it is difficult to reach my constituency by bus. It is also difficult to go from my constituency to Edinburgh by bus, so the new rail line helps my constituents to access sporting events at Murrayfield and concerts, for example. As today is St Patrick’s day, it would be remiss of me not to mention that the St Patrick’s day festival will culminate in Coatbridge this weekend. It is easy enough for people to come to that festival by rail, but—unfortunately—coming to the family fun day will be far more difficult for people from the wider Lanarkshire area and for my constituents who live in areas that do not benefit from rail links and who suffer from poor bus provision. In this parliamentary session, I have been inundated by constituents who have contacted me about bus provision across my constituency. In the past year, I have campaigned for the reregulation of bus services. My campaign petition has received almost 2,000 signatures from people in every part of my community who call for buses to be regulated. My constituents—many of whom are pensioners—tell me that, often, buses are infrequent and inconsistent, and they are non-existent at some times. The main population centres are not easily accessible by public transport. I have been advised that many services have been cancelled or altered at short notice, which has caused terrible problems for commuters. Those problems are the direct consequence of the lack of regulation. A public service is being left to the whims of the market, which means that profits come before the service. The minister knows that I have written to him about the problems that have arisen in Moodiesburn following the sudden opening of the new bypass, which seems to have been done without consideration for its impact on bus passengers. I have a mailbox full of complaints from concerned constituents who, following the opening of the bypass, have turned up at their normal bus stops at their usual times only to find that their buses and many others no longer travel via Moodiesburn. Many FirstBus services that used to pass through there no longer do so. People who used to rely on the X4, X5 and X80 services along Cumbernauld Road can no longer board those buses. That is extremely infuriating for people who must travel at rush hours, because the buses that are running are crammed. The Scottish Government did not consult my constituents before opening the bypass. My constituents were given no warning that their buses would no longer run and that they would be left stranded and cut off from work, hospitals and shops. Will the minister tell us, in summing up, how he intends to resolve that problem, which he caused? The services in Moodiesburn highlight the wider issue of bus services in Scotland. Given the lack of regulation, bus timetables and bus routes are often changed at short notice, which leaves passengers to suffer. It is outrageous that Charlie Gordon’s proposed bill was not supported. I am pleased that Scottish Labour is committed to reregulating bus services, because people in my constituency want a better deal from their buses. They tell me in their thousands that the situation is not good enough. People know that the SNP is on the side of the big bus companies, that Brian Souter is supporting the SNP financially and that the SNP’s commitment to reregulate buses disappeared from its manifesto. Only the Labour Party is prepared to stand up for ordinary people and to ensure that bus passengers get the service that they deserve. Scotland needs a Government that will do that—a Government that stands up for ordinary working-class people. The strength of feeling in my community is clear. People are demanding better buses. They will get them with a Labour Government.

Is the minister aware that the St Patrick’s day festival in Coatbridge is one of the biggest festivities of the type in the world? Will she congratulate its organisers on their hard work, which enables Irish culture and history to be celebrated over the course of the two-week festival? Will she join me in urging Scots with Irish heritage to tick the Irish ethnicity box on the census form?

Given that energy-from-waste plants are one of the least preferred options in the waste hierarchy and that they undermine efforts to reuse, recycle and compost, does the minister agree that the Scottish Government should do much more to limit the percentage of waste that is directed to such plants? Given the minister’s previous answer, will he explain to my constituents why his Government has not chosen simply to say no to Shore Energy’s appeal for the proposed pyrolysis incinerator energy-from-waste plant close to homes, schools and nurseries in my constituency?

I know that the debate is supposed to be consensual, but will Andrew Welsh comment on the abolition of the health in pregnancy grant?

I do not often get excited by the work of the Finance Committee, important though it is. However, its report on preventative spending is excellent, and I commend the committee for its vision in undertaking the work that it has done. Like other members, I, too, wish the convener of the committee all the best for the future. The report highlights the gains from preventative spending not only for individuals and their families but for society as a whole. I, too, commend in particular the evidence on universal benefits, which is extremely interesting. Jamie Hepburn made a point that I agree with. It seems reasonable to at least start with the committee’s recommendation that “a robust and measurable definition of ‘preventative spending’ that could be used across the public sector” should be provided. That would allow for increased spending in areas that might have lacked resources in the past but which are vital to the preventative approach. We have heard a number of examples of those areas, but I want to highlight one in particular: support for and promotion of breastfeeding. Sadly, breastfeeding services have been treated as something of a Cinderella service, and hard-gained local provision is suffering from the current cuts agenda, which is unfortunate. There has been much mention today of giving children the best start in life, and breastfeeding does that. It has not been mentioned much in the debate, although Joe FitzPatrick did. As the children who were involved in the Dundee longitudinal infant study are now around 20, it would be interesting to look at that study for examples of where preventative spending has achieved results. During a debate on early intervention last month, Richard Simpson told members about the fantastic work that was undertaken by breastfeeding support nurses in Wishaw general hospital in assisting his daughter-in-law. Unfortunately, the 22 breastfeeding support nurses in Lanarkshire are facing redundancy by the end of March, as the funding from the Scottish Government’s CEL 36—chief executive’s letter 36 of 2008—programme is coming to an end. Sadly, public bodies and organisations see such services as an easy option to save money, which is unfortunate because their impacts are measurable. The community mothers project in Lanarkshire was also under threat due to the local authority withdrawing its funding, but it has been given a temporary reprieve, as the health board has picked up the costs. Going back to what Malcolm Chisholm said earlier, I think that that might be an argument for a degree of ring fencing. Such funding is exactly the sort of funding that needs to be continued and prioritised as preventative spending. As we know, spending on breastfeeding projects results in significant cost savings in both the short term and the long term because of the obvious and undisputed health benefits that are associated with it for mothers and children and because it lowers the risk of certain illnesses. UNICEF pointed out an example of that some years ago. It is not a Scottish example, but it nonetheless gives an indication of the cost savings. UNICEF pointed out that the NHS spent £35 million a year in England and Wales on treating gastroenteritis in formula-fed infants, and that, for every 1 per cent increase in breastfeeding at 13 weeks, £500,000 would be saved on the treatment of gastroenteritis. We should be investing heavily in such services because they deliver long-term health benefits, particularly in areas that suffer from a legacy of poverty and ill health. Sadly, a negative attitude towards breastfeeding remains that continues to hinder its rates, so preventative spending must also cover education and training across a range of public bodies and awareness raising. It is important to give an example of why that is needed. I have dealt with a case involving a new mother—Sacha Moonsammy, who is a paediatrician—who was subjected to verbal abuse. She was told by a senior member of staff in TK Maxx in Sauchiehall Street to stop breastfeeding, was ranted at by a customer and had to leave in a distressed state with a very hungry baby. Strathclyde Police charged two individuals with contravening the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Act 2005, but the procurator fiscal issued only a warning letter—a slap on the wrist—to the company, although that was a traumatic situation that no woman or child in Scotland should face. The Procurator Fiscal Service should treat such incidents more seriously, given their propensity to put women off breastfeeding, which will have an impact in future. It is a strange world in which we are—rightly—willing to prosecute football supporters for shouting across stadiums but a woman who is forced to suffer horrific verbal abuse and is told to stop breastfeeding is not afforded justice. Spending on education is essential to eradicate negative attitudes and to encourage positive approaches, which contribute to prevention. In 2004, pupils from Rosehall high school in Coatbridge undertook a series of awareness sessions. A subsequent report demonstrated that such spending on education produced improvements in young people’s attitudes. Following the sessions, positive attitudes to breastfeeding improved from 10 per cent to 48 per cent in secondary 1 and from 13 per cent to 58 per cent in S4. It is a bit worrying that the figures were so low to start with but, given those positive outcomes, such schemes could be integrated into curriculums. The outlays would be well worth it in comparison with the longer-term benefits and savings. Susan Deacon’s report criticised the amount of money that is spent on new strategies and initiatives when front-line services are being cut. She said: “Bluntly, if the choice is between a policy analyst or a play worker—I know which I would choose.” I would do the same as her—I would choose the community mothers programme and breastfeeding support nurses over another infant feeding strategist. I will finish with a good quotation from Children 1st’s briefing for the debate. It said: “We also urge Members to commit to creating a child-friendly Scotland in which every child is valued, respected and protected in our society and where they grow up in families and communities which are confident about nurturing them.” That ties in well with the preventative spending agenda and with breastfeeding. I hope that the committee’s legacy paper will receive the support that it deserves.

I thank the members who signed the motion, those who are here today and those who support the Scottish Trades Union Congress’s campaign. On 23 October, 20,000 people, including MSPs, took to the streets of Edinburgh to protest against the cuts and proclaim that there is a better way. A number of my constituents were on that march. The big unions, such as Unite, Unison, the GMB, the Public and Commercial Services Union and Prospect, represent the majority of public sector workers, who are feeling the pain of savage cuts already. However, all trade unions have members who are affected. I note that the Educational Institute of Scotland has agreed to ballot on the education cuts. I am aware that folk are coming into the gallery for the debate and that there will be folk here from the wider Labour and trade union movement. I welcome in particular North Lanarkshire trades union council, which is coming to view the debate. I commend it for its active support for the campaign and for taking the message out on to the streets; I joined it in doing that in Coatbridge. We are also joined by the president of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, Joy Dunn, and people from Greenfaulds high school, which is in the constituency of my colleague Cathie Craigie, will come to the chamber for the debate. Many myths are being peddled about the deficit, the cuts and the need for the cuts, and we need to counter-attack with the truth to dispel them. Cuts are not inevitable or necessary. Britain had a higher deficit in 1945, when the welfare state was introduced. The cuts agenda is simply an excuse to undermine the very fabric of that welfare state. All the myths and counter-attacks are on the there is a better way website, which anyone can access. We are talking about an ideological attack and a reorganisation of society firmly in favour of big business interests and away from the workers. Let us be clear. The deficit, which can be paid off over many years, is due to the recession and the greed of bankers. It is not the fault of public services or public sector workers, so why should they pay with wage freezes, which effectively mean wage cuts, as my union, Unite, has pointed out? The general secretary of the STUC, Grahame Smith, has sent a message to councillors in which he said: “I know that many of you don’t want to make cuts. I know that many of you believe in the public sector and in public service. But if you are not to be seen as coalition collaborators you need to stand with us, like local government leaders did in the 80’s and 90’s, and argue the case against the cuts.”

I absolutely agree with that. Perhaps it would be quite uncomfortable for them to hear this message. Spending on public services is an investment, not a debt or a drain, and public servants deliver vital services in our communities and to the most vulnerable people. The current campaign of vilification of public services is all about cutting and privatising because of ideology, not because of need. It is no surprise that the Tories are pursuing that agenda, but it is a bit of a shock to many that the Liberal Democrats are aiding and abetting them. Grahame Smith has sent a message to them, too. He said: “you have not only ripped up your manifesto you have ripped up your credibility. If you want to restore it—stop cowering behind the Tories and stand up and fight these cuts.” He turned his sights on the Scottish Parliament and said that it must “ensure that its priorities are our priorities—jobs, services, fair taxation and a living wage.” Of course, we know that the Scottish Parliament’s Scottish variable rate tax powers cannot be used at present. The Finance Committee has just reported on that matter. It concluded: “the SVR belongs to the Scottish Parliament and not to the Scottish Government”, and urged the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to make an immediate statement to Parliament on how the power could be reinstated. I would be grateful for a comment on that from the minister. SVR might not be the preferred choice of many—like others, I would certainly prefer to make the rich pay more—but at least it is income based and supported by a mandate of the people in a yes, yes referendum. In 1997, Donald Dewar said of SVR: “It is important to recognise that the power may be used to deal with some special project or difficulty.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 31 July 1997; Vol 299, c 465.] The time is coming when members will have to recognise that we are in a period of great difficulty. When the Tory-led slash-and-burn policies begin to impact on our communities, it might be preferable to use tax rather than watch the devastation. I have some sympathy with the Scottish National Party Government telling us that it is bound by the grant imposed by the Tories, but it is simply not true that there are no other choices. Apart from SVR, such choices could include a properly considered large business supplement, business rates on land banks and empty properties, land value tax and a review of current big project spending priorities. There are a number of choices that could better protect us from Tory cuts. The Parliament was established to do just that. It was established to act as a buffer against an attack on the working class by the obscenely wealthy public schoolboys who are now in charge at Westminster. The Trades Union Congress is sending the Tories a message with a massive rally in London on 26 March to demand an end to cuts and to tell them that there are better ways to save money as proposed by the PCS: employ more tax collectors, not fewer, to gather in evaded, avoided and uncollected tax; dump the renewal of Trident; and end the unwinnable war in Afghanistan, which is costing £2.6 billion a year. Of course, the Tories are spinning the line that we are all in this together. Guess what? We are not. The top 1 per cent of the population of Britain own nearly a quarter of the wealth and the bottom half own just 9 per cent. The rich just keep on getting richer while the poor get poorer. We are not all in it together and we are not all feeling the squeeze. Very little is being squeezed from the rich. We do not get out of recession by causing unemployment and making the needy many pay for the mistakes of the greedy few. The GMB tells us that, in Lanarkshire, at least five unemployed workers are chasing every vacancy, and Unison points out that some 60,000 public sector and 65,000 private sector jobs could go in Scotland because of the cuts. The answer to the economic crisis is to create jobs, not to cut them. We need an economic strategy that is based on public investment, job creation and tax justice. After the economic disaster that we have witnessed, we should be watching the death throes of capitalism. We should be seeing that unfair system, which benefits the minority who have power, wealth and privilege, replaced with socialism providing equality, justice and fairness for the majority. The left is often—wrongly—accused of seeing the problem but not providing solutions. The people’s charter, which is part of the better way campaign, offers sensible alternatives. I invite everyone who is here to come along, meet leading trade unionists and the actor David Hayman, and sign up to the charter at 5.15 tonight in committee room 4. In conclusion, the better way campaign really is a them-and-us situation. If we are not with it, we are against it, and silence is simply collaboration. In the words of the STUC general secretary: “in the run up to the Scottish elections ... join us in targeting the constituencies of those candidates who support the policies of the UK government either actively or by their silence” or, as Patrick Harvie mentioned, by not being here today. The cuts amount to a cruel attack on working people and the poorest, most vulnerable members of our society. They disproportionately affect women. I fully support the STUC campaign, and I will use my public position to speak out at every opportunity against the vicious, ideological cuts, in favour of the sensible alternatives proposed by our trade unions and the people’s charter committee. I hope that many more MSPs, across the parties, will join me and support the principle that there is a better way. [Applause.]

As John Wilson did not respond to Cathy Peattie’s point about the council tax, I will ask the minister. Does he not recognise that the council tax freeze results in cuts to services and that, although it puts a few extra pennies into individuals’ pockets, it affects us as a society?

I have a similar question for the minister about the cost of appeals, with regard to the incinerator in Coatbridge.

Early in 1948, a plane deporting migrant workers from the United States to Mexico crashed. In his song “Plane Wreck at Los Gatos”, Woody Guthrie displayed his anger at the prejudice faced by those people, even in death: “The sky plane caught fire over Los Gatos Canyon, A fireball of lightning, and shook all our hills, Who are all these friends, all scattered like dry leaves? The radio says, ‘They are just deportees’.” We cannot continue to delude ourselves into thinking, more than 60 years later, that we in Scotland do not have problems with the perception and treatment of migrants. This report shows clearly that we do. Of course, many organisations—for example, the Scottish Refugee Council, the Black and Ethnic Minority Infrastructure in Scotland and Unite Against Fascism—have known that fact for years now and the trade unions are making every effort to tackle the many issues that are involved. Indeed, every year on St Andrew’s day the Scottish Trades Union Congress holds a march against racism. Last year, the STUC general secretary Grahame Smith said: “Racism and discrimination have no place in our society. It is vital that we continue to challenge racism in all its guises and we have to ensure that black and minority ethnic workers are fully involved in our ‘There is a Better Way’ campaign to challenge any discrimination against black workers as the cuts take effect.” Although the committee’s excellent report provides a good resource for the Parliament to continue tackling prejudice, exploitation and misinformation, Mary Scanlon was right to point out that it only scratches the surface. Unfortunately, as I suspected, the evidence taken by the committee shows that the public perception of migrants in Scotland is generally negative, with little distinction made between asylum seekers, refugees or migrants. The terms are simply not well understood. As Stuart McMillan pointed out, the term “bogus asylum seeker” has entered common usage, even though it is nonsense. After all, anyone who seeks asylum cannot be bogus or illegal. There is also a sad lack of understanding that anyone who flees their own country hardly does so on a whim; undoubtedly they are escaping war, violence or fear of persecution. Moreover, there is little knowledge of the positive contribution made by migration to our communities, although the committee has noted Scottish Government research carried out in 2009 that shows such an impact. Although some sections of the Scottish media have adopted a more positive tone, overall reporting of migration issues has not been well balanced, with negative stories given prominence. However, the NUJ issued helpful guidelines following work carried out in conjunction with the Scottish Refugee Council, Amnesty International and Oxfam. Paul Holleran of the NUJ gave the committee some positive evidence on good practice. A major conclusion by the committee was that politicians need to be well informed about migration in order to be able to speak responsibly on the issue and that they need to be mindful of the consequences of any public pronouncements that they make. That is important. Perhaps the report should be compulsory reading for all MSPs or even wider than that. I urge the Scottish Government to reconsider its refusal to take forward an awareness raising campaign. Such a campaign would help to bust the myths and inform the public that migrants’ demands on public services are not as high as those of the general population. Migrants are housed largely in private rented housing rather than social housing, and migrants do not depress wages. Overall, migrants pay more in taxes than they receive in benefits and public services. Those are important facts that need to be widely known and understood. The other part of the inquiry was about human trafficking. It is horrifying to realise that we are surrounded by modern-day slavery. Ignoring it is not acceptable and silence would make us complicit in the crime. As we have heard, trafficking can include forced labour, domestic servitude or sexual exploitation. Evidence was provided with regard to racism pervading sexual slavery, with women being marketed according to racial stereotypes. Another piece of evidence, from TARA, highlighted the link between the making of pornography and sexual exploitation. I wanted to say more about that but, sadly, I have run out of time. Freedom for Scotland’s slaves must be a top priority for the Parliament in the next session. The inquiry acknowledged that it has only scratched the surface of this major issue. We cannot continue to put up with attitudes of racism, misinformation, prejudice and enslavement. Public policy, action and funding must be directed at eliminating this scourge from our society.

As I have written to the First Minister on this matter, he will be aware that thousands of my constituents are protesting at the proposed siting in Coatbridge of a pyrolysis incinerator, which was refused planning permission by the council. Given that under the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 it is within Alex Salmond’s Government’s power to refuse the developer’s current appeal, will he do so and put the interests of the people of Coatbridge before Shore Energy’s private profits?

The initiative between North Lanarkshire Council and Shire Highlands education division in Malawi is the only local authority partnership to be recognised by the Department for International Development and the British Council. It involves a large cluster of school partnerships that are focused around Coatbridge and Chryston. What practical and immediate financial support can be offered to help to build capacity for that beneficial and sustainable initiative?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Under rule 13.4 of the standing orders, a question is deemed to be admissible “unless ... it does not comply with the requirements of Rule 13.3.3”, which states: “A question shall ... (b) relate to a matter for which the First Minister, the Scottish Ministers or the Scottish Law Officers have general responsibility”. At today’s First Minister’s question time, I asked a question relating to the Scottish Government’s powers under paragraph 3 of schedule 4 to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997. The First Minister told me that if I had been looking up the acts I must have known that the First Minister “cannot give a judgment or determination on a matter of ministerial discretion in this way.” Thus, the First Minister called into question the legitimacy and admissibility of my question. It is clear, from the legislation, that the Government has the power to step in and recall the planning appeal in question. I represent thousands of people in my constituency who wish that Alex Salmond’s Government would act on the side of the people and use his powers to reject the appeal by Shore Energy, which seeks to overturn the decision of the democratically elected members of North Lanarkshire Council and is against the wishes of the community. Rather, the First Minister seems to have tried to sidestep his responsibilities through his evasive answer on his Government’s powers under the 1997 act.

Scottish National Party members may jeer, but the people I represent believe that this is a deadly serious matter. As my question legitimately related to a matter for which the First Minister and his ministers are responsible, it was clearly admissible, so I contend that it was out of order for the First Minister to suggest otherwise in his response. Do you consider that that was a breach of standing orders? If so, how can it be remedied?

I congratulate Andrew Welsh on securing the debate and, like others, wish him all the best for the future. I would also like to associate myself with the motion, which acknowledges the role of Scotland’s FE colleges in providing important skills and training across a wide range of professional and practical areas. Scotland’s colleges play a central role in delivering high-quality skills to help to grow and shape new industries. They also place the learner at the heart of the education that is delivered. By allowing greater flexibility and part-time learning, Scotland’s FE institutions also have an important part to play in assisting mothers who wish to re-enter education or the workplace, because they can help them to gain new qualifications and increase their confidence levels. On-site crèches and nurseries are vital in supporting them. As other members have said, Parliament should recognise the major social contribution that colleges make in encouraging people back into education by accepting learners at all levels and helping them to develop their full potential. I commend Coatbridge College in my constituency for the important contribution that it makes to the prospects of local people. Coatbridge College is Scotland’s oldest college; it celebrated its 145th anniversary last year and has more than 250 members of staff and about 7,000 students. I was proud to attend its recent graduation ceremony in the prestigious Glasgow royal concert hall, at which it also celebrated the anniversary. At the ceremony, the new graduates were presented with their qualifications by the principal, John Doyle, in front of an audience of about 1,200 people. That demonstrated the strength of support for the college. Coatbridge College has adapted well over the years to meet the needs of the people of the town and the surrounding areas. At the time of the decline of heavy industry under the Tories, the college was forced to change its traditional focus on industrial courses, so work began in the 1980s to extend the original college building to create computing suites, hairdressing and beauty salons, a refectory, a theatre and sports facilities. In the past few years, the college has again begun a large redevelopment, after it was awarded funding by the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to address accessibility. There is a new entrance and a main reception area will lead to an integrated student services provision, a new learner resource centre, a coffee shop and a new refectory. In addition, there will be lift and stair access to all floors throughout the college, which will allow all users to get to all areas of the campus, which is very important. I am delighted that the first phase of the building work is expected to be completed on time and on budget. I was pleased to support the college in its efforts to gain the funding to redevelop and I look forward to seeing the completed campus and the benefits that it will bring to my constituency. The motion refers to the current economic climate. It is essential that we continue to invest in education so that we do not repeat the mistakes of the 1980s, when a generation of young people were unable to find work or training. The job prospects that are provided by colleges such as Coatbridge are crucial to the local economy and to the lives and future prospects of our young people. A key aspect of the second phase of the redevelopment of Coatbridge College will be new facilities such as a first-class conference area, which will support economic development in North Lanarkshire. On that theme, and to reiterate a point that other members have made, the proposed budget for this year seeks to cut the FE settlement, which will present challenges to the sector, a major one of which will be on student support. The NUS has found that almost two thirds of students last year found bursaries to be inadequate. Its president, Liam Burns, said: “College bursaries were already failing, but with this cut we could risk a meltdown in the system.” In recognising the importance of our FE colleges to the economy, we must agree that their funding should reflect that importance. I hope that members from all parties can agree on the need for continued investment in our FE institutions. Once again, I congratulate Andrew Welsh on the debate.

Does the member agree that we must be very clear that forced marriage is not cultural, but is firmly viewed as abuse?

Consensus seems to have broken out in the chamber this afternoon in what has been a regrettably short debate on an important subject. I agree with my colleague Mary Mulligan that it would have been better to have had the bill sooner but, that said, because of the wait we now have a better bill. In closing for the Labour Party, I speak in support of the general principles of the bill, which will bring us into line with other parts of the UK. As has been said, the Equal Opportunities Committee expects the Scottish Government to lodge amendments at stage 2 on various matters, many of which were outlined by the committee convener, Margaret Mitchell, in her opening remarks. We on the Labour benches are clear that the bill is needed to try to stop the horrendous practice of forcing anyone into marriage, whether male or female, but as Marlyn Glen made clear, we recognise that it is mostly young women and girls who are likely to be in that situation. According to Karma Nirvana, 14 per cent of callers to the forced marriage unit are under 16. The committee heard in evidence that the youngest victim that the FMU has dealt with was aged only nine. Forced marriage is clearly part of the continuum of violence against women and is completely unacceptable. It must, therefore, be exposed and challenged. The harm to women and girls is becoming clearer as more find the help, support and—importantly—the courage to speak out and to try to leave their situation. Victims seek support from various places, including women’s aid organisations, rape crisis centres and mental health support services. In many cases, only when they seek such help—perhaps for domestic abuse or other issues—does it become apparent that they are in forced marriages. Harrowing examples were provided to the committee. Some are outlined in the report, and we heard about real-life cases from Anne McLaughlin and, latterly, Jamie McGrigor. I will quote from Jasvinder Sanghera, the author of “Shame”, who founded Karma Nirvana in 1994. The charity, whose name means “peace and enlightenment”, helps the victims of so-called honour crimes and operates a phone line to help the victims of forced marriages. In an article in The Guardian, Jasvinder said: “I come from a family of seven sisters, and I watched each of them disappear. They’d be taken out of school, sent abroad, and brought back as wives...I saw my sister suffer horrific domestic violence.” She said: “When I was 14 my mother showed me a photo of the man I’d been promised to since I was eight years old. I refused to marry him, and for that I was abused, physically and mentally”. Later, Jasvinder discovered that one of her sisters, Robina, had committed suicide aged 24. She described it: “She’d doused herself in paraffin and set herself on fire. She knew that because of izzat, or shame, that suicide was the only way out of her marriage.” There are many such stories of women being beaten, raped, locked up in bedrooms for months on end and murdered. The list of atrocities is huge, and they are being suffered by young women in Scotland as we speak. That is why legislation is important to raise awareness about forced marriage and, ultimately, to stop it happening. Malcolm Chisholm spoke about raising awareness and reiterated why it is so important. There must be no confusion among official organisations or anyone else about the fact that forced marriage is not cultural but abuse. Sandra White emphasised that in her speech. Although the bill is a positive step in offering protection to victims of forced marriage and sends a strong message that the practice will not be tolerated in Scotland, it needs amendment. For example, the definition of forced marriage that the Government uses states, “duress is involved”. However, as Marlyn Glen outlined, it could also involve a lack of understanding, so the Government needs to revisit that definition. Perhaps we will hear something about that in the minister’s closing speech. Section 1(6) is drafted to assume that major force is included. However, having reflected on the evidence, the committee would like an amendment to strengthen that provision and to make it explicit in the bill, as Bill Aitken outlined. I suggest that the Labour Party would support that, too. I am pleased that the minister has committed to considering amendments. He has heard various suggestions in the debate. Hugh O’Donnell raised the matter of religious practices. The committee was keen for the Government to liaise further with religious bodies on nullification of forced marriages. I am pleased to have heard a commitment to that in the minister’s opening speech. It is difficult to imagine the suffering that those in forced marriages endure, but the bill may give hope to many and provide them with a means of escape to live their lives in peace away from the all-encompassing shadow of fear. I conclude with more of Jasvinder’s words. Talking about the research for her second book, “Daughters of Shame”, she said: “I listen to those stories—told by women who have been drugged, beaten, imprisoned, raped and terrorised within the walls of the homes they grew up in. I listen and I am humbled by their resilience.” Labour will support the general principles of the bill at decision time, but we look forward to seeing the amendments that will address our concerns.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

The minister might think about engaging with the public in my constituency and agreeing with the thousands of my constituents who oppose the proposed pyrolysis incinerator in Coatbridge, because such incinerators can undermine efforts to reduce carbon emissions by discouraging recycling and other more innovative green solutions.

I am pleased that the minister thinks that the Government could do more to help and encourage women to donate their milk. What can she do to advise women that birth plans can include a request for donated milk, rather than artificial formula, in case of problems? What plans does she have to promote the importance of breastfeeding more generally?

Like other members, I congratulate Bob Doris on securing the debate. His motion "congratulates Scotland's Irish community on ... the dedication and commitment that it has shown in keeping Irish culture thriving and in the good work that Irish groups do in the wider community". I contend that nowhere is that more evident than in my constituency, Coatbridge and Chryston. By the middle of the 19th century, more than a third of the population of Coatbridge was Irish born. People were attracted to the town by employment opportunities, as they were to Dundee, as Joe FitzPatrick said, but in Coatbridge the opportunities were in the heavy industries, for which the town became famous.  It was partly the large influx of labour that enabled the industrial revolution to continue so rapidly in my part of the world. The large coalfields in the constituency, such as Cardowan and Auchengeich, were mined by the working-class people of Coatbridge and the wider area, and the coal fuelled the masses of blast furnaces that produced the steel that gave the town the name "the iron burgh". Robert Baird described Coatbridge in 1845 and was amazed by the flames that the furnaces cast into the night sky. Coatbridge is proud of its industrial and cultural heritage, which is celebrated at the fantastic museum of Scottish industrial life at Summerlee. Like other members, I am proud of my Irish heritage. My own name is Dornan, and I have Irish heritage on both sides of my family. My great-grandfather, Paddy McKeown, worked at the Gartsherrie steelworks in Coatbridge, and the museum of Scottish industrial life features a painting of the steelworks from the mid-1800s. I urge members to visit Summerlee, if they have not already done so. The fruits of the workers' labour were exported via the Monkland canal, which I think that Bob Doris mentioned, into Glasgow and beyond. Coatbridge was, in effect, the workhorse of Scotland, and the nation should remember the pivotal role that working class Irish labour played in the development of modern Scotland. In his fantastic new book "Stramash: Tackling Scotland's Towns and Teams", the historian Daniel Gray describes in colourful detail the impact of Irish immigration on Coatbridge. He says: "Irish arrivals undertook jobs often spurned by the indigenous population. They worked hard where the danger was greatest and played hard to find solace." Coatbridge is very different today from the town of flames and industry that is depicted at the Summerlee museum, but its people are keen to celebrate the town's Irish heritage. Members might know that every year, thousands of people descend on the town centre to join in the St Patrick's day celebrations, and over the years the Coatbridge festival has grown into a major event that spans a week and culminates in the Saturday family fun day in the town centre, which is attended by thousands of people. The event is organised by a group of committed local people, to celebrate the town's Irish heritage. The hard-working organising committee deserves recognition for its dedicated efforts in making the festival bigger and better every year. The festival attracts about 15,000 people from Scotland and abroad, and provides a good boost to the local economy and small independent traders, in particular. Coatbridge is a great town, and it is unfortunate that it has been on the receiving end of unwanted  awards and criticism in the past. The reality is that it has many fantastic attractions and a heritage of which it can be proud. North Lanarkshire Council has worked for many years to regenerate the area. We have Drumpellier country park, the museum of Scottish industrial life and the newly renovated Time Capsule. The bridges in Coatbridge have just been repainted, which has made a massive difference to the environment in the town. The canal basin has been redeveloped and is now a good space for people to use. Such things must be remembered. We must be proud of and celebrate our heritage. The debate is important, and I concur with the motion when it says: "modern Scotland must have at its heart the appreciation and celebration of the multiple cultures that contribute to Scotland's national life." My son has Irish heritage on both sides of the family. His father has Irish heritage and lived and went to school in Ireland. In Scotland, we still encounter racism, which must be challenged, as members have said. We cannot have intolerance. Working class Irish men and women who settled in communities such as Coatbridge played a pivotal role in the development of Scotland, and it is important that we continue to recognise and celebrate their contribution, as well as contributions that people are currently making. I commend Bob Doris for his motion.

As others have done, I commend Hugh O'Donnell for bringing to the Parliament the issues of autism and gaps in autism services and support. It is enormously to his credit that he has done so, and his work ought to be applauded by all of us. I signed the original bill proposal for several reasons. First, I know the personal commitment of Hugh O'Donnell to the subject, so I was keen to allow him the opportunity to explore legislation. Secondly, like others, I have dealt with many issues involving constituents who are on the autistic spectrum or who are parents of children with autism, so I know the problems and frustrations that they face. Thirdly, I spent many years on the cross-party group on autistic spectrum disorder, so I am aware of the many failures in our system with regard to supporting and assisting people with autism. In a debate in the chamber in 2002, Lloyd Quinan, the then convener of the cross-party group, said: "the range of services that are delivered must be seamlessly delivered and planned and developed in a multi-agency way. I have frequently talked about the necessity for a national strategy that is focused on the individual and that uses multi-agency methods and many members have agreed with me."— [ Official Report , 15 May 2002; c 8913.]  He was right. A strategy is not a new idea, but it is clearly much needed and long overdue. I am pleased that the Government has made a commitment to taking that forward. After undertaking its scrutiny, the committee did not agree that the bill is supportable. I feel that the Parliament needs to heed its findings at this time, but that does not mean that it should do nothing. The committee agreed that the strategy needs to enable public bodies to focus their policies and services better on the needs and requirements of people with autism; it just does not believe that legislation is needed to achieve that. It thinks—as Christina McKelvie outlined—that the bill is not strong enough, and that in terms of specifying needs the bill simply expects the NHS and local government to "have regard to" the guidance, and therefore lacks teeth. As we know, autism is a lifelong developmental disability that affects how a person communicates with and relates to other people and the world around them. People with autism have difficulty with social communication, social interaction and social imagination. The condition is a spectrum, so everyone who has it will share certain traits and difficulties, but it must be stressed that each person is an individual with their own unique needs. Services that are appropriate to specific  needs cannot just be offered in a one-size-fits-all solution; that is not acceptable. There is a definite need for continuity and person-centred planning throughout a person's life, so I make a plea for that to be at the heart of the Government's strategy. The Parliament passed the 2004 act, which should help in education situations. Parents encounter many issues—including getting a diagnosis, finding appropriate help and getting the right school or nursery place—with which they need assistance, and they seem to be battling all the time. Nonetheless, services that are supplied by councils, particularly in education, are improving, although other services are still lacking. We need a directory of good practice; that would be really helpful. Specialist support for children, such as sensory rooms, activities such as horse riding and other provisions, are not commonplace, and if those have to be sourced privately they can be beyond the financial reach of ordinary people. That is something else that should be considered. There is a lack of provision for adults, and a need for further research and information, particularly with regard to employment issues. As the National Autistic Society has highlighted, only 15 per cent of adults with autism in the UK are in full-time paid employment, in comparison with around 50 per cent of disabled people overall. It is bad not only for individuals not to be working, in terms of their prospects and self-confidence, but bad for society more generally, so that must be addressed. We must commend the work of the Scottish Society for Autism, and local groups, such as HOPE for Autism in my area. I am sorry that it does not appear that Hugh O'Donnell's bill will make it past the initial scrutiny stage, but that does not mean that members are against the idea—far from it. I am pleased that the Labour Party is taking the issue seriously; we would be committed to a national strategy, but one that is very much backed by resources. Although I do not intend to support the bill in its current form today—which has nothing to do with whips, and everything to do with the committee report—I expect action on the issues that have been raised, and I commend Hugh O'Donnell.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the importance of services such as community mothers in the support and promotion of breastfeeding. (S3O-12524)

Does the minister recognise that the Scottish Government's cuts to local authority budgets are directly affecting front-line services such as community mothers, which supports and sustains breastfeeding? It is a particularly important service in places such as Lanarkshire, where there are worryingly low breastfeeding rates. Does the minister consider that any decision to cut funding to community mothers projects would contravene duties under section 19 of the  Equality Act 2010, given the disproportionate impact on women?

Given that the Scottish Parliament has no second chamber, it is dependent on its committee structure to scrutinise legislation before and after it passes it. As the convener said in her opening speech, there has been little by way of post-legislative scrutiny of acts of the Scottish Parliament. The need for such scrutiny is fairly self evident: legislation may not always do what it was intended to do, there may be unintended consequences or we may simply want to see the impact of the legislation. With that in mind, the Equal Opportunities Committee undertook post-legislative scrutiny of the equalities principles of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. The act introduced the statutory right for every person with a mental disorder to independent advocacy services, and placed duties on health boards and local authorities to ensure that such services are made available. Unfortunately, our report identifies gaps in provision alongside a need for improvement in the principles of equality and non-discrimination that underpin the act. As other members have noted, one main issue that we identified is entitlement to advocacy services. According to witnesses, priority is given to crisis cases, which has led to gaps in advocacy provision for other entitled groups. The committee felt strongly that, as part of its reflection on the McManus review, the Scottish Government should look closely at prioritisation in order to ensure that  advocacy provision is available to all groups—not only to those who present as crisis cases. FBS Advocacy in my constituency aims to do exactly that. At the moment, it is funded by North Lanarkshire Council, but operates independently. It provides group and individual advocacy services to children and young people with disabilities and mental ill health, with the ultimate aim of enabling the children to become respected and responsible advocates for themselves. FBS Advocacy does that by working with the young people and ensuring that its advisers take fully into account their views and needs. That example could be followed throughout Scotland. As other members have said, the McManus review raised the issue of the age appropriateness of facilities around Scotland. The 2003 act brought change in the provision of age-appropriate services for children and young people, some of which is positive. However, concern remains, particularly about the recent increase in the number of admissions of young people to adult psychiatric facilities. The increase seems predominantly to be in the category of young men aged 16 and 17. As Dr McKee pointed out, in certain circumstances, it is better for a young person to be in an adult ward—for example, to avoid the young person's having to travel miles away from family. However, SAMH raised the concern that, when a young person is admitted to such a ward, they do not always receive age-appropriate care. The Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland estimated that around 20 per cent of young people do not get access to expert medical and nursing care in adult wards, which is concerning. Donald Lyons of the commission suggested that, if a young person is admitted to such a ward, the ward should be designated for that purpose and that there should be input from professionals who work with younger people. In its response to our report, the Government indicated that it is working closely with NHS boards on the issue. The minister also said that in her speech. She has said that she recognises the need to reduce the number of children in adult wards. I would be pleased if she would say in summing up how that work is progressing. There is currently no secure care facility in Scotland for young people, so the Mental Welfare Commission has called for one to be established, but the minister has said that the numbers are at present too small to justify that. I am interested to know the numbers and what they might need to be before a Scottish unit was established so that young people in Scotland do not have to go down to England. Stuart Lennox of the Association of Directors of Social Work made the point that, as with advocacy  services, resources are often directed away from preventive work and towards crisis care. I would be grateful if the minister would comment on that in summing up. Counselling for young people in schools is particularly important. The final issue that I want to mention is services for prisoners. The committee's report on female offenders highlighted that it appears that they are not receiving the advocacy to which they are entitled. The convener raised that issue in her opening speech, and the situation may improve when their care is transferred to the NHS. Can the minister tell us when that will happen? The report is an interesting and worthwhile piece of work that shows that more post-legislative scrutiny is required.

Like others, I congratulate Bill Kidd on securing the debate. I am curious about which anarchists Jackson Carlaw knows, because I wonder whether anarchists would have sat quietly and listened to his drivel. I recognise the major role that was played by New Zealand in helping to progress the campaign for nuclear disarmament. The New Zealand Nuclear Free Zone, Disarmament, and Arms Control Act 1987 is an extremely important piece of legislation, which prohibits “Entry into the internal waters of New Zealand by any ship whose propulsion is wholly or partly dependent on nuclear power”. It also prohibits any citizen of New Zealand from manufacturing, acquiring or possessing any nuclear explosive device. That pioneering legislation came about as a result of increasing  unease in New Zealand about the cold war and as a result of concern about the number of American nuclear ships docking on New Zealand’s coasts. In the early 1980s, the ruling party in New Zealand, which had a majority of one, decided to vote against a bill to ban nuclear arms-empowered ships. However, anti-nuclear campaigner Marilyn Waring decided to vote with her conscience and support a ban. According to her account, Waring was dragged into the whips’ office and subjected to verbal abuse. The Prime Minister, Robert Muldoon, decided to take the issue to the people and called a snap general election. Unfortunately for him, the people overwhelmingly supported the stance of the anti-nuclear Labour Party, which swept to power on the promise of enacting nuclear-free zones. Waring did not seek re-election and has spent her time since lecturing on issues of feminism and human rights. Legislation such as that sets an example to the rest of the world. It requires brave people such as Waring to take a stance. It is fair to say that it has required bravery on the part of the New Zealand Government to stand up to the might of the American military machine and refuse to back down. As the motion suggests, Scotland too could play its part with the establishment of nuclear-free zones in homes, classrooms, places of work, communities, local authorities and—I note what Jamie Hepburn said—the environs of this Parliament. That would send a clear message to the international community about the strength of feeling in Scotland against the use of nuclear weapons. We have something of a position against Trident in this Parliament—I say “something” because the vote was to support the position that Trident should not be replaced at this time. Personally, and I am sure like others in the chamber, I do not want it to be replaced at any time; I know that I am not alone in that view. The majority of Scots oppose the Trident nuclear programme, for a variety of reasons. Besides the abhorrent nature of such destructive weapons of mass destruction, the cost is overwhelming, particularly at a time of imposed economic austerity. The UK Government estimates that renewal of the programme will cost somewhere in the region of £20 billion, but Greenpeace estimates the real figure would be closer to £100 billion. How many affordable homes could we have for that amount of money? How many new jobs could be created? How many people could be taken out of poverty? CND believes that the cost of replacing Trident can be paid only at the expense of jobs and public services. The establishment of nuclear-free zones in Scotland would make the point about the futility of nuclear weapons clear. For years there have been health fears about the legacy of nuclear tests, and I note that last year the French Government announced that it was prepared to compensate people who were involved in nuclear testing and had suffered illness as a result. I have constituents in Coatbridge and Chryston who were involved in similar British tests in the 1950s and 1960s. They have spent years fighting for compensation, but they have not had it. There has been no justice for my constituents who have suffered ill health, and that is unacceptable. The evil of nuclear warfare is indisputable. Storing our own weapons of mass destruction is wrong, replacing them is wrong, and using them would be an abomination. I was pleased that Bruce Kent spent time with my family on the evening of the peace walk. Unlike Jackson Carlaw, Bruce Kent will be remembered for devoting his life to promoting peace and nuclear disarmament. Scotland could help that cause by sending a clear message against weapons of mass destruction by establishing nuclear-free zones. By doing so, we could educate future generations about the danger of living in a world with the threat of nuclear annihilation.

That is a very interesting point. Ted Brocklebank said earlier that some local authorities are granting a day's holiday and others are not. Will the minister consider writing to local authorities to tell them that some authorities are granting the holiday and encourage others to do so?

Like others, I congratulate John Wilson on lodging the motion and securing the debate. As we have heard, the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Act 2007 had the overwhelming support of the Parliament, so it is disappointing that for most workers the day continues to go unmarked. As the motion says, for the majority in the private and public sectors, a holiday is not provided. That shows that the voluntary nature of the legislation means that it is not working. A longer weekend around the time of St Andrew's day would be a really good time for an extra public holiday. It would allow Scotland to participate in a day of celebration that could signal the beginning of the winter festivities that we have—including the switching on of Christmas lights around the country, markets in Edinburgh and Glasgow, and other events in cities throughout Scotland—that culminate in the hogmanay celebrations. It would benefit my constituents to have an extra day's holiday around St Andrew's day that formed a part of those celebrations. As this week is trade union week in the Parliament, it is appropriate to consider the position of holidays more generally, perhaps taking up where Ted Brocklebank left off. Scotland currently has only eight public holidays—I think that John Wilson made that point—compared with the European Union average of 12 per year. Scots are therefore already overworked when compared with their counterparts on the continent—and average annual hours worked are higher in Scotland than they are in most western European countries, including France, Germany and Italy. I note that in response to the original consultation on a St Andrew's day bank holiday the STUC argued that an extra bank holiday would be a positive step for Scottish workers. I think so too, and I am sure that my constituents in Coatbridge and Chryston agree with that assessment. Even so, that would still leave Scotland with fewer public holidays than the rest of the EU. In its submission, Unison Scotland noted that there might be some opposition from businesses to establishing such a holiday in Scotland—either the complaints that we heard earlier about a loss  of competitive advantage or complaints about having different bank holidays from the rest of the United Kingdom—but Unison concluded that it would be a national holiday and, since the majority of companies in Scotland could be expected to participate, the fear of a competitive disadvantage would be minimised. It also pointed out that Northern Ireland already has two more bank holidays than the rest of the UK—and we seem to be able to get an extra one with the flourish of a royal ring. Big business tends to oppose changes that benefit the workers, as do Tories, but we should not forget that millions of pounds are lost to the Scottish economy through stress-related illness and, especially in the current climate, many people feel overworked and undervalued as employers seek to maximise profit, often at workers' expense. According to NHS Scotland, stress costs the UK economy about £3.7 billion every year and the loss of as many as 80 million working days per year. There is also high incidence of seasonal affective disorder and vitamin D deficiency in Scotland, so we would also benefit from an extra bank holiday day in that regard—which would go some way to alleviating pressure on the NHS. The STUC also expressed concerned that Scottish and UK workers are placed under increasing pressure as a consequence of the need to balance family and working lives. An extra day's bank holiday could allow families to spend quality time together. It could also help the tourism industry to generate income outwith the traditional peak times, serving as a boost to local economies throughout Scotland—so it would not necessarily be a drain of any kind on the economy. There are many tourist attractions in my constituency, such as the newly refurbished Time Capsule complex, which will reopen soon with a brand new flume called tornado tantrum. The complex is always well used during the holidays and a public holiday on St Andrew's day could be well spent in Coatbridge. St Andrew's day would be an all-inclusive celebration; everybody could rally round it. Indeed, as John Wilson said, the STUC holds an annual anti-racism march to mark St Andrew's day. This year's march will be on Saturday 27 November. Trade unionists will rally round the St Andrew's day banner against racism and fascism and celebrate diversity and shared humanity. I believe that the Parliament should do more to encourage the St Andrew's day holiday as a national celebration of Scotland's patron saint and the trade union movement's position that it could be used to promote a sense of collectivity. More private and public employers should follow the Parliament's lead and honour the day by granting a holiday; otherwise, we will need to revisit it and  consider legislating, as Dennis Canavan first suggested.

In terms of local interests, does the minister have any idea of the anger and frustration among my constituents about the delays to this vital road improvement project?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, I wonder whether you can keep us right on material for debates. I asked the Scottish Parliament information centre outside whether we could have the material that the cabinet secretary said in his opening speech he had laid in SPICe. I was told that it was available in the coffee room. I asked whether it was available in the chamber and was told that no, on the instruction of the Minister for Parliamentary Business's office, it was not to be put in the chamber. I took the few copies that were there and put them out in the chamber, but I would like your advice on what should and should not be available in the chamber as material for debates.

This might come as something of a surprise to some SNP members, but the council tax freeze benefits the wealthiest home owners by putting £45 in their pockets annually at the expense of services in our communities.  Has the cabinet secretary read yesterday's letter from Grahame Smith of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, which was sent to all MSPs, urging "fair use of the tax powers that are available to you"? Will the cabinet secretary admit that he has options other than to attack public sector pay and public services and that he could hit the people I have mentioned in their pockets to pay for the mistakes of the bankers?

Are patients' rights not such an important issue that the cabinet secretary should be given the opportunity to amend the bill at stage 2? If it is not amendable, members of Murdo Fraser's party could then decide not to support it.

The main problem with the bill seems to be whether it is required at all. However, there can be little doubt that the underlying ethos should be  supported and encouraged, and the Scottish Government has rightly recognised the need for the provision of better information for patients, as well as a guaranteed standard of care and reasonable treatment throughout the NHS in Scotland. Making patients aware of not only their responsibilities, which we are often reminded of, but their rights is a positive step forward that ought to be welcomed across the chamber. It is vital that health care professionals listen to the patients' cares and concerns, with patients being treated as partners, whose knowledge of their own body and symptoms is respected, rather than as subjects who are just dictated to. I will focus on the example of thyroid disorders in order to highlight the importance of patient advocacy and a need for a change of ethos, as outlined by the cabinet secretary earlier. Thyroid disorders are a gender issue, as women are five times more likely to suffer from them than men are, and 17 per cent of women over 60 will suffer from some form of hypothyroidism. In its submission to the Health and Sport Committee, Breast Cancer Care suggested that health care should be based on clinical and patient-specific need that excludes all strands of discrimination. Any discussion of rights should, therefore, not ignore the gender imbalance that exists in many areas of health care, such as thyroid disorders. Many very ill people with thyroid dysfunction are not being diagnosed by general practitioners, are on the wrong levels of thyroxine or are on thyroxine but not converting from T4 to T3, and they need advocacy. Dr Anthony Toft, a world-renowned and highly respected Scottish endocrinologist, believes that it is of prime importance that GPs consider how patients present, rather than simply accepting the results of blood tests. He suggests that doctors should take a whole-picture approach that takes into consideration all the patient's symptoms and does not rely totally on tests. That is important in the case of a lack of T3. In such a circumstance, the tests show that the T4 is fine, and the GP will insist that there is nothing wrong with the patient's thyroid function when, in fact, they are gravely ill and getting progressively worse. Another issue that the proposed patient advice and support service could assist with is generic prescribing. Obviously, we are looking to save money in the health service, but a drug such as thyroxine can vary in strength and quality, depending on the source, and that variation can have a detrimental impact on the health of thryoid patients. Dr Toft therefore also recommends that the same make of thyroxine should be dispensed to a patient, but GPs and pharmacists do not seem to be aware of that. Advocacy is needed in that regard.  The health of many thryoid patients could be much improved if GPs and others listened to them rather than simply depending on tests. That is an area that requires more attention, research and advocacy for patients in Scotland. Whether or not the bill progresses to the end of stage 3, a patients rights officer could promote the interests of the patient in cases in which they are not being listened to or are too ill to advocate on their own behalf. With or without the bill, we need to start viewing patients as equal partners in our system of health care. As well as ensuring that their views are respected, that could prevent more serious conditions from arising or stop there being lengthy periods of misdiagnosis, which would save the NHS money in the long run. As others have said, the area of complaints needs to be updated and modernised. Patients not only need clear procedures in order to make complaints; they need evidence that their complaints are dealt with and that effective changes are made and systems modified as necessary. It is vital that feedback be given. As the constituency member for Coatbridge and Chryston, I have heard numerous instances over the years of constituents who are dissatisfied with NHS services but worried that, if they complain, they may receive less favourable treatment. Overall, our NHS is an excellent service that operates on the principle that people are treated on the basis of health need and not their ability to pay. Any change must be an improvement and in no way detrimental to that ethos, and it must work better for the patients of Scotland.

Does the cabinet secretary support the STUC's there is a better way campaign, which proposes alternatives to cuts? If so, how does he justify his attack on public sector pay and public services?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on access to podiatry services being based on clinical need rather than ability to pay. (S3O-11852)

In Lanarkshire, revised criteria for podiatry have stopped general practitioners referring their elderly patients for nail cutting, which is having a negative impact on those patients' health and wellbeing. Does the cabinet secretary recognise that the majority of elderly people are unable to carry out essential nail cutting for themselves and have a clinical need for the service? Does she accept that the refusal to offer that vital service on the NHS has a disproportionate impact on the poorest and most vulnerable elderly patients, who cannot afford to pay privately? Given that she has indicated to me in a letter that the service could be provided by nursing staff or foot care assistants, will she ensure that it is provided free on the NHS?

I presume that the cabinet secretary will be aware that the Scottish Futures Trust considers that much more investment is required in Scotland to meet waste management needs over the next 10 years. Does he agree that it would be better for Government to provide waste processing facilities directly, which would allow emphasis to be placed on local environmental justice, than to allow private profiteers to enrich themselves to the detriment of our communities?

Presiding Officer, if we are all eagerly awaiting the Browne report, what is the objection to an independent review in Scotland? Could that not look at all sorts of issues, including barriers to education?

Likewise, will the minister clarify whether health boards consider equality legislation? Was NHS Lanarkshire required to undertake an equality impact assessment before withdrawing podiatry care from my elderly vulnerable constituents, who are now expected to cut their own toenails, which is impossible for most of them; to pay about £20 for that service each time; or to face possible impaired mobility and the pain of ingrowing toenails?

My understanding is that financial markets are continuing to fund Government debt. Is the member saying to us that the Government is having problems selling its debt to investors? What is his understanding of the payback period as compared with other countries?

Bill Kidd finished on an interesting point: I  believe that any sensible budget review should have concluded that the SNP Government must decide which services it considers to be important and which are needed in Scotland, and tell us how it is going to pay for them. After all, it is the Government. In her speech, Maureen Watt quoted Dave Prentis; I want to quote from someone in Scotland—Dave Watson of Unison—who called the independent budget review "a rather tired rehash of right wing economic orthodoxy". The report simply offers suggestions for cutting Scottish public services and universal benefits including concessionary travel, free eye tests and free personal care. It also suggests that tuition fees could be reintroduced and asks the Government to reflect on whether Scottish Water's status should be changed. I listened to what was said about Scottish Water in yesterday's debate—although I have to say that I am not entirely clear what it meant—but the budget review report contains some weasel words that suggest that it could be opened to future privatisation. Moreover, it says that the Scottish Futures Trust will become an expert in the disposal of public assets—perhaps we should be happy that it is going to do something—and that road-user charging is to be considered.

I was actually talking about the report that we are debating, but I still have to say that I was not very clear that what the member has said was the case. I am glad that he has put that on the record. The report also calls for pay restraints, pay cuts and recruitment freezes, all of which will have a detrimental effect on workers, service provision and the economy; indeed, we should not forget that these cuts will also have a resulting impact on the private sector. It briefly mentions the fact that the Parliament has tax-raising powers, but says that looking at the issue lay outwith the review's remit. I believe that the SNP, which is now in government, was part of the yes-yes campaign and that the vote of the people gave the Scottish Government a mandate in that respect. The report also calls for an end to the council tax freeze, which was supposedly introduced by the SNP as a short-term measure, pending the introduction of a fairer local taxation system. Of course, that did not happen. The SNP could at least have amended the tax bands to make the current system fairer instead of starving local councils of funds, which is what has happened.  To help to create jobs, boost the economy and meet a dire social need, it would also have been sensible to have had a massive council and social housing building programme over the past few years. It is a myth that the only response to the recession is strict austerity measures with deep, savage and immediate cuts, as members right across the other side of this chamber have suggested. That is not the only response. The debate is taking place in a chamber in which most of the members on those other benches believe that savage public sector cuts are either inevitable or necessary. I do not believe that they are, and neither do Scotland's trade unions, for example. The Tory-Liberal alliance is peddling the proposition that cuts are necessary, but the reality is that they are a good excuse to attack the fabric of the welfare state. The Tory-Liberal Government has quickly shown its true colours with its strategy to viciously slash state provision and its strategy of death by a thousand cuts for the public sector, with a rise in VAT that will hit the poorest hardest, and an ideological attack on the welfare state. Basically, there is a reorganisation of society firmly in favour of the rich and big business interests, and away from the workers. Make no mistake: that is what it is about. We are not all in it together, and we are not all feeling the squeeze. Very little is being squeezed from the rich. The SNP Government seems to be in the camp that believes that savage cuts are inevitable. Here is some news: they are not; they are ideological. Ironically, the SNP gained support in 2007 on a promise to protect public services and deliver social policies that benefit ordinary people.

I am afraid that I do not have enough time. The reality is that most of the SNP's progressive policy promises, such as those on free school meals, free prescriptions and smaller class sizes, have not been delivered and others are unravelling. Police numbers are due to decrease, new teachers are without jobs, and there are fewer nurses. The promised alternative to PFI—the now infamous Scottish Futures Trust—has not delivered, which has meant a dearth of new building and no stimulus for jobs and the Scottish economy. It is impossible for a party to convince anyone that it is left of centre while it demands and underfunds a council tax freeze. That is now resulting in losses of jobs, services and provision at local government level. However, that allows that party to say, "It wisnae me." The SNP should be firmly standing up for Scotland against cuts, not forcing them through. Doing that will threaten recovery and increase unemployment, and will be detrimental to people, the economy and services.  There are alternatives. The people's charter offers solutions, and the Public and Commercial Services Union has researched solutions such as employing more, rather than fewer, tax inspectors to catch the avoiders and evaders, who cost some £95 billion a year. It is interesting that The Guardian ran a YouGov poll last month to test attitudes towards a one-off tax of 20 per cent on the richest 10 per cent in the country, who own almost half the country's wealth. Some 75 per cent of people polled approved of such a tax. Where is the debate on that? I do not see it. Rather than accepting suggestions in the review or collaborating on a savage cuts agenda, it would be better if the SNP served the ordinary people of Scotland by looking for ideas from the Scottish Trades Union Congress's there is a better way campaign, for example. That campaign will be launched tomorrow, and there will be a rally on 23 October. Britain is the sixth richest nation in the world, and its economy is continuing to grow. What kind of mad world is it in which the Government, whether in Edinburgh or London, is allowed to slash services to the poorer majority while the rich minority feel no pain at all? The scorched-earth economics of the Con-Dems, who are aided by the SNP, must be stopped before more ordinary working-class people lose their jobs, homes and services and suffer from associated effects on their health and wellbeing. In conclusion, it was the rich capitalists of the world who caused the global crash, with their greed and private corporate folly, not ordinary people. Despite Government attempts to rewrite history, it was not public spending that created the problem. In this country, the rich continue to rake in their bonuses. They avoid fair taxes and get richer while ordinary people and the poor and vulnerable suffer disproportionately. There is nothing fair about who the cuts will affect. They will not affect the rich minority who own the majority of this country's wealth.

Does the minister agree that encouraging greater participation in sporting activity should remain high on the Government's agenda, given the undoubted benefit that sport provides in tackling Scotland's poor public health record? That is especially important in ex-industrial areas such as mine. Will she recognise this week's Coatbridge success story and join me in congratulating the new World Boxing Organization super-featherweight world champion, Ricky Burns?

Does the member recall that there is a mandate from the people for varying tax, as one of the questions in the referendum was on that?

The UK's national debt is not unprecedented by historical or international standards: it is currently 68 per cent of GDP and the average for advanced economies is 77.3 per cent. Also, the maturity of the debt in Britain is double that of other advanced economies, so why are the Liberals signing up to savage cuts?

Surely all services could have been protected if George Osborne had kept his pre-election promise to keep to Labour's public spending, if and when elected. Does the member accept that there are other choices? Given that the top 1 per cent of the population own a quarter of the wealth, why do we not just tax the rich?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it has taken, or are planned, to progress the designation of nature conservation marine protected areas. (S3O-11190)

As the cabinet secretary is aware, there is a commitment to establishing a coherent network of MPAs by 2012, covering all our marine species in their full range across Scotland's waters. It seems strange that seabirds are currently omitted from the draft list of priority marine features, which will be used to steer the designation. The Natura network on its own will not be able to cover the full species diversity and range of seabirds. Does the cabinet secretary consider that Scotland's network of marine protected areas can be ecologically coherent if it misses out on the most important places for nationally important seabird populations? What steps will he take to ensure that the criteria are amended to address that issue?

Like other members, I congratulate Aileen Campbell on securing a debate on such an important subject. Like her, I welcome the children's commissioner's report, which highlights the fact that children are often the forgotten victims in the justice system. If their parents are imprisoned, they can suffer stigma, they can lose their homes, their family income might be reduced and they might be separated from their siblings and sent to foster homes or care. Overall, there is an economic, psychological and social repercussion for children. Of course, the imprisonment of an abusive parent is sometimes a respite, but even then the aftermath and the repercussions can be traumatic for children. The evidence taken by the Equal Opportunities Committee in our inquiry into female offenders in the criminal justice system suggests that there are particular women's issues and issues for their children when mothers are imprisoned. For example, a number of women offend as a result of drug dependency, which can often be an attempt to blot out the harsh realities of things such as prostitution and sexual exploitation—or it can be the cause of their involvement in those matters. We need to offer more support to allow women to escape that cycle of violence and exploitation for their own sake, but also for the sake of their children. We need better options; centres such as the 218 centre can be invaluable. The impact of prison is usually greater for women than it is for men because women are much more likely to lose not only their homes but their responsibility for the care of their children. As women are still the main carers in our society, imprisoning mothers really results in the punishing of children.  It is a tragedy that, as is outlined in the committee's report, so many thousands of children face life without a parent for the period of the parent's incarceration and experience the trauma of visiting their parents in a prison environment. It is therefore vital that alternatives to prison take account of the impact of a custodial sentence on children, as Aileen Campbell outlined so well. In our report, the Equal Opportunities Committee makes the point that cancelling children's visits as a punishment for their mother's behaviour, as seems to happen frequently, is unacceptable. That ties in with the commissioner's assertion that children are not simply aids to their parent's rehabilitation but have their own needs and rights. Obviously, children can play an important role in helping sentencing to change adult behaviour, but they must be seen as people in their own right. Overall, the committee's report contains 28 laudable recommendations that make sense for society and for the individuals involved. Respecting the rights of children, making their needs a major factor in decisions and ensuring that the children are not punished when they have done nothing wrong will benefit our society as a whole. Once again, I congratulate Aileen Campbell on highlighting the children's commissioner's report and on bringing the issue before the Parliament this evening.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in support of amendments 6 and 7, in Marlyn Glen's name. Prostitution is predominantly male violence against women and children. The Government in Scotland has accepted that. Prostitution is not a career choice and it is not a profession, and women do not aspire to such a lifestyle. People who are involved in prostitution are generally vulnerable and get involved in it due to reasons such as previous abuse, poverty, substance misuse or trafficking. The cloak of secrecy should be lifted from the men who buy sex. The social harm of their behaviour must be recognised and acknowledged. Prostitution is not a career choice or a simple business transaction; it is violence, it is exploitation and it is abuse. Women go to prison for it, but if anyone should go to prison it should be the pimps and the purchasers, not their victims. Criminalising buyers would undoubtedly reduce demand for prostitution. I urge members to support amendments 6 and 7. We have an opportunity to make a real difference.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it supports pyrolysis incineration. (S3O-11069)

I thank the minister for her not unexpected response. Is she aware that thousands of people in my constituency oppose plans to build a new pyrolysis incinerator in Coatbridge because they believe that the technology is untested and that any new pyrolysis plant would have an adverse effect on people's health and the environment? Will the Government make a statement to the Parliament on the recently published zero waste plan, which would allow members to ask questions about issues such as local environmental justice? Does the minister agree that the new environmental targets would be best achieved by Government provision of waste facilities rather than by allowing private companies to profit to the detriment, sometimes, of our communities?

I point out that I asked my question during an intervention, rather than a contribution. I have spoken on the issue on many occasions over the years, so I thought that I would let my male colleagues speak this afternoon. However, we need more research into counter-allegations. Perhaps the police could provide that information.

I do not think that anyone would disagree with the last point that John Wilson made. However, is he in denial that domestic abuse is predominantly rooted in gender inequality?

Do the member's statistics show how many of those were counter-allegations?

I, too, point out my entry in the register of interests.  I congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate. I apologise because I do not do Facebook; all the same, I am pleased to speak in support of the campaign, and I welcome the opportunity to discuss the contribution that Robert Owen made to improving the conditions of the working class. In particular, as a Lanarkshire MSP, I pay tribute to the pioneering work that Owen undertook at New Lanark, which is in the constituency of my colleague Karen Gillon. As Bill Butler said, Owen recognised that a more content workforce was a more productive workforce. He demonstrated that it was possible to make a profit while at the same time raising the standard of living of his employees. Many of Owen's ideas and reforms went against the grain in early 19th century Scotland. Indeed, many of his fellow investors were unconvinced of the merits of raising educational and living standards for the workers at New Lanark. It is unfortunate that, two centuries later, business leaders still appear to oppose reforms. For example, the Confederation of British Industry and others argued that the Labour Party's introduction of the minimum wage would have a disproportionate impact on profits. Owen disliked the factory system, which he believed encouraged social irresponsibility, destructive competition and heartless individualism. For those reasons, he decided to try to revolutionise that system. Given the social irresponsibility, destructive competition and heartless individualism that led to the collapse of our modern banking system, it is a bit ironic that we are calling for Robert Owen to be recognised on a banknote. However, the bank on Owen campaign is about raising awareness of Owen's legacy and, as Bill Butler pointed out, perhaps getting something back out of the banking system. Owen believed that co-operation and harmonious planning would be far superior and far more productive—in relation to the interests of society—than the divisive and competitive nature of capitalism. I agree with those sentiments. At New Lanark, Robert Owen successfully improved the working and living conditions of all his workers, especially his young apprentices. The conditions in the mills at New Lanark, although pretty awful by modern standards, were a rare exception in their day, and a massive improvement on the conditions in other mills. Owen believed in equality for women and universal suffrage at a time when women's rights were non-existent. He courted controversy by denouncing marriage, as it was then, as a form of slavery for women. He said: "Women will be no longer made the slaves of, or dependent upon men ... They will be equal in education, rights, privileges and personal liberty." Owen was certainly not afraid of being controversial. He regarded New Lanark as an  expression of the ways in which the evils of poverty, social disadvantage and ignorance could be surmounted through good education, steady employment and decent housing and health care. In his New Lanark schools, he pioneered new methods of teaching involving the use of pictures, maps and charts. Although he believed that education was essential to a child's development, he recognised that a well-educated workforce was a more productive workforce. He also believed that education should be enjoyable. He stated: "To train and educate the rising generation will at all times be the first object of society, to which every other will be subordinate". Owen recognised that despite the severe economic depression in Britain following the Napoleonic wars, safer working conditions were essential in every workplace. Unhappy with the regulations that were introduced in the Cotton Mills and Factories Act 1819, he lobbied Parliament to ensure that better conditions were extended to all workers. In today's volatile financial climate, in remembering Robert Owen we can also be reminded that the conditions that were fought for and won over many years must be protected. This is a good time to remind ourselves that health and safety in the workplace must remain the right of every single employee. We must protect workers' entitlement to withdraw their labour and remove anti-trade union legislation that undermines working class rights and conditions. Including Robert Owen on an everyday object such as a banknote will remind us of past struggles and help to focus attention on modern working conditions and the continuing need to tackle the social evils of poverty, inequality and repression. One of the criteria by which New Lanark achieved world heritage status was the international cultural influence of Owen's campaign for a better and fairer society. I encourage people to visit New Lanark. I again congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate and wish the co-op movement and the campaign every success.

Does the member think that that is always wise, particularly in the case of breastfeeding mothers?

I welcome the minister's response. It is important for people who have Duchenne to get as much exercise as possible, and an ideal and enjoyable way of getting exercise is through hydrotherapy. There does not seem to be provision for hydrotherapy in Lanarkshire. Are there plans to ensure that everyone in Scotland who has Duchenne can get access to hydrotherapy?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to protect education funding. (S3O-10601)

I point out to the minister that the underfunded council tax freeze does not help. Does he support the Educational Institute of Scotland's why must our children pay? campaign, which many parents in my constituency support because they are worried about cuts in education services? Does he accept that they are also angered by the broken Scottish National Party promise to reduce class sizes, the massive reduction in teacher numbers and the Government's mishandling of the implementation  of the curriculum for excellence? Will he now apologise for those broken promises and commit to changing his party's approach to education?

Many of my constituents go to local colleges in order to access higher education institutions such as Glasgow Caledonian University, where a rally against cuts was held yesterday. Does the cabinet secretary believe that it is a good use of education funding for GCU bosses to spend over £1 million on a campus in London while planning major cuts to funding in Scotland, meaning further job losses and a poorer standard of education?

Will the cabinet secretary accept an intervention?

Does Robin Harper share my concern that such projects might suffer from the underfunded council tax freeze?

Like other members, I welcome today's debate on this important environmental issue. It is unfortunate that, with less than a year to go until the Scottish National Party finishes its term of office, we are still waiting on the waste plan. In any Government waste strategy, environmental justice must be paramount. Worryingly, research has shown that more deprived communities bear a disproportionate burden of negative environmental impacts, such as industrial pollution. On 24 January 2008, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment told the Parliament:  "the Scottish people voted for a Parliament that would improve our environment".— [ Official Report , 24 January 2008; c 5491.]  I hope that the cabinet secretary will acknowledge that the idea of "environment" means more to people than simply a global view of carbon reduction targets. Under the Scottish Government's zero waste strategy, people's local environments and communities should not be sacrificed for the purposes of meeting global environmental targets. It is essential, in pursuance of perfectly laudable aims on waste reduction, that recycling centres and new waste disposal plants are not situated in built-up residential areas, where associated pollution could cause a disproportionate burden in the form of poor air quality, increased traffic and noise nuisance. That is particularly important in areas such as mine that have suffered from their industrial past. The cabinet secretary will be aware that I wrote to him in September about the concerns of thousands of my constituents in relation to an application by Shore Energy to build a pyrolysis incinerator in Coatbridge. My constituents think that the construction and operation of that private business venture would have a negative impact on quality of life for the many families who live in the large residential areas that are adjacent to the proposed site—and for families throughout Coatbridge. The Coatbridge area has sufficient waste reduction facilities, as Michael McMahon said, and has suffered from landfill sites over the years. I do not intend to stand by and allow my constituency to become the waste capital of Scotland. Coatbridge cannot be the dumping ground for everyone else's waste. Maggie Proctor, one of the protesters, said at a public meeting: "We cannot, and will not, accept that this incinerator is necessary for Monklands." She went on to say of the company: "Their only risk is financial, they are asking us to risk so much more." In response to a question that I asked in the Parliament, the cabinet secretary said that North Lanarkshire Council "has already passed the 2010 recycling target and has achieved a commendable rate of 41 per cent. It is clear that the member's area is making substantial progress and we should pay tribute to it for doing so."—[ Official Report , 7 January 2010; c 22541.] Particularly given that the council is meeting its targets, it would be unfair, environmentally unjust and completely unacceptable to impose a pyrolysis plant on my constituents. I am happy to say that North Lanarkshire Council has rejected the planning application for the plant. It would be a bad day for democracy if  the clear wishes of thousands of my constituents and the considered opinion of the local authority were overturned following an appeal by a single private company. I welcome the amendment in Elaine Murray's name. Local authorities need more assistance in meeting targets, and I am pleased that North Lanarkshire Council has surpassed its targets for this year. I understand that Government faces a major challenge in meeting the zero waste targets and I question whether meeting them can best be achieved by leaving waste management in the hands of private companies, whose overriding concern is the maximisation of profit and who depend on volumes of waste to make money—that is ironic. If the Government is serious about improving the environment on a local as well as global scale, serious consideration must be given to the direct funding and building of recycling and waste facilities in a not-for-profit way. That is important in relation to an untested process such as pyrolysis, the pollutant effects of which are disputed. The process could be dangerous to health, to our environment and to our children's wellbeing. I tried to make the point earlier that if we had not-for-profit arrangements the energy that was produced could be used for the benefit of communities rather than for the profit of privateers. The Scottish Government must ensure that no single area is burdened with a disproportionate number of waste management facilities. Concern for the planet, the local environment and our children's future should be the motivating factors for any Government in implementing the zero waste strategy. The issue should not be left to privateers in their pursuit of profit.

Will the member give way?

I am simply keen to hear the cabinet secretary's comments about using energy from waste to benefit communities.

Does the member agree that it might be a good idea to renationalise the railways?

Would the member consider speaking to the people who do the jobs—the guards and train drivers and others who work on the railways—to ask their opinions on the safest method?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I pay tribute to the many members of the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers who are in the gallery today and who work hard in various jobs to help keep Scotland moving. This debate is about the current dispute involving guards, but it could be about any section of the workforce, as it goes to the heart of collective bargaining and industrial relations. I thank members who signed my motion, and I am pleased that one Scottish National Party backbencher did so as well. My constituency interest concerns the Airdrie to Bathgate line, which will provide a new service between Coatbridge and Edinburgh. However, that must not be a second-class service and safety must come first on that line. It was, therefore, a shock to discover that the service might be run as a driver-only operation. That proposal has resulted in industrial action by the RMT, which has mounted a campaign to keep the guards on our trains, and has taken action over several days. No worker wants to go on strike, to lose pay, to stand on picket lines and to fight with their employers, but sometimes people have no choice other than to withdraw their labour. The strike was  supported by a massive majority of the union, and shows the strength of feeling about standing up for safety and putting passengers before profits. The last thing that those union members need to find out is that their action could be undermined by the Scottish Government using public money to bail out the bosses—a company that made £18 million in profit last year. What is indemnification? There is a clause in railway franchises that allows train companies to make claims on taxpayers' money to bail them out in the event of strike action. In response to a question by my colleague, Charlie Gordon, last November, on whether the Scottish Government intended to indemnify the ScotRail franchisee, Stewart Stevenson stated that the clause was "drawn up" by the previous Administration. Before we go any further, I must dispel that SNP myth. It is not true. That clause was not drawn up by the previous Administration; it was inherited when the franchise was drawn up in October 2005. However, when the SNP Administration extended the franchise without retendering and without any discussions with stakeholders, it chose to keep that clause in the franchise, even though it was in its power to remove it. Scottish Labour is committed to removing it when we win the election—sorry, if we win the election—next year. It is important not only to get the history of the clause right, but to examine how it might be used. In a letter to the Scottish Trades Union Congress in May 2006, the then Minister for Transport and Telecommunications, Tavish Scott, said that one of the key principles in assessing the franchisee's behaviour would be "adherence to the principles of collective bargaining", and he gave an assurance that, before a decision was reached on any requests for indemnification, all parties with interests would be consulted. In the current dispute, First ScotRail has not adhered to the principles of collective bargaining and has ignored an existing agreement. The RMT has been given clear legal advice that the 2001 agreement that there would be no further extension of DOO transferred to First ScotRail when it took over the franchise from National Express. That was explicitly confirmed in a letter dated 9 November 2004, in which the then managing director, Mary Dickson, stated: "I can give you an assurance firstly that First ScotRail will not, during the current franchise, be removing Conductors from any of the services on which they are now present." I hope that the minister will comment on First ScotRail's reneging on that agreement. The most important point today, however, is not whether the outrageous union-bashing indemnification clause should exist in Government contracts—clearly it should not, and I hope that we  will hear some cross-party consensus on that today—and it is not even whether the clause should be enacted, as I am hopeful that this debate will result in all MSPs agreeing that Scottish taxpayers should not be paying one penny to First ScotRail for this dispute; it is that the very existence of the clause has incentivised First ScotRail to provoke a dispute with the RMT. That shocking fact was uncovered following the release of correspondence following my request at First Minister's questions in February. We now know that there was clear collusion between Transport Scotland and First ScotRail, despite the existence of a collective bargaining agreement. A letter sent to Transport Scotland by First ScotRail on 26 February 2009—a year before the dispute began—says: "As our Franchise ends in 2014 we think it unlikely we would be able to recover the costs of strike action during our Franchise and would if left to decide alone probably avoid such costs by adopting Conductor operation ... Should you decide ... to require us to use DOO, we will obviously need to discuss how any losses we incur can be recovered." In the response to that letter, dated 22 May 2009, Transport Scotland confirmed that in the Airdrie to Bathgate service "these services should be introduced using the DOO method". It went on to confirm the possibility of a bail-out, based on the reasonableness test. If the clause did not exist, and if ScotRail did not think that it could get its money back, it would have retained conductor operation and there would be no dispute. Let us remind ourselves that ScotRail said that it would "if left to decide alone probably avoid such costs by adopting Conductor operation". When Alex Salmond said to me: "We continue to urge the RMT and ScotRail to resolve an unnecessary dispute"— [ Official Report , 25 February 2010; c 24034.]  his Government agency had already colluded in provoking the strike. When Stewart Stevenson was meeting the RMT, the decision had already been made. Serious questions now arise about the governance of Transport Scotland, including the whole issue of extending the franchise without full, open and transparent consultation and publication of all information. When I asked recently whether the Scottish Government would meet the cost of training strike breakers, the answer was that  "no agreement has been made to pay such costs".— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 23 April 2010; S3W-32872.]  That is welcome, since a letter dated 22 January 2010 was sent by ScotRail to Transport Scotland outlining the costs involved in covering the jobs of striking workers. It said: "We are prepared to cap the cost at £300,000 and take the risk above this level. I shall be grateful if you will confirm that you accept this is a reasonable project cost and indicate how you wish us to recover it?" I hope the minister will tell us that these privateers will not be recovering £300,000 of strike-breaking funding from the Scottish taxpayers, because that is not reasonable. I doubt whether the Scottish people would be happy to discover that the Scottish National Party was championing state-backed union bashing. The RMT is simply asking that existing agreements be honoured. It is a reasonable request and one that accords with good industrial relations. Will the minister commit to removing the indemnification clause, as Labour will? Will he assure us that no public money payments will be made to the franchisee for lost revenue or strike breakers? Will he reassure the RMT that new stock will not designed for DOO and that existing agreements will be adhered to? The minister must urgently get around the table with all those involved to ensure that existing agreements are honoured, and work in an open and honest way with the RMT to end this dispute.

I am pleased to contribute to a debate on such an important subject. The living wage is not a new idea and the achievement of a living wage has been a campaign in the Labour movement for nearly 100 years. The Independent Labour Party first debated the living wage programme in 1924, and adopted it two years later at its annual conference. Even so, there was considerable debate about it among socialists at the time. One major argument in the ILP was that a living wage was unachievable in a capitalist society. James Maxton made the point that while the ILP wanted socialism, the workers wanted a living wage, and the fact that capitalism could not provide it was a big propaganda point against capitalism. As Johann Lamont said, the trade unions inside the Labour Party were concerned that it might interfere with free collective bargaining. However, an accommodation was reached. The ILP's living wage policy applied to Government employees first, followed by workers in firms receiving Government money—another point that was made by Johann Lamont—and then, after two years, to all other industries. That is happening at the moment. In March last year, following London's action five years ago, Glasgow City Council adopted the living wage model for its staff. It is especially pertinent that we are debating the issue between international workers memorial day yesterday and May day at the weekend—a holiday that was given to workers by the late Michael Foot. Yesterday, I spoke at the third international workers memorial day service at Summerlee heritage park, a museum in my constituency, which was organised by North Lanarkshire Trades Union Council. There was also an event there in February to launch the NLTUC's campaign for a living wage of £7 an hour in Lanarkshire.  Since then, I have been trying to engage my constituents in supporting the campaign because it is important that they do so. To inform them about it, I included an article on the campaign in my most recent newsletter. However, I was badly let down by a company called Mailbox Nationwide Ltd, and my newsletters have not been delivered to the vast majority of my constituents, which is extremely disappointing. The company has been blasé about it. Unfortunately, it means that my constituents do not have the appropriate information to help in the campaign to press the council on that important policy. The living wage campaign is about securing a decent pay packet that allows workers to access housing, pay their bills, feed and clothe their families, and have disposable income to spend on activities that better-off people take for granted. In February, Richard Leonard, writing in the Morning Star , pointed out that a wage that was set at the London rate of £7.60 an hour would lift 25 per cent of the entire workforce in North Lanarkshire above the breadline. Even if North Lanarkshire adopted the Glasgow rate of £7 an hour, the lowest paid fifth of all women workers would benefit. In a news release from the GMB union, Richard Leonard also made the point that part-time women workers living in the Coatbridge, Chryston and Bellshill UK Parliament constituency receive the poorest pay in Lanarkshire, with more than 60 per cent—nearly 5,000 women—on less than £8 an hour. It is a major equality issue; a living wage would have a dramatic impact on low-paid part-time women workers, and would help in the quest to close the unacceptable gender pay gap. There can be no doubt that Labour's minimum wage was a radical step in supporting workers. When it was introduced it raised the floor for the lowest paid 20th percentile in North Lanarkshire. Unfortunately, many employers simply use it as the rate for the job, and there are still too many working poor people in our society. I hope that North Lanarkshire Council heeds the call for the policy, as it would be fitting for the council to become one of the first to implement a living wage. The ILP championed the policy in the 1920s, and three of its socialist members were linked to Lanarkshire. Bargeddie was the childhood home of John Wheatley, Jennie Lee was first elected to Parliament as a Lanarkshire representative at the age of 24 and, of course, Keir Hardie was born in Lanarkshire. In Parliament in 1912—almost 100 years ago—Keir Hardie called for basic workers' rights, such as a maximum eight-hour working day and a minimum living wage that matched the cost of living. That is what we should now be pursuing.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The issue of volcanic ash is extremely important, so much so that surely the First Minister should have requested under the standing orders to make an emergency statement to Parliament this afternoon so that all members would have the opportunity to question him about the matter, rather than spending nearly five minutes of First Minister's questions making what he called a statement and eating into the only time during the week that members have to question him. For example, the lack of time meant that I could not question the First Minister on a current constituency issue that relates to the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers dispute. I hope that you will consider that and whether a request for a statement would have been more in order, Presiding Officer.

As we all know and have heard today, tourism is one of Scotland's largest business sectors and is a vital element in Scotland's social, economic, environmental and cultural wellbeing, with many areas depending on it for jobs and infrastructure. It is, therefore, concerning that the SNP Government has cut the tourism budget for the coming year. In promoting our tourism, it is important to ensure that the messages that attract visitors are not all about haggis, heather and Highland flings; that may be the point that the minister was making when he mentioned authenticity. Although we have great traditions such as bagpipes, whisky and beautiful scenery, we have much more to offer visitors from aboard and, crucially, folks staying at home. The internal tourism market must be encouraged, to ensure that Scots are knowledgeable about the facilities that are on offer on their doorstep. We have tried to do that in today's debate, with constituency members mentioning attractions in their constituencies. I will be no different. I do not imagine that Coatbridge immediately springs to mind as a tourist destination for the majority of the people in the chamber or the wider public, although the Costa Coatbridge has a  certain ring to it; there is a beach at Drumpellier Loch, if anyone wants to try it out. However, I want to make a serious point about the need to widen our attraction to visitors, both internal and from abroad. Of course we should use our areas of breathtaking beauty, such as the Highlands and the Borders, to attract visitors.

Strangely enough, I am about to come to that point. Not all of the time, effort and resources that are available for tourism should be concentrated in areas such as the Highlands. Our ex-industrial areas have much to offer tourists. Attracting tourism can help to create jobs and increase the prosperity of more deprived areas. Coatbridge is home to excellent facilities. I argue—against Joe FitzPatrick—that Summerlee heritage park is Scotland's top industrial museum. Drumpellier park and loch has great play areas and provision for other activities, such as water sports and golf. There is also the time capsule swimming centre and leisure complex, which is undergoing a renovation to make it even better. Summerlee is known as Scotland's noisiest museum. It was opened in the 1980s by Monklands District Council and has grown in popularity at a steady pace, along with its facilities. Recently it underwent a major renovation, with assistance from funding sources such as North Lanarkshire Council, the lottery and friends of Summerlee. The history of the Monklands area is closely linked with the industrial revolution. It is appropriate that the museum is located in Coatbridge, which was once known as Scotland's iron burgh. It is situated on the site of the ironworks; the remains of the blast furnace and other buildings can be seen from the view pod and parapet in the main exhibition hall, which also houses interactive displays of social and industrial heritage and contains a cafe. There is a reconstruction of a drift mine, where visitors can safely experience the working conditions of miners and hear about mining from trained guides. Adjacent to that are miners rows with renovated interiors dating from the 1840s to the 1960s, which show the changing living conditions over that period of 120 years. The highlight of Summerlee for visitors, I would say, is taking a ride on Scotland's only working electric trams, which are kept operational by volunteers. The heritage park has a fantastic children's play area, and it hosts a number of events during holidays. There is no entrance fee.  In a comment on the VisitLanarkshire website, a Diane Smith from Glasgow wrote: "My kids and I had a great time at Summerlee. In particular, the tram rides and guided trip down the coal mine were the real highlights. A great day and best of all it was free!!"

I do not think that I have time, I am afraid. Today is St Patrick's day—in case anyone had not noticed from the Parliament's canteen—and much of the industrial heritage that is displayed at Summerlee involves Irish immigrants, in particular people fleeing the potato famine. According to the 1851 census, the Irish-born population of Scotland was 7.2 per cent; the Irish-born population of Coatbridge was nearly 36 per cent—and those figures did not include offspring. It would be remiss of me, in this tourism debate, to fail to extend an invite to everybody to come to Coatbridge, where the eighth annual St Patrick's day festival will be taking place on Saturday, with about 15,000 people expected to attend from Scotland and abroad. It draws thousands of visitors to the town, it involves many school pupils and it gives local business a welcome boost. This year it is being opened by television presenter, singer and former pupil of St Ambrose high school, Michelle McManus. The festival has grown over the years from being a day festival to encompassing more than a week of events. It is organised by a group of committed local people to celebrate the Irish heritage of Coatbridge. The festival programme—I have a copy here—outlines all the events and provides information. Anyone who wants a loan of it can come and see me after the debate. The festival has sponsorship from local business and help from the council, and the organisers furiously fundraise all year round in order to put on the event. The minister spoke about various things being on the web. Last night I went on to VisitLanarkshire's website, and I was perturbed to find that the St Patrick's day festival in Coatbridge was not on it, despite being the eighth-largest St Patrick's day festival in the world. Happily, after I contacted VisitLanarkshire, the website was amended and the festival is now on it. Groups of committed citizens organising such events can massively boost visitor numbers to smaller towns and the Government should consider ways to help them. The Coatbridge group would certainly welcome assistance from tourism professionals in promoting their family fun day, and our tourism networks should be doing that.  I wanted to mention Spanish paradors—I lodged a motion about them that the minister can read—but I do not have time to talk more about them. I hope that the minister can reassure me that the resources that have been earmarked for tourism will be used more equitably and will help to highlight the facilities that are available at places such as Coatbridge, which have been somewhat marginalised under past tourism strategies, despite the best efforts of North Lanarkshire Council.

The debate is important and I join other members in supporting the implementation of the strategy. However, it is not possible to have a debate about tackling serious and organised crime without talking about the lack of progress on the new crime campus at Gartcosh in my constituency. Gartcosh is, as some members may know, the site of the former steelworks that was shut for no good reason when Margaret Thatcher wreaked devastation on Scottish industry, the trade unions and working-class communities. Gartcosh has been a sad monument to that destruction since its closure in February 1986. I was therefore pleased to hear, under the previous Labour-led Executive, that the site would be developed and I was delighted to join Cathy Jamieson, the then justice minister, in early 2007 as she officially declared it the site for the new police services campus, which would house the SCDEA among other services. The community in Gartcosh and the surrounding areas was pleased, not only because the site was going to be developed to house such an important number of agencies, but because the development was due to bring 900 quality jobs to the area. Work was supposed to begin in 2008 and completion was scheduled for this year. However, following the election in May 2007 and the change of Government, it soon became apparent that work was not progressing. I asked a question in November of that year, to which I will return. I was approached by the community council and concerned constituents early the following year and I wrote to Kenny MacAskill in February 2008 to express their concerns. I was assured that the funding had been identified in the spending review and that the work was due to commence, but that the completion date had been pushed back to  2011. In July 2008, Scottish Enterprise assured me at a meeting about Gartcosh that the work would commence early in 2009, but little progress has been made since then. In November 2007, I asked the minister whether he was aware of the deep frustration that my constituents felt because of the delay. He responded: "The member can rest assured that we will act expeditiously and efficiently."— [ Official Report , 29 November 2007; c 3935.]  I do not think that the new proposed opening date of 2012 is either expeditious or efficient and I know that the community in Gartcosh will not think so either. Jim Diamond of the community council recently said of the delays: "This is having a detrimental effect on our community." Obviously, I have a constituency interest in seeing the campus opened, but aside from that, why is it important? Last year, in talking about bringing together key staff at Gartcosh, Kenny MacAskill said: "This sends out a strong message to the criminal gangs that we will use every means at our disposal to protect our communities from the threat they pose." What is the threat? As we heard, drug smuggling is one of the main activities, but serious and organised crime also involves guns, money laundering, fraud, counterfeit goods, piracy, prostitution and people trafficking. It infiltrates our communities and ruins lives. It instils fear and fuels other crimes, and it is not victimless. In addition to the obvious victims such as drug addicts and their families, prostituted women and people who are harmed by faulty goods or poisonous alcohol, there are the victims of the car crime, mugging, burglary and so on that come with such crime. It is about money, greed and power. The criminals who are involved in it use extreme violence, intimidation and corruption to protect and sustain their lucrative criminal enterprises. We need to get that message out more widely. I agree with the Government on that point and its aim to do that. The beginning of the week, 8 March, was international women's day, and trafficking is a major issue of violence against women. According to Stop the Traffik, the trafficking of people is hugely profitable. It generates billions of pounds a year in profit and is second only to the trafficking of drugs. Much of it, of course, involves the enslavement of women into prostitution. This week was also freedom week, during which young people have been encouraged to talk about trafficking and what we can do to help stop it. Serious and organised crime needs halted for many reasons, not least of which is the damage that it does to the people who are bought and sold  in to modern-day slavery. It also threatens everybody's safety, destroys lives and the social fabric of communities and harms the legitimate economy. The SOCA website states: "The scale, scope and sophistication of serious organised crime in the 21st century demand an equally sophisticated and ambitious response from government to tackle it." In the new strategy, the section on detection mentions boosting capacity, improving co-ordination and providing better intelligence. The facility at Gartcosh must surely be an integral part of that. Perhaps my frustration at the delay—and the frustration of my constituents, local councillor Joe Shaw and Tom Clarke MP—will be more understandable now that it has been set in the context of today's debate. We are all scunnered by the delay. We are angry at the lack of concrete information and fed up with the Government's procrastination. I hoped that today, at long last, the minister would be honest with us and commit to a date for the opening of the crime campus, but sadly that has not happened. Perhaps he will do that when he sums up. Only when he has done so will he be able to stand up in the chamber and convince us that he is unequivocally committed to delivering on the new strategy and to tackling serious and organised crime in Scotland. He must now prioritise Gartcosh or he will send out entirely the wrong message.

Richard Baker mentioned the strategic approach. Does he agree that it would have been easier to co-ordinate such an approach if the SNP Government had treated the construction of Gartcosh as a priority?

The cabinet secretary now says that the Gartcosh campus is due to open in 2012. Originally, it was 2010, then it was 2011 and now it is 2012. Will he guarantee that the campus will open in 2012?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take to assist in resolving the current dispute between First ScotRail and the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers. (S3F-2232)

The First Minister is right to mention safety, because the dispute is about putting passenger safety before private profit. The Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change has caused a breakdown in trust and has inflamed the dispute. Only last month, at the meeting that the First Minister mentioned, the minister told the unions that no final decision had been made, but yesterday we learned that Transport Scotland had already accepted First ScotRail's proposal to remove conductors from the Airdrie to Bathgate line. To show that his Government is not siding with the bosses against the workers, will the First Minister publish all the correspondence and documentation on the issue, meet the union, demand that First ScotRail honour the agreement to retain conductors, as guaranteed in a letter from First ScotRail to the RMT, and confirm that there will be no taxpayer subsidy to First ScotRail as a result of strike action? Will the First Minister now face up to his responsibility, as his Government reissued the contract to First ScotRail without tendering or changing it?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is there anything in the standing orders that allows you to remind the First Minister that his microphone is on and there is no need to shout hysterically at us week after week?

Will the minister comment on the alternatives, such as 218, and how they will be rolled out, so that we can reduce the number of women in Cornton Vale prison?

The subject of women in prison has been on the Parliament's radar since its inception. Johann Lamont first raised the matter as the gender reporter on the Equal Opportunities Committee in the first parliamentary session and I  pursued the issue when I was appointed to the role. However, I am sad to say that the number of women in prison keeps on increasing—as we have heard, it has doubled in the past decade. There have been a number of debates on the issue over the years, but the difference today is that, through the Equal Opportunities Committee's report, we approach it from an equality perspective rather than simply a justice one. We continue to imprison women at a growing rate despite the stated and restated policy intention of reducing the number of women in prison. We really need to take action to change that, as other members have pointed out. The reason why we need to change it is not simply to do with reducing crime or prison overcrowding or the economic arguments on the costs of prisoners; the main reason is a genuine understanding that the majority of women in prison in Scotland are themselves victims and that it is in the interests of no one—least of all their children—for them to be in custody. Statistics indicate that around half the children of female prisoners may end up in prison themselves and that 30 per cent suffer significant mental health problems. Such repercussions mean that we almost certainly create more suffering for future generations and add to society's ills while achieving little when we imprison women. I will concentrate my remarks on one or two specific issues in the committee's report and the Government's response. First, it is necessary to consider what the majority of women in Cornton Vale are there for and what their backgrounds are likely to be. There has been some mention of that, but it is important that we consider it. The majority of women in prison have chaotic lifestyles, as well as significant mental health and/or addiction problems. Tragically, many of them have been victims of childhood sexual abuse and physical or mental cruelty. Our evidence unveiled that 75 per cent of current prisoners were victims of physical or sexual abuse, 80 per cent had a mental illness and 98 per cent had addiction problems. Many women offend because of drug addiction and others take drugs to try to cope with their situation, which involves prostitution in many cases. Again and again we ask why vulnerable women who have been victims of abuse are in prison. Since devolution, the Government in Scotland—it does not matter which Government—has recognised that prostitution is on the spectrum of violence against women, so why are women being criminalised for that abuse and put in jail? I contend that the abusers—the pimps and the purchasers of women—should be in jail, not the victims. Perhaps then there would be a fall in  demand and a subsequent fall in the numbers of female prisoners. The report also addresses the requirement to disclose convictions for prostitution, which can make it difficult for women to escape from prostitution and move into employment. I note that the convener mentioned that. The committee has agreed to pursue the issue with the Government by an amendment to the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. The bit that is under dispute just now is the wording of that amendment, but I am sure that we will come to some conclusion on that. The committee was clear in its report that it did not find it acceptable for children's visits to be cancelled as a punishment for their mothers. Of course, more could and should be done to stop drugs circulating in Cornton Vale, but children should not be punished by having their visits cancelled if their mothers are caught taking drugs. It is not acceptable and does not seem to have been addressed in the Government's response, so I would be pleased if the cabinet secretary could mention that in his closing speech. The provision of parenting training also needs to be clarified. The Government's response states that Cornton Vale has a parenting programme, but Dr Nancy Loucks of Families Outside states that the course is no longer running because it is not being funded. We need some clarity on that. I turn now to remand, social inquiry reports and community sentences. We took evidence on the successful alternatives—in particular, the 218 centre in Glasgow, which the previous Executive initiated. That service's purpose is to offer an alternative to custody, to address the root causes of women's offending and to take an holistic approach to changing offending behaviour, so rolling it out makes absolute sense. I would be grateful for the cabinet secretary's comments on that. There is no doubt that more female-appropriate community sentences are needed to prevent women who are the principal carers of children from losing custody of their children. When women are on pre-trial remand, they are of course innocent in the eyes of the law. A significant proportion of those women do not subsequently receive a custodial sentence, so why is it necessary to imprison them, when they pose no threat in communities? When women are imprisoned, they can lose their jobs, homes and children, with all the consequential problems for them and for society. Members have said and the report says throughout that it was suggested that women deliberately commit offences in order to access services at Cornton Vale. That leads us to ask why such services are not available before women go  anywhere near prison. The cabinet secretary said: "The SPS does not exist to provide respite care. I am not being flippant when I say that if that is what you want to provide, it would be cheaper and better to do so at Stobo castle or similar than at Cornton Vale prison."—[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 23 June 2009; c 1161-2.] Evidence suggested that many women offenders—about 80 per cent—suffer from mental health problems. Social inquiry reports need to be addressed further, because sheriffs might not be receiving the necessary information. That could be a gap. Although many women offenders have mental health problems, the reports do not necessarily include a mental health assessment. That flaw needs to be addressed. Without the right information, sheriffs cannot make the right decisions. Baroness Corston said: "Sentencers do not like to hear this, but they have been giving women harsher sentences for less serious crimes."—[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 19 May 2009; c 1048.] That is a damning and worrying charge. The cabinet secretary made a similar comment on the subject, which I understand is being researched. Many women in Cornton Vale have been used, abused and abandoned and their children could meet the same fate. They do not need punishment for what are usually crimes of poverty, ill health and abuse; they need help, support and the chance to provide a better life for their families. It is unbelievable that the number of women in prison continues to rise. We need a commitment from the Government to take action and to work with the committee to implement our report's recommendations.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what consultation was undertaken with MSPs and their staff prior to the decision to introduce changes to the chamber ticketing procedures. (S3O-9559)

Is the SPCB aware that the reduction in the block ticket allocation will exclude schoolchildren from my constituency? We have always needed to take the full allocation of 25 tickets and to split the group into two. Will the SPCB agree to consult fully on all the implications before implementing such radical changes to a service for members in the future?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has had with North Lanarkshire Council during the budget process about provision of essential services. (S3O-9306)

Did the cabinet secretary discuss with COSLA the fact that the percentage share of the Scottish Government's budget that is allocated to local government has fallen from 34.7 per cent in 2006-07 under the Labour-led Administration to 33.9 per cent this year? Based on current allocations, the reduction means that North Lanarkshire will lose out to the tune of £17 million. Will the cabinet secretary increase the funding or justify the cut to my constituents who are resisting the closure of Gartsherrie primary school in Coatbridge?

I am not entirely convinced that the private sector will be able to respond in that way. However, I will look with interest at the options paper that recommendation 10 of the report seeks, if the minister decides to go down that road.

Like others, I welcome the report and commend Paddy Tomkins for his hard work on the issue. The report is comprehensive, so there are a number of points that could be made—and indeed have been made—in the debate. However, I will concentrate mainly on fire and rescue service issues. Once again, I commend firefighters for the work that they do on our behalf on a daily basis in Scotland. In recent months, we have had several debates on the fire service. In the one on 10 September, to  which I contributed, the Minister for Community Safety said of the Tomkins review: "It will be a key piece of work and, if the Parliament wishes to debate it after it has been published and perhaps after we have had an opportunity to consider it, it will be entirely appropriate that we do so."— [ Official Report , 10 September 2009; c 19484.]  The minister has kept that promise by bringing the issue to the chamber. I have no doubt that he is keen to hear members' views and consider them prior to responding officially to the report. I note that, following the publication of the report, the minister said that he would work "with partners in local government and the emergency services to apply the recommendations where appropriate." I trust that, before he makes up his mind about which recommendations to commit to implementing, how to implement them and what resources are required to deliver them, he will consider the responses from all the stakeholders, including, in particular, the FBU, and will work closely with them to iron out any areas of concern. On that point, will the FBU have a place on the water rescue working groups? Perhaps the minister will answer that in his closing speech. I want first to address a point that the FBU raised in its response on the register of water rescue capability. The union agrees that there should be such a register, but it states that if it is to be led by the fire and rescue service, it should come under the auspices of agreed structures, such as the ministerial advisory group, and should not be left to one organisation, such as the CFOA. That is not a criticism but a reflection that the CFOA represents six joint boards and two unitary authorities and therefore does not have the mechanisms to establish a national arrangement. It is not surprising that the review has concluded that there is no requirement for new legislation or wholesale change in current statutory arrangements or protocols, or indeed that the minister agrees with that, because we already have a duty that refers to flooding. I agree with the union that it would be practically impossible to establish a fire and rescue service water rescue resource, given that we have thousands of freshwater lochs, rivers and canals, as others have said. The minister might wish to consider the approach of informing water users where there is cover and where there is not, as happens with lifeguards on beaches, although we should take into consideration the point that Nigel Don made. In this month's edition of Firefighter —the trade union magazine of the year—the FBU outlines its campaign to give the fire and rescue service a statutory duty and the required resources to deal with flooding in England, following the  recommendation of the Pitt review. That is set out in an article entitled, "Why are we still waiting for the kit?" In the magazine, the union commends the situation in Scotland, where the fire and rescue service has a statutory duty to deal with flooding, but it goes on to note the lack of protective personal equipment and the need for more flood training for Scottish fire crews. It uses the familiar example of last November's images of firefighters wading waist-deep in water dressed in kit designed for fighting fires. A leaflet is being produced to outline that, too. Firefighters and the union are frustrated because it is nearly five years since the Parliament passed the Fire (Additional Function) (Scotland) Order 2005, which gave the fire service the statutory duty to respond to serious flooding. Concern has been expressed that the development of water rescue capabilities in those five years has been piecemeal and disjointed. That takes us back to governance and the lack of direction from the centre, which I and others highlighted in the previous debate that I mentioned. One of the union's main concerns has been firefighters being committed to water incidents without appropriate equipment and proper training. The union makes the point strongly that that practice is dangerous and breaches numerous health and safety guidelines. In the article in Firefighter , John Duffy, the FBU's Scottish regional secretary, says: "we continue to see firefighters trying their best with little training, without the proper tools and wearing completely the wrong protective equipment. It does beg the question of how serious some managers are about our safety." He was joined in his view by Roddy Robertson, the FBU's executive council member for Scotland, who said: "It is only a matter of time before we pay the ultimate price, as happened in Greater Manchester a number of years ago when we lost a firefighter who was not fully trained and who had entered water to attempt a rescue. This is a foreseeable occurrence and not an accident. If the service wants firefighters to carry out water rescue then train them and stop playing Russian roulette with their lives." The firefighter who lost his life was Paul Metcalf and I am sure that we all wish to express our condolences to his family. In its response to the review, the FBU says: "A simple rule of thumb for the observer is that a firefighter wearing structural firefighting kit has not been trained to carry out water rescue." That means that firefighters are being put in danger, which the union views as not only unacceptable but untenable. The union says that it  will have to take action to prevent that from occurring in the future. However, given the prospect that those concerns might finally be resolved satisfactorily with ministerial intervention following the review, the FBU is encouraged by most of the recommendations in the review and expects to be fully involved in progressing them. I would be grateful if the minister confirmed that involvement when he sums up. Other members have mentioned training, which is covered by recommendation 13. There is little doubt that national training would be of invaluable assistance in addressing some of the dangers of water rescue and is desperately needed. The Scottish Fire Services College is the obvious choice to co-ordinate water rescue training and, which is important, to act as a verifier for quality and assurance. In the September debate, I made the point that, if the fire and rescue service is to take on additional work in water rescue, additional resources will be required. Labour's amendment deals with that and I am pleased that the minister has said that he will support it. I presume that he will address that point in a bit more detail when he sums up. The minister will undoubtedly have to take an approach that is a mixture of education, individual responsibility and interagency co-operation, as others have said. It is particularly important to educate the public about water safety, as it is impracticable for the emergency services always to be available, given the thousands and thousands of pieces of water in Scotland. I could talk about several other issues, but I do not think that I have time to mention them. Could I mention them briefly, Presiding Officer?

Thank you. I have reservations about recommendation 10, which proposes using the private sector to provide equipment. I am interested in the minister's comments on that. I am not averse to achieving value for money for the public purse, but equipment needs to be available when it is needed and I am not convinced that the private sector will be the right people to respond to the need. If the minister accepts that recommendation, I will read the options paper with interest. Auditing equipment is important, as is not cutting fire resources to fund water rescue equipment—that would be unacceptable. Recommendation 12 concerns using police vehicles. That idea seems reasonable, but has the police service agreed to it? I am keen to hear the minister's comments on that.  The Parliament has acted through legislation to address the flooding rescue issue, but we need to sort out problems that have accompanied that. I expect the minister to involve the interested parties in his discussions before he decides on the way forward. It is crucial that he works closely with the FBU, because the proposals affect its members' conditions of service and because firefighters are in the front line—they provide a rescue service and save the lives of numerous Scots who are caught in dangerous water situations and they put themselves in mortal danger to do so. We must all hope that the review will result in a fully funded, rational, structured, vigorous, safe and secure means of providing appropriate water rescue competence in Scotland. I am pleased to support Labour's amendment and the Government's motion.

Does the member recognise the comment in the green paper that "Whatever the outcome of the consultation, we want to ensure that people receiving any of the relevant benefits at the time of reform would continue to receive an equivalent level of support and protection under a new and better care and support system"? Is the member suggesting that, if the decision is taken to end attendance allowance—although that is only subject to consultation, as Mr Doris said—people who currently receive it will cease to receive it?

Will the member take an intervention?

This is a strange debate to have on the very important issue of support for disabled people and the future of care. The topic is a green paper—it is not a firm proposal—that was subject to consultation last year, when anyone could have submitted a response. I was beginning to wonder whether anyone had read the green paper, so I was pleased that Bill Kidd was able to quote some bits of it. The Scottish National Party seems to suggest that the green paper is going to impose changes on devolved services, without any input from the Scottish Parliament. After 10 years of devolution, I doubt that anybody in the chamber would sit back and do nothing if there was any suggestion that Westminster intended to impose changes on devolved areas of policy, such as social care. However, the Government is not doing that.

Anyone could have responded to the consultation. In fact, we are interested to know whether the Scottish Government did so. Nothing will be imposed on this Parliament. Even the Tories, all these years on, are now big fans of devolution. Today, they certainly seem to be in coalition with the SNP on this issue. However, they are not averse to spinning scaremongering stories to suit their narrow political agenda for the general election. I have  here a copy of a letter from Andy Burnham to David Cameron, to address David Cameron's claim that the Government is going to cut disability benefits. Andy Burnham asked David Cameron to "withdraw your pernicious and misleading campaign, designed to prey on the fears of the most vulnerable in society." I hope that he does that.

I do not think that it is a fact. There are three options on the table, and the Government has said that it will discuss further any moves in that regard. The implications for this Parliament will be discussed with this Parliament. It is therefore simply wrong to say that the green paper is anything other than a discussion paper, so I am not clear what we are debating today and why we are debating it. The minister's opening remarks served to confuse the issue further, because he is wrong if he is indicating that it is a done deal. I hope that the minister is not being confused by some members with regard to the Personal Care at Home Bill, which will allow the UK Government to provide free personal care in the home for all people in England with the highest needs. It is a wee, one-clause bill that will end the postcode lottery for the most vulnerable in England. Surely the nationalists cannot object to that kind of improvement for people south of the border. It would be breathtakingly hypocritical if we attempted to interfere in legislation that is under the jurisdiction of Westminster and deny people a free care package that is already available here. It would be helpful if the debate was about clearing up misconceptions about attendance allowance in the green paper, but it is not, is it? The debate is about the SNP yet again using Parliament's time to snipe at Westminster. We need to know whether the Government submitted a response to the consultation. If it did, why is a copy of it not available at the back of the chamber? If it exists, why is it that the Scottish Parliament information centre could not find it when I asked about it? We would like to see it. Further, have ministers sought meetings with Westminster Government ministers to discuss specific proposals and explore whether in the longer term changes will be needed to devolved responsibilities? Capability Scotland has called on both the UK and Scottish Governments to reassure disabled  people who are worried about their benefits being stopped, because of the misinformation, scaremongering and hype on the issue. Capability Scotland has pointed out that the green paper sets out many different policy options and that we need to be clear about what the implications will be for disabled people in Scotland. It expects the UK and Scottish Governments to clarify that. It is clear that some of the concern arises from alarmist rumours. Due to that, Capability Scotland has felt it necessary to reassure people. I quote from its response: "We understand that the way the Green Paper has been reported on some websites may lead people to assume that after the consultation period ends, their disability benefits will stop. This is not the case. If you get Attendance Allowance at the moment, there will be no changes within, or at the end of, the consultation period. There is very little chance that we will see legislation on proposals to reform Attendance Allowance before the next general election and there will be transitional protection for current disability benefit recipients. This means that if a disability benefit is amended or phased out, existing recipients of that benefit retain their entitlement to it." It is important to make that point. If any changes are made, that will be the case. I would therefore expect any responsible devolved Government to address scaremongering, denounce it, give people the correct information, and not add fuel to the fire. Will the minister now commit to doing that, rather than panicking people by picking a fight with Westminster when there is no need for confrontation? Sensible discussion should be taking place. Of course people will be wary of change. I am always wary of what any Government—not just the SNP Government—is up to when it talks about change and modernisation. Sometimes that is because I look at policy with socialist eyes: the modernisation of public services can often be a euphemism for privatisation. However, any sensible person has to recognise that, much of the time, change is genuinely required to make services better and more fit for purpose. I am not sure how much time I have left, Presiding Officer.

Good.

In its response, the Equality and Human Rights Commission stated: "The Commission congratulates the Government for moving the agenda forward. The current system is unsustainable and is already failing thousands of the most marginalised and excluded members of society. Some fundamentally hard decisions need to be made to achieve  long-term solutions, and they can only be made through debate and consensus." I made that point earlier to our SNP colleagues. Those decisions should not be made through conflict, misinformation and scaremongering. Citizens Advice Scotland makes that point as well. I used its response earlier in an intervention. The SNP Government really has to stop sniping and start acting responsibly on the issue. I hope that it is listening to members' speeches and that it will take the opportunity that the green paper affords it to inspire a reasoned debate on care issues in Scotland. The reality is that many of the most marginalised and excluded members of our society are not benefiting from the current system. We have to change that, but we should do it through debate and consensus. Our objective must be to ensure that older and disabled people get good-quality care and support. That should be the most important issue that comes out of the debate and should be what we are all trying to achieve for people in Scotland. The scaremongering around the issue, whatever its source, really must stop.

I point out that it is also stated on page 104 of the Government's document: "We will work closely with all three devolved administrations to reach a shared view on how to ensure the best possible outcomes for all people in the UK." I hope that that reassures the member.

I am curious about whether SNP members are suggesting that no review of the system of care is required. If so, what would they say about the Citizens Advice response to the green paper? It said: "For many years adult social care services have been struggling to meet the demand that they face. As a result, many people with care and support needs are currently not receiving the services and financial support that they need." I have some of those people in my constituency.

Can Jackson Carlaw explain why he is referring to a policy when we are debating a green paper, in which various options are under consideration? Does he know something that we do not?

While supporting the games industry, we should also recognise some dangers. Is the minister aware that under-18s access violent 18-rated video games, which are sometimes bought for them by their parents? Will the minister liaise with the industry with a view to undertaking an awareness campaign to ensure that parents are advised of the possible effects of games on the psychological, emotional and social development of their children?

Does the minister agree that after spending all that money on nuclear weapons the thought that we would ever use them is quite horrendous?

I, too, congratulate Bill Kidd for securing the debate and for his support for the march, which I am happy to support, too. The march is a truly international endeavour and those who are organising it should be admired and commended by us all. They are doing it for all our futures and for the futures of our children. They want peace, justice and equality—those are the very principles and aspirations that the Labour Party was founded on and that is why I am a member. It is therefore, for me, a tragedy that under a Labour Government we have waged war several times over the past decade and are still fighting in Afghanistan. In Iraq, we are in a war that I have spoken against both in this chamber and outwith it, and it is currently in the spotlight again because of the Chilcot inquiry. As Linda Fabiani said, the main casualties of war are civilians. In Iraq, as in other wars, they are euphemistically described as  "collateral damage". In reality, they are ordinary people who are indiscriminately killed in a war that is not only of extremely dubious legality but is most certainly unnecessary and inhumane. Like the marchers, throughout history men and women have bravely tried to stop war and the obscene violence and inevitable rape, torture and slaughter of civilians that go with it. The majority of victims of armed conflict are women and children and, of course, rape is routinely used as a weapon of war. As the marchers identify, violence against women also exists outwith the realms of armed conflict. Kofi Annan described violence against women as "the most shameful human rights violation, and perhaps the most pervasive ... As long as it continues, we cannot claim to be making real progress towards equality, development and peace." Around the world, we need urgently to address the plight of female victims of violence. Legislation is not enough; we must create a consciousness that recognises that any form of violence against women is repulsive and totally unacceptable. I hope that the world peace march will help to show that violence against women in all its forms—I include prostitution and pornography—must end. We have heard this week of cuts in public sector pay, school closures and rising unemployment, yet billions of pounds are being spent on Iraq and Afghanistan and, of course, on nuclear weapons—all in a world in which millions of people die of malnutrition every year. During wars a great many people are, of course, killed, maimed or reduced to poverty, while a very few people are made rich men—it is usually men. In the aftermath of war, capitalism gains while the poor pay the price. I was thinking about this debate through the week and on Tuesday night I watched a BBC programme about Joan Baez. I tuned into the programme because I like her music and appreciate the power and influence of the protest songs that she sang, but the programme was also very informative from an anti-war perspective, which I had not expected. It was very interesting, because Joan Baez put herself in the front line to try to stop wars and she was frequently taken to prison as she tried to persuade young men to avoid the Vietnam draft. That takes courage and commitment. World peace might actually happen if more of us were like Joan Baez and the people on the march. However, in spite of Joan Baez's efforts, many of those young men flocked to Vietnam with the promise of glory and a dream of escaping poverty and unemployment. Of course, the idealistic notion of "serving your country" while being paid a decent  wage and learning a trade and so on remains one of the armed forces' most powerful recruiting tools. This week, Chilcot is exposing the shambles of Iraq and Obama is digging a deeper hole in Afghanistan. Surely history cannot repeat itself yet again through a war with Iran. We must be clear that that must not be allowed to happen. In the end, the victims of war are the poor, the powerless and the women and children. In the end, we are always left asking: what was it for? Who gained by it? What was the cost in human life? I will finish with the words of a song, not one by Joan Baez, although she has plenty that would be appropriate, but "The Green Fields of France": "And I can't help but wonder, oh Willie McBride Do all those who lie here know why they died? Did you really believe them when they told you the cause? Did you really believe that this war would end wars? Well the suffering, the sorrow, the glory, the shame The killing, the dying, it was all done in vain, Oh Willie McBride, it all happened again, And again, and again, and again, and again." Let us hope and pray that the march for peace can prevent further wars and abominations from happening again.

Given the cabinet secretary's response, can she tell the people of the Monklands area when they can expect substantial investment in Monklands general hospital to ensure its long-term future, given all the promises that the SNP made before the election?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will send a delegation to Cuba to build on Scotland-Cuba relations and Scottish interests in the region. (S3O-8603)

Does the minister know that an early-day motion at Westminster referring to the wish you were here postcard campaign and calling for a British ministerial visit to Cuba has attracted support from more than a third of MPs from across the political parties? Is he aware that the Cuban Government has already this year welcomed foreign ministerial visits from European Union countries such as Ireland and Spain? Does he agree that an official Scottish Government visit would not only be good for Scotland-Cuba relations in devolved areas such as education,  health and sport, but could lead the way for the rest of the United Kingdom? Perhaps he could discuss that with the Cuban ambassador on his visit on 9 December.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will respond to a request from the people's charter's Scottish organising committee to endorse the charter. (S3O-8446)

Given that some of the charter's aims chime with the Government's aims, does the cabinet secretary agree that it would be logical for the Government to support the charter, which simply sets out a programme for challenging the economic crisis and delivering a fairer society, to put people first? Will he attend the people's charter event in the Parliament on 25 November? That would allow him to learn more about the charter from the trade unions and the Scottish organising committee.

I accept Nanette Milne's point, but does she agree that old industrial areas that  were the workhorses of the industrial revolution have greater need in the process?

Like other members, I am pleased to take part in the debate. I say that not only as an MSP with a central belt constituency but as a member of a party that has traditionally claimed ownership of the whole idea behind the debate. After all, Scottish Labour has long advocated the establishment of a network of green corridors covering central Scotland. The environment in which we live is important to our personal health and wellbeing and its quality is crucial to the health, wellbeing and prosperity of our communities. The founders of the central Scotland green network have given the Government an opportunity to work with local authorities and other agencies to strengthen efforts to extend and protect green spaces throughout the central belt and to turn ambitious plans into reality. The minister has said as much  and I acknowledge that she is taking things forward in a series of meetings. However, I make a plea for priority to be given to old industrial towns and areas of high deprivation where, as a member has already pointed out, vacant and derelict land remains a detrimental legacy of our industrial past. Regeneration and restoration are necessary for aesthetic purposes, the feel-good factor and, more important, the attraction of much-needed investment. I am pleased to say that, in my Coatbridge and Chryston constituency, a number of landmarks have grown out of regeneration, developed and maintained thanks to North Lanarkshire Council's commitment and effort. I was heartened to note that in a list of attractions on its website the Central Scotland Forest Trust identifies a few of those areas: Glenboig nature park, North Calder heritage trail, Drumpellier country park and Summerlee heritage centre. It will be very helpful when they are all joined up by the green network. Coatbridge has an undeniable industrial heritage that the townspeople are rightly proud of, and North Lanarkshire Council has tried to enhance and celebrate that legacy through ventures such as the industrial museum at Summerlee, which was built on derelict ground. Visitors to the museum can see for themselves the excellent way in which it has managed to preserve and interpret the history not only of the local iron, steel, coal and engineering industries but of the people and communities that depended on them for a living. The reclamation of a derelict industrial area in that way not only provides a window into our rich industrial and working-class heritage but generates revenue for the local economy by bringing visitors into the town. I should also point out that it is a first-class visitor attraction that Coatbridge and indeed the whole of Scotland should be proud of. The museum also has Scotland's only working trams—[ Laughter. ]

Indeed. It also provides good recreational space in the middle of the town. Moreover, Drumpellier country park has already benefited from Forestry Commission investment to improve wildlife habitats and public access and create new paths to enhance community life. We cannot understate the importance of urban green spaces in communities and their potential impact on quality of life. I note that in its briefing the Scottish Wildlife Trust says: "A 10% increase in available greenspace reduces health complaints to a level equivalent to a reduction in 5 years of age." Like many members, I have over the years argued for an end to the erosion of our green spaces,  because I realise that further attrition will undoubtedly be detrimental to communities' sustainability and wellbeing. There is growing recognition of the built environment's impact on our health and wellbeing, and I have spoken previously about the link between obesity and the lack of green spaces. There is little doubt that we can draw a similar parallel with the physical environment's impact on our mental health, and providing a proper network of green areas will, for example, assist general practitioners who might want to prescribe walking as a treatment for certain patients. Good paths will certainly help in that respect. Other members have said that local people are a valuable resource; I believe that they are the most valuable when it comes to improving our communities. After all, they are the experts and should be fully involved in any decisions that affect the areas in which they live. I do not think that any speaker has made this point yet, but I believe that a gendered analysis should be carried out for and incorporated in any regeneration and restoration policy that might be formulated. Men and women experience their communities differently; they have different needs and use their local environment in different ways. I am glad that Alex Neil is responding to the debate, because this important issue comes within his remit. Of course, with our commitment to mainstreaming, it should come within all our remits. Engagement and co-operation involving the network organisations, the Government, local authorities and community groups will ensure that the network is cognisant of local people's needs and will help to move the network forward by getting councils, which are fundamental to its success, on board. It is good that Coatbridge was recognised during this year's beautiful Scotland awards. That recognition gave the area a welcome boost and built on the many developments that I have argued for over the years and which our community now enjoys. The minister mentioned meetings with British Waterways. I, too, have had meetings with British Waterways and have urged it to enhance the Monkland canal basin and walkways. It is now doing that, and it has ambitious plans for the future. The long-awaited painting of our railway bridges has also had a positive impact on the quality of life of people in the constituency. It would be difficult for me to cite tangible evidence that my area has lost out on investment and business opportunities because of derelict industrial space, but as the constituency member for more than 10 years, I am aware that first impressions can be important and long lasting and that they can have an effect. There is still a lot of  unsightly derelict land in my constituency. Further regeneration is needed to enhance Coatbridge and therefore residents' impression of the area. I am running out of time, but I want to make a particular point. In Havana city in Cuba, the community has been allowed to take over pieces of derelict land—as happens with allotments—on which an organoponics system is used to grow food. Perhaps ministers will consider that approach. When the minister sums up, will he tell us whether the network will lead to greater protection for existing green spaces? I welcome the network, but urge co-operation and the putting in place of a proper funding package to support the organisations that are involved in delivering such a welcome and ambitious project.

Is the member, like me, disturbed at the number of young children who play the game that he has mentioned, and does he agree that it would be far better for their health and wellbeing if they were out accessing green spaces?

Should we also be asking questions about companies that clear land without gaining permission, and take forests, woods and trees away?

Can the minister tell me whether British Waterways is involved in the CSGN, given its network of canals in the central belt?

Does the minister accept that the way in which the scheme has been introduced has given rise to unfair anomalies? While we continue to debate the issue, some families throughout Scotland continue to care for children in difficult circumstances and without the full support,  including the holistic care package and the allowance, that they need and deserve.

I, too, congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing the debate—and for playing the pipes. I admit that I am not a piper myself, but I have a  personal interest in the debate, as both my husband and my son play. There is a great deal of uncertainty about the origin of the bagpipes. I have looked into it, and it seems that they have existed in one form or another for as long as records have existed. In Scotland, they are thought to date back to about 100 AD. Over the centuries, they have inspired Scottish warriors and terrified their enemies. After Culloden, the pipes were outlawed and much of the music was lost, because the tunes were not written down. The ban was lifted in the 1800s. Although they are not unique to Scotland, bagpipes are now synonymous with our country and our culture. The Scottish bagpipes are unique, however, in having three drones and for being used for military music by Scottish regiments. As Stuart McMillan outlined, the pipes are popular among people in occupations such as the police. As he said, Strathclyde Police's band is world renowned, and came fourth in the world championships in Glasgow this year. It has won on previous occasions. Stuart McMillan made an excellent case for supporting the band, so I take this opportunity to join him in his call for a rethink of the planned cuts. We can all understand how the pipe band seems like an easy place to make budget savings but, as Stuart did, I argue that what the band offers in publicity, profile and heritage—not only for Strathclyde Police but for all the Scottish forces—far outweighs the small cost. I, too, lodged a motion about the world championships, and I attended the event at Glasgow Green. I congratulate all the bands that participated in that excellent event. The lord provost, Bob Winter, remarked that Glasgow was proud to be hosting the event once again, and that it has become a cultural highlight of the council's calendar. It was particularly significant this year, as Glasgow became a UNESCO city of music—under the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization—and the championships were tied in with that. I have one small suggestion about the venue of Glasgow Green, which is that more random seating placed throughout the park would improve the experience for some visitors. The highlight of my day was cheering for North Lanarkshire schools pipe band which, just five years after its formation, finished second in the novice juvenile section of the world championships. That talented group of young high school musicians faced off competition from 22 other bands across two heats, and were just pipped at the post by George Watson's College. I have to admit that my son Vann is a piper in the band, but he was not quite at competition level on the day of the world championships, so he was not in the competition. However, he did play in the  final Highland games of the season at Pitlochry, where the North Lanarkshire schools pipe band came first. I come back to a point that Jamie McGrigor made about school bands. The North Lanarkshire schools pipe band was formed in partnership with the world-renowned House of Edgar Shotts and Dykehead pipe band and its pipe major, Robert Mathieson. The band rehearses on Wednesdays and Fridays at Coatbridge high school. Band members wear their own Spirit of North Lanarkshire tartan and they get personal tuition bi-weekly from Pipe Major Ross Cowan and support from the head of instrumental teaching, Jim Park. Councillor Jim McCabe, who is the leader of North Lanarkshire Council, also takes a personal interest in the band. He is proud of their achievements and was responsible for the establishment of the band. He ensures that funding is available for the kind of tutoring that Jamie McGrigor mentioned. However, my son and other young people in Monklands might not have developed an interest in piping in the first place if it were not for the Airdrie Bagpipe Learning Centre in my colleague Karen Whitefield's constituency. It was set up by Pipe Major Jim Maitland, who is in his late 70s and teaches the pipes for no personal monetary gain but for the love of piping. Unfortunately, it has proved to be impossible to access any assistance to support the learning centre. Funding for it would help to buy much-needed equipment for youngsters who do not have the resources to buy it. I want to use the debate not only to support Stuart McMillan's position on Strathclyde Police pipe band, which is at the top level of piping, but to make a plea for supporting investment in grass-roots piping organisations such as Airdrie Bagpipe Learning Centre, because they feed in to the upper echelons. These volunteer organisations help youngsters in working-class areas, such as my constituency, to gain a love of the pipes from an early age, and give older learners a similar opportunity. I commend those organisations: they should be supported. I again congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing the debate and I hope that it makes a difference to the future success of Strathclyde Police pipe band.

Will the minister consider re-establishing the link between fire service budgets and the number of uniformed posts, as I asked earlier?

Does the member agree that given the thousands of areas of water throughout Scotland, he describes a complicated issue? If the fire and rescue services are to take on additional work in that regard, it is to be hoped that the review's recommendations attract much more additional funding.

It would be hard to criticise the Scottish Government's motion or the minister's sincere speech. However, I am sure the minister agrees that there are issues that need to be explored during the debate. Any debate on the fire and rescue service is welcome, because it gives us the chance to recognise and appreciate—as members have done today—the job that our firefighters do on society's behalf. Those men and women risk their lives daily to save the lives of others, and we are all indebted to them for the exceptional service that they provide in our communities. This year in Scotland, we tragically lost a brave firefighter, Ewan Williamson, and, as other members have done, I express my condolences to his family and his comrades. Angela Constance pointed out that in the past two years, there have been four fatalities in the line of duty, whereas there were two in the previous 25 years. One death is one too many, but that increase is deeply worrying and indicates that something must be wrong. Ken Ross of the FBU says that deaths in the line of duty touch everyone who works in the fire service, and we should remember the debt that we owe firefighters when we seek to reorganise the service in any way. Like other members, I have seen what firefighters can face in the local area when they are trying to carry out their jobs. They are often  attacked in our communities. There was a major incident a few years ago in Carnbroe in my constituency, and more recently there was an incident in Strathclyde in which bottles and objects were thrown at firefighters from an upper storey of a tower block. Given firefighters' contribution to the safety and security of our communities, it was sad to see them having to strike over pay and conditions in 2002. The FBU has wide-ranging political interests including union learning initiatives and its support for the Cuba solidarity campaign and, topically, the people's charter. If we look at fire brigades' websites, we see the diversity of what they do, for example planning for a swine flu pandemic, providing fire reach training for young people and planning for major incidents such as the Glasgow airport attack. However, their priority has to be intervention and fighting fires. To do that, the service needs more, not fewer, front-line, operational firefighters. The Parliament has taken action in the past to try to address some of the issues that face fire and rescue services. As others have said, the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 was intended to improve the service and was put in place with the best motives. Indeed, the review of the framework is required by that very act. Unfortunately, it seems that in some areas new arrangements have left front-line firefighters overstretched and underresourced, and the review needs to address that. In recent years, the number of fire deaths and injuries to firefighters and members of the public has increased, training and competency levels have decreased, front-line jobs have been lost, fire stations have been downgraded or closed, and response times have increased. Those are all worrying trends. Non-uniformed posts in fire and rescue authorities are necessary, but there seems to have been a vast increase in the number of such posts with no corresponding increase in front-line uniformed posts. Indeed, about 220 front-line posts have gone. Before 2005, if an FRA altered its number of front-line posts, that had a commensurate effect on its allocated budget, which went either up or down. Since then, it has been possible to decrease the number of uniformed posts with no effect on the budget. In that way, unfortunately, savings can be made. Given that, in the long run, it is not a saving in terms of safety to have fewer front-line posts, will the minister consider re-establishing the budget link, obviously in the spirit of partnership with COSLA? I hope he will answer that at the end of the debate. One reason that is given for cutting front-line personnel is the effectiveness of community fire  safety initiatives, but even if they are successful in prevention, that does not justify a decrease in intervention levels for the fires that continue to occur. Does the minister have any plans to review or assess the effectiveness of community fire safety initiatives? As others have said, the FBU believes that many problems in the service could be addressed through governance. Like Bill Butler, I am pleased to note that the minister says that he has an open mind on the matter. The FBU strongly believes that local flexibility must be set within national parameters that ensure that there is Scotland-wide consistency. The minister must seriously consider creating a central Scottish-level structure to oversee the eight FRAs. Perhaps the ministerial advisory group could have that role, but a forum below that level is also needed. There should be a body that can establish common standards with which FRAs are required to comply, and FRAs should be measured against those standards in a robust inspection regime. It is difficult to see how national resilience can be secured without harmonisation of policies, procedures, strategies and equipment. I reiterate that joint procurement by the FRAs would lead to significant savings and best value and would allow consistency in relation to appliances and equipment throughout Scotland. That brings me to the somewhat contentious issue of the concordat. I do not think that a commitment not to micromanage has to extend to providing revenue funding on a non-ring-fenced basis. That does not necessarily follow. Of course FRAs should manage the day-to-day running of the services that they provide in a local context and with local flexibility, but they did that before the concordat. Scottish ministers have legal obligations, which they cannot offload, on matters such as national resilience. I believe that ring fencing of capital and revenue funding for the fire and rescue service is required in order to ensure appropriate funding levels. I was a wee bit concerned by the minister's comment that there will be competition in local authorities with the likes of education, housing and so on. That is worrying. I conclude by quoting Strathclyde Fire and Rescue's motto, which is: "Making our communities safe places to live, work and visit." The revised framework must be measured against whether it will do that. Does the framework represent a better service in our communities? Will it save lives or will it result in underfunding? Our fire and rescue services are far too important to get caught up in the politics of the concordat. The people on the front line know what they need in order to provide a service that not only delivers for our people but ensures their, and their comrades', safety. The Scottish Government would be wise to  pay heed to the front-line firefighters' views as expressed via the FBU. I am pleased that the minister said that he will indeed do that.

As part of the review, will the minister ensure that IRMP is not just about cost cutting and does what it is supposed to do?

I had not intended to participate in the debate, but I would like to make a point that I hope the minister will be able to address at the end. My point is a bit long to make as an intervention. As expressed today by members, the bill's aims are laudable and I am sure that most members will support it. I am interested in the detail on consultation, and in particular on transport. An example from my constituency will set that in context. In Coatbridge, two high schools were closed. There were good reasons for that, including problems with the fabric of the schools, the fact that new schools were to be built, and falling school rolls. However, among the concerns of parents was that a denominational school was being closed and replaced by the non-denominational Coatbridge high school. Children from that area whose parents wanted them to go to a denominational school had to travel about 2 miles to do so—previously that had not been the case. Conversely, a non-denominational school was closed and replaced by a denominational one. Unfortunately, the local authority's transport policy—although more generous than the national policy—stayed the same, so the children were unable to get transport to, for example, the new denominational school. The route to the school, which involved crossing a busy road, was quite unsafe. That caused some concern and took away part of the glow of the new buildings. More than that, it made some parents feel that they now had to send their children to a non-denominational school when they would have preferred them to have denominational education—the Catholic  education that was on offer before. The same was true the other way round: some parents were sending their children to the nearest, Catholic school rather than having them travel across the town. I wrote to the local council about the matter, asking whether, instead of lines simply being drawn on maps, needs could not be taken more into account in urban settings. I refer here to some of the issues that my colleague George Foulkes raised. Could such issues be considered at stage 2—if they are not already included under the bill—or are they outwith the terms of the bill? If parents agree to a school closure for a good reason but have deep concerns about matters such as travel, perhaps that could come under a consultation, or even a call-in.

I thank the cabinet secretary for intervening with that point, which gives me some reassurance. I will put some of the details to her in writing for further consideration. Thank you for letting me participate in the debate, Presiding Officer. I am sure that the bill will become a good piece of legislation, and I look forward to seeing it after stage 2.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to engage with Latin American countries. (S3O-7457)

The minister guessed correctly about my specific interest in Latin American countries. Is he aware that the Welsh Assembly has successfully developed a number of formal links with Cuba in education and is looking to foster agricultural links, with a particular interest in Cuba's permaculture urban food movement? In light of that, and given his previous answer, will the minister seriously consider engaging with Cuba, particularly in this historic year of the 50 th anniversary of the socialist revolution in that country?

What support can the First Minister's Government offer the total workforce of 57 people at Glen Shaw Knitwear—formerly Mackinnons—in Coatbridge, who were dismissed in an appalling way last week, with no prior notice or consultation? Does the First Minister agree in general that Governments of whatever political persuasion should not simply pander to a pro-business agenda in which greedy companies can make excessive profits at the expense of the working class?

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on bringing the first debate on midwives to the chamber. On this historic day, we should remember that members'  business debates are an important part of the parliamentary process. I recall my own members' business debate on breastfeeding in 2001, which later resulted in the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Act 2005. I am grateful for the opportunity to commend the contribution that midwives make to the health and wellbeing of women and babies in Scotland and throughout the world. Midwifery is, of course, about more than just delivering babies. It is important in the postnatal period, particularly because help with breastfeeding is crucial for many new mums. A midwife's support can make the difference between a mum deciding to continue breastfeeding, and deciding to formula feed. A project in my constituency, which is a unique curriculum-based breastfeeding programme that midwives are involved in delivering—if members will excuse the pun—has been very successful, and has been externally evaluated with positive outcomes. It is part of the healthy lifestyle project that is based at Coatbridge high school and managed by Mr Charles Fawcett, and it offers an holistic and integrated approach to health and wellbeing. The programme educates boys and girls about the benefits of breastfeeding, which is vital, because in some council wards in Coatbridge, breastfeeding rates are as low as 3 per cent. Many young people in my constituency have no experience or knowledge of the crucial role of breastfeeding in child health and development. Although individuals make decisions about positive health behaviours such as breastfeeding, those take place in complex social circumstances that are influenced by attitudes, beliefs, motivations and community norms. The healthy lifestyle project is so important and so successful because it is rooted in the local community and takes account of the complete health context of the Monklands area. It is part of a wider strategy that has been complimented and acknowledged by many experts on the subject, including Phil Hanlon, who is a professor of public health at the University of Glasgow. In addition to the breastfeeding initiative, the project has extended its holistic approach to its aiming higher in Malawi programme. It has been supported by a Scottish Government international grant and it has, working in partnership in Malawi with the Forum for African Women Educationalists, formally evaluated a mother group training programme with the local community and schools in Luchenza market town, near Mulanje in Malawi. I am told that that "mother group" is a deceptive term, because the group usually comprises village headmen, headteachers and influential women. That is because it is necessary to overcome  resistance and rivalries to create an environment that avoids harmful historical cultural practices towards females. The mother group training addresses issues that impede the development of women and girls in Malawi, such as female genital mutilation, forced early marriages, sexually transmitted diseases, miscarriages, stillbirths and poor nutrition, especially at the stage when girls reach puberty. Girls in Malawi also face many other issues. Malawi has an unenviable record, with an infant mortality rate of 90 deaths for every 1,000 live births; and an under-five mortality rate of 130 deaths per 1,000. That compares badly with rates in the UK of five deaths per 1,000 and six deaths per 1,000 respectively. The external evaluation of that particular healthy lifestyle programme provided a strong evidence base with positive outcomes. The programme is important because educating women so that they have fewer children, healthier pregnancies and safe deliveries ensures that their babies are more likely to survive childbirth, the vulnerable first months of life and the critical first five years. I wanted to mention the girls go for health initiative, but I realise that I do not have enough time. I will finish by saying that I fully support Mary Scanlon's call to reduce child mortality and to improve maternal health, as set out in the United Nations millennium development goals. I hope that today's debate will help to raise awareness of the invaluable job that is done by midwives, and I once again applaud the vital contribution that they make to the health and wellbeing of mothers and babies in Scotland and abroad.

I congratulate John Wilson on securing what I think is his first members' business debate on this important issue. Having written my honours degree thesis on public housing and worked as a homelessness officer, I have a long-term interest in housing and commitment to the cause of council housing. I am therefore particularly pleased to speak in the debate because of my passionate hatred of the so-called right to buy. Indeed, in the debate on the Housing (Scotland) Bill on 13 June 2001, I had a major disagreement with my colleagues and voted with the Opposition to try to stop an extension of the right to buy. That said, we need to recognise that the Labour-led Executive's Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 brought positive change. One such change was pressured area status, which should be helpful in stopping the selling off of housing stock. I am pleased that North Lanarkshire Council is applying pressured area status to areas including Moodiesburn in my constituency. More desperately-needed properties should, as a result, be made available for rent in an area that has, as John Wilson said, a significant lack of affordable social housing. Of course, for many years, councils have been unable to build new housing. There are various reasons for that, one of which has been the fear that, if the houses that they had built were snapped up at massive discounts, they would be  left with a big debt and nothing to show for their investment. I am pleased to note that North Lanarkshire Council has indicated its intention to build new housing. The council should also be commended on the quality of its housing stock; it has kept up the quality of its stock through difficult times. Our social rented sector now has to rely heavily on housing associations rather than councils to provide homes. For that reason, the Government's decision to cut the housing association grant was not a particularly wise one. Perhaps the new Minister for Housing and Communities might review that decision. We must never forget that privatising council housing via the right to buy was a Thatcherite plan. The plan was to encourage universal home ownership and then to bind the working class in the chains of mortgages. Indeed, the Tories said in the 1950s that a nation of home owners would be a nation of Tory voters. That was their aim. The term "right to buy" is a complete misnomer. It was never a right; it was a right-wing housing policy and it was sleight of hand to privatise a key public service. Council housing belongs to everyone: it belongs to society, but Margaret Thatcher stripped us of that social asset. No wonder the right to buy policy is so abhorred by socialists. It is understandable that many tenants decided to buy. Some individuals may have got a good deal, but it was a bad deal for society. It was not a good deal for the thousands whose right to rent was ruined by the right to buy. I am talking of people who are some of the most vulnerable in our society. As John Wilson said, many are on homelessness waiting lists. There are also abused women and children who are desperate to escape from their attackers, and there are rough sleepers begging on our streets. We now see the calamitous consequences of this right-wing policy: we have a dire shortage of social rented housing and huge waiting lists. Families also face the possibility of losing their homes because of mortgage arrears. As John Wilson said, housing is an issue that fills the mailbag of every member—certainly, it fills mine. I hear harrowing stories of homelessness and the family trauma that goes with it. It was therefore a good day when the Labour-led Executive introduced the most progressive homelessness legislation in Europe. However, in order to meet those requirements, more council housing is needed. It is blatantly obvious that the market is not a device that can adjust to social need, which means that the state must supply housing. In my opinion, that should be done not through third parties at a distance, but through supporting local authorities to build houses.  The Scottish Government could massively boost the economy by initiating the "building of ... houses with no 'right to buy'", which was a point that Grahame Smith made in the Morning Star last week. I note that £25 million of funding has been made available to councils, so I would be pleased if we could have some information on that. I also look forward to the consultation exercise and review of the right to buy, which I believe is coming soon. The Scottish people's charter, which was launched recently, demands, among other things, "Decent homes for all", which is to be advanced by creating "250,000 new publicly owned homes in Scotland over the next five years. Stop the repossessions. Control rents." All socialists should support that call. I join John Wilson in welcoming the news that North Lanarkshire Council has been granted pressured area status for Moodiesburn and the northern corridor, and that it can suspend its selling of council housing. I urge more urgent action by the Government to meet the basic human right to a home and to give people a right to rent.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister include the issue of pornography within the spectrum of his work on violence against women? Will he further indicate where action can be taken to tackle the issue?

Since its birth in the socialist movement, international women's day has grown to become a global day of recognition and celebration in developed and developing countries alike. The idea started in 1910 at the second conference of working women, where a woman who can certainly inspire us all, Clara Zetkin, raised the question of organising an international working women's day. That conference decided that, from then on, every year and in every country, women should celebrate on the same day a women's day under the slogan "The vote for women will unite our strength in the struggle for socialism." I commend Cathy Peattie, a good socialist woman, for bringing the debate to the chamber this evening to highlight women's inequality at home and abroad. In the past decade, she and other persistent comrades have raised the issues of inequality, discrimination, lack of representation and violence against women. They have done so in the Parliament and outwith it so that those injustices are recognised as societal problems here in Scotland and around the world and to highlight the need for action to address and eliminate them. There have of course been some successes, as Cathy Peattie said. In a debate in the Parliament in 2000, I said: "In 1918, the suffragettes won votes for women. Eighty years later, 82 per cent of MPs were men. That picture is reflected across society. For the whole of the past century, women have battled for equality."— [ Official Report , 8 November 2000; c 1436.]  Sadly, we have only to consider the terms of Cathy Peattie's motion to know that the same battles continue in the new century. Women remain underrepresented in public life, are paid less than men, endure violence at the hands of men, and suffer disproportionately from the effects of poverty and the unequal distribution of wealth and power. The Public and Commercial Services Union points out that the earnings gap between men and women in the civil service is higher than the UK average. Whether in debates about equality, violence against women or international women's day, or on other relevant occasions, I and others find ourselves making the same points over and over  again. Unfortunately, nearly a decade after the Scottish Parliament was established, there remains a need to debate women's unequal status in Scottish society and abroad. I note that Jack McConnell has a current motion that encourages MSPs to support One World Action's more women more power campaign. That shows that there are examples of good practice around the world that should be recognised and shared. In Tanzania, the Women's Legal Advice Centre's access to justice for refugee women and girls project helps refugee women and girls to gain access to legal assistance. In Zambia, Women for Change works with and empowers remote rural communities to contribute towards gender-sensitive, sustainable development and the eradication of all forms of poverty. In India, the Self Employed Women's Association is a trade union movement of informal women workers who believe that women's human rights will not be achieved without economic empowerment and self-reliance. We can also learn from socialist Cuba, where the Federation of Cuban Women is an example of female solidarity within a socialist system. It makes real change in fighting for women's rights. Of course, the lives of women today are very different from the lives of our grandmothers. Christina McKelvie referred to that. We remember that it is only within the past 100 years that women have had the vote. Sadly, however, many women do not use their vote. They are disfranchised and disempowered; they do not see the point of voting because they do not see it as relevant. Despite many advances, women are still oppressed, still not equal and still fighting for our rights. That inequality is rooted in exploitation, patriarchy and capitalism. It is in the interests of private greed to stand in the way of equality. Perhaps now, with the seeming collapse of global capitalism and the personal disgrace of those who have worshipped at the throne of Mammon, we have an opportunity to try to rebuild society on the tenets of freedom, equality and justice instead of avarice, greed and injustice. We can do that. We can put people before profit and allocate the resources that are needed to deliver a truly equal society. I finish where I started, with the founder of international women's day. Throughout her political career, Clara Zetkin focused on the liberation of women in society through Marxist reforms of the capitalist system. Her words help to explain why we continue to make the same points over and over again. She said: "The total liberation of the world of proletarian women ... is only possible in a socialist society."  More than 100 years later, and after 10 years of devolution, I have to concur with that view.

On that point, will Mr Kelly join me in welcoming the £5 million of heritage lottery funding that has allowed North Lanarkshire Council to refurbish Summerlee heritage park in Coatbridge, which will reopen this weekend as a national landmark heritage facility and a fabulous visitor attraction that Commonwealth games tourists might want to visit?

It would help if the cabinet secretary were to admit that the SFT is PFI/PPP. He mentioned the hub, which is a PPP joint-venture arrangement that will allow the unbundling of primary care services into saleable commodities and give private companies market opportunities in the national health service. In other words, it is privatisation. Will the cabinet secretary admit that the hub will open up primary care services to the market? Why is the SNP Government promoting that when it has previously said that it is against the creeping privatisation of the NHS?

Dorothy Parker once famously opined that "You can't be too rich or too thin." I mention that to highlight the point that being thin can be associated with a person's status in society. People in the public eye strive to be slim. It is fairly common for overweight and obese children to be bullied over their weight; likewise, society can portray obese adults as being gluttonous. We might therefore think, as being thin is such an aspiration and being fat is held in such disdain, that we as a nation would be predominantly slim and trim. We know, however, that that is not true. Currently, one in two adults is sufficiently overweight for it potentially to harm their health. It is estimated that, by 2010, 28 per cent of women and 33 per cent of men in the United Kingdom will be obese. In Scotland last year, 21 per cent of primary 1 children were overweight.  As we have heard, the issue is complicated, but because of the associated health risks the issue might be one of the most important that this Parliament tackles. Taking the right action will literally save lives. I return to an point that was made earlier: obesity is sometimes genetic; it is sometimes due to medical conditions; and it is sometimes due to inability to take exercise. It is also possible that obesity is due to overindulgence in this instant-gratification society in which unhealthy food choices are readily available, along with—as the minister mentioned earlier—sedentary lifestyles and jobs. Whatever the reason, people should be accepted as they are. They should be able to access the same services as everyone else and not suffer discrimination. Nevertheless, there must be increased awareness of the fact that certain life-threatening conditions can accompany obesity, such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease and some cancers. Therefore, obesity must be tackled for the sake of the individuals concerned, for the health service and for the good of society as a whole. Before we can successfully begin to reduce the growth in obesity, we need to understand the reasons behind it, which are multifaceted. Although obesity is a complex condition that can affect all socioeconomic groups, it is nonetheless a class issue in that the most seriously obese people are poor. The BMA tells us that the highest levels of overweight, obese and severely obese children in Scotland are found in the most deprived areas, and that the opposite is the case, with the least deprived areas having the lowest levels of childhood obesity. It is unacceptable that Andrew Lansley, the Tory shadow health secretary, said last week that there are no excuses for being obese. I note what Mary Scanlon said earlier, and I commend her for her work on the issue. However, not all individuals are wholly responsible for their obesity; therefore, we need a societal approach to tackling the problem, as Michael Matheson just said. The Foresight report highlights the need to tackle the growing obesity trend coherently and comprehensively. It points out that we live in an "obesogenic" environment. The factors include a lack of green space and safe areas for children to play in, budget constraints that mean that food is selected on the basis of cost rather than quality, and cynical marketing by supermarkets that promote two-for-one and buy-one-get-one-free deals that are designed to make profits on edible goods that have little nutritional value. "The Scottish Health Survey 2003" tells us that there is a marked difference between the diets of people in affluent and deprived areas: for example, women in the least deprived areas are  twice as likely as women in the most deprived areas to eat the recommended five portions a day of fruit and vegetables. Obviously, cost plays a part in that, and some people have limited choices. The fast-food industry targets children with its advertising for high-fat, low-nutrition sugary offerings that I am loth to call food. Indeed, some fast-food joints should carry a health warning. Also, the highly addictive nature of sugar should be noted, as young children have a propensity to get hooked from an early age. The action plan is to be welcomed today, especially for its recognition of the fact that a range of partners must work to tackle obesity. The minister stated that work across Government is necessary. I would be interested to hear, in the minister's summing up, a further breakdown of the welcome extra money—the £56 million. What other funding will be available from other portfolios, and what will that be for? Although the money, which has been increased, is welcome, it does not seem to be a huge amount to make available over three years to tackle an epidemic, especially given the fact that the cost of obesity to the NHS was £171 million in 2003. The SNP's manifesto pledge to provide free fruit to pregnant women and to children in pre-school establishments seems to have been replaced with broad-parameter guidance to NHS boards. What checks will be made on funding for that? Perhaps the Liberal Democrat amendment would sort that out. I also welcome the mention of breastfeeding, which, it is widely accepted, helps to establish healthy eating patterns from an early age and might have an effect on the propensity to become obese. The rate of breastfeeding is lower in deprived areas. My own piece of legislation, the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Act 2005, is cited as an example of the way in which Scotland is leading the way in breastfeeding support. I would like to know more about the funding that is being targeted to increase breastfeeding rates and whether the new target of 32.7 per cent means that the Government has given up on the previous target of 50 per cent. I am interested to know whether breastfeeding will feature on the curriculum in schools, as I think it should and must if we are to make a difference to future choices. On page 20 of the action plan, mention is made of increasing access to healthier food. Does that mean that there will be more funding for food co-ops? On page 38, we are told that car dependence will be reduced by various methods, but I do not see anything about buses. The action plan is welcome. As has been said, much of it builds on previous initiatives. However,  the most important issue is that we acknowledge that the obesity epidemic must be tackled through joined-up social and economic policies that also tackle poverty and inequality. In an article entitled "Inequality is fattening", Polly Toynbee writes that "the narrower the status and income gap between high and low, the narrower the waistbands." She concludes that "only a genuine drive towards a society that doesn't leave out a quarter of its citizens will send the bathroom scales tipping in the right direction."

The healthy working lives plan for action—which was introduced by the previous Executive—acknowledges the importance of workplace occupational health provision, such as that offered by Salus, which is based in Coatbridge in my constituency. Does the minister believe that occupational health services in the public sector—in the health sector specifically—should be provided by private companies or should be provided in-house? Will she commit to intervening to stop the threat of privatisation that is currently hanging over some services? Will she look favourably on the Scottish Trades Union Congress's call for formal recognition of international workers memorial day, which could provide an annual opportunity to review progress on healthy working lives and on health and safety at work in general?

Is it Bill Wilson's understanding that the SNP Government will not go ahead with any PFI or public-private partnership projects in the future?

For the record, will the member clarify that in line with its partnership agreement PCS requires to have input into proposals before decisions are made? We should clearly call for such input.

In her statement, the minister emphasised early years intervention, but I did not hear any specific mention of breastfeeding support and promotion. Does the minister agree that breastfeeding is critical to improving health from the start? Can she provide detail on how the low rate of breastfeeding can be improved in deprived areas especially, but also throughout Scotland?

I have declared interests that are relevant to this debate. As someone who has consistently spoken out against PFI/PPP, I am genuinely disappointed that the Scottish futures trust is not an end to that regime. Unison makes the point well in its submission, which highlights that the SFT is "essentially window dressing", as it keeps the "same profiteering and inflexibility inherent in PFI." Alex Neil is right that infrastructure investment is a vital issue for Scotland's economy, public services and people. The issue is in essence whether the public get their new schools and hospitals and how those are paid for, managed and maintained. Sadly, I think that debates such as this may not catch the public's attention until such time as new schools and hospitals are cancelled. I strongly recommend that Government back benchers—in particular those who claim to be trade unionists—read and digest every word of "Taking forward the Scottish Futures Trust". For very good reasons, the proposals are not supported by the trade unions. As previous speakers have mentioned, John Swinney has already confirmed that the SFT will have several "key components to its work. First, it will have at its core the non-profit-distributing model of finance."  He went on to confess that "The NPD models are part of the family of public-private partnerships" —[ Official Report, Finance Committee , 27 May 2008; c 560, 578.] However, even the term "non-profit distributing" is a misnomer. As Dave Watson of Unison stated in his evidence: "Of course, NPD is not non-profit, because the profit is simply taken at contractor level." —[ Official Report, Finance Committee , 13 May 2008; c 506.] The problem for the Government and its back benchers is that, before last year's election, the SNP made a very clear promise to the Scottish electorate that it would end PFI/PPP and restore commonsense public financing. That was one of the SNP's most popular policies—as evidenced by a BBC poll—and I do not doubt that it helped the SNP to electoral success. The Government must now be honest by admitting to those voters that they have been deceived. The SFT is not a clear end to PFI/PPP, as it is part of the PPP family. Given the impact of the Government's decisions on infrastructure investment, the people of Scotland should be able to expect that their elected representatives are properly informed about the Government's proposals. However, the Government's intention was announced not to Parliament but at a conference. In making such announcements outside the Parliament, the SNP seems to be running the Government via conference so let us look at that conference in a bit more detail. The list of organisations that were invited to the conference tells the story—as does the fact that the trade unions were not included. The purpose of the conference, which was hosted by the Scottish Government, is explained in the leaflet: "The Scottish Government welcomes the involvement of the private sector in infrastructure investment. It recognises the benefit of partnership between the public and private sectors, the value of private sector know-how and the due diligence it provides through having private capital at risk, as well as the additionality their investment brings on top of public sector investment." The conference was supported by Partnerships UK, which boasts of "delivering investment through public-private partnership". The conference's sponsors were Citibank, McGrigors and PricewaterhouseCoopers. The final clue as to the Government's purpose comes from the company that managed the conference, City & Financial, which states on its website: "Governments around the world are embracing Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) as the delivery mechanism of choice for their infrastructure investment programmes." We are clearly talking about PPP.  On another important privatisation issue, I wonder whether the Government back benchers noticed the surreptitious, throw-away mentions of "hub", both today and in last week's statement. They must know that that means opening up primary care to the market through PFI—if they did not know, I draw their attention to that. Hub is a joint venture model that allows primary care services to be broken up into saleable commodities under a process that is known in the privatisation world as unbundling, thereby providing commercial providers with entry points and market opportunities. As Pauline Bryan pointed out in the 2005 publication "The Red Paper on Scotland", the more private finance involvement there is in the health service, the more likely it is that health services will fall within the ambit of international trade law, which will open up our health service to commercial invasion. We need to hear more about that from the cabinet secretary in his summing up. The second key element of the SFT is that it will share expertise. How can the SFT provide impartial advice as well as being a funding provider and delivery vehicle? Will its advice be free? It will be a private body, so how will staffing work and to whom will staff be responsible? On the final key element of SFT, even if local authorities are minded to pool projects, what guarantee does the Government have that the private sector will engage? The private sector hates multi-headed clients and thinks that they are a recipe for delay and additional costs, which are passed back via the contract. If the Government cannot deliver its promise to end PFI it should be honest and say so. However, there are alternatives to the PPP family—I do not have time to go into them all. If a superhospital can be delivered through conventional funding, other projects can be delivered in that way. We could pursue fiscal powers for the Parliament—I argue for that in "The Red Paper on Scotland". I have no time to describe Unison's sensible five-point plan, but members can read about it. In the business case for the SFT, the SNP's stated intention is not to get rid of PFI. Not only is the SFT part of the PPP family but the Government's intention is to continue with some currently proposed PPP projects and it is not ruling out traditional PFI, whatever the profit levels. The SNP grasped an easy PFI solution, as a drowning man grasps a lifebelt. Public utilities should be publicly owned and run and the SNP should deliver what it promised to Scottish people.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to assist people who suffer from Duchenne muscular dystrophy. (S3O-3653)

I acknowledge the work that has been undertaken thus far. Is the minister aware of Action Duchenne's visit to the Parliament today, which I am hosting? The visit aims to highlight the benefits that improved support and services can contribute to the life expectancy and quality of life of people with DMD. Given that Action Duchenne believes that Scotland requires a centre of excellence to bring the standard of care and treatment of DMD up to the level that is seen elsewhere in the United Kingdom, for example in centres in Newcastle-upon-Tyne and London, will the minister commit to considering funding and support to allow for the establishment of such a centre in Scotland? Action Duchenne proposes that the centre be located in Glasgow, where it would provide streamlined services to ensure best practice and to disperse standards of care into local clinics throughout Scotland.

The First Minister might be aware that I have lodged a motion, "No to Nestlé", which has cross-party support. Does the First Minister agree that the decision by Scotland Excel, the local government buying consortium, to include Nestlé in a framework agreement to provide bottled water to local authorities should be reviewed, particularly given ethical concerns regarding Nestlé's promotion of formula milk in the developing world?

I thank the minister for his statement. I particularly welcome the funding for tackling violence against women. I agree that the statement ought to be passed on to the Equal Opportunities Committee for scrutiny, as it raises many questions. One of those questions is about the consequential £34 million funding for the national  health service, local government and other agencies to assist disabled children and families. Is the minister aware that in a report on services for disabled children, Tom Clarke MP said: "If government is not persuaded to ring-fence additional resources for disabled children ... Ministers must be able to convince parents and professionals that alternative mechanisms exist to ensure that the resources reach the children who need them"? What does the Government intend to do specifically for disabled children and their families?

I have registered interests that are relevant to the debate. I am pleased to have secured this important debate to commemorate international workers memorial day, which was held on Monday. The serious matters that will be discussed tonight might even receive press coverage after the return to Scotland of the Morning Star as a daily paper. I thank all the members who signed my motion and who have stayed for the debate—they are mainly Labour members. The debate is appropriate to May day, which is an occasion to remember and learn from past workers' struggles against poverty, oppression and injustice. Of course, poverty and exploitation are particularly relevant to the debate. My comrade Cathy Peattie held a debate about international workers memorial day in 2002 and I commend her for her constant work with trade unions and as the convener of Labour's trade union group. I also thank the Scottish Trades Union Congress, trade union members—including those in North Lanarkshire trade union council—and the families who have made the effort to come here to support the motion. That highlights the importance of the Parliament recognising  international workers memorial day. To that end, it would help if, in responding to the debate, the minister made a commitment to meet me, other interested members, the STUC and families of those who have been killed at work to discuss formal recognition of the day. To recognise the day on Monday, measures were taken throughout Scotland—including a minute's silence at 12 noon in many workplaces and the flying of official flags at half-mast in several areas—and various events took place. One was an inaugural event in my constituency, where the North Lanarkshire workers memorial, which was funded jointly by North Lanarkshire Council and North Lanarkshire trade union council, was unveiled. I was privileged to speak at that event, which was attended by several MSPs and councillors, Tom Clarke MP and Grahame Smith, the STUC's general secretary, and at which we also heard a heartfelt plea for better legislation from Dorothy Wright of families against corporate killers. The memorial is situated at the gates of Summerlee heritage park, which will reopen this year after major refurbishment. Visitors to Summerlee will see the excellent way in which the museum has preserved and interpreted the history of the local iron, steel, coal and engineering industries and of the people and communities that depended on them for a living. Working in those industries was dangerous. Our ancestors frequently faced the anguish, despair and heartache of losing their loved ones in industrial accidents and disasters. At Summerlee, we can reflect on the hard work and sacrifice of the working class of Scotland's central belt over hundreds of years and we can remember the difficult circumstances in which those people worked and lived. Scotland's prosperity was built on their blood, sweat and tears and that should never be forgotten. My constituency has a great mining tradition but, tragically, that has meant first-hand experience of disaster for many of my constituents. Next year marks the 50 th anniversary of the Auchengeich colliery disaster on 18 September 1959, when 47 men lost their lives. Of course, it does not take a disaster for lives to be lost at work. Accidents happen, and some deaths at work are accidents. However, the Health and Safety Executive estimates that more than 70 per cent of major or fatal workplace injuries are the result of senior management failure, which is often systematic and over a period. The vast majority of deaths at work could and should have been avoided. The theme of this year's international workers memorial day is occupational health. According to the Health and Safety Executive, work-related  stress accounts for more than a third of all new instances of ill health. Study after study shows a sharp increase in hours worked, which causes rising stress. Only today, we heard that the number of people—and particularly women—who must take second jobs to make ends meet is increasing. Increased flexibility in the labour market has led to a feeling of powerlessness among workers. They suffer as a result of impaired mental health, long hours, work intensification and oppressive management. It is clear that there is a price to be paid for tailoring the workforce to meet the market's every whim. Employees are being squeezed to the point of illness to allow unrealistic targets to be met; it is a case of workers' health for employers' wealth. Employers have a duty to their staff. When those duties are not met, serious penalties must be imposed. Only then will companies take health and safety seriously and make genuine efforts to reduce the number of cases of death, injury and disease at work. Too often, profit is put before people. I again draw the Parliament's attention to the possible outsourcing of occupational health services at Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board to an American firm. Such privatisation—that is what it would amount to—would undoubtedly be a short-sighted and retrograde step, and would do nothing to ensure better health among the board's employees. Over the past 30 years, market deregulation has taken place to an extent that would never have been tolerated in previous eras. When Margaret Thatcher swept away workers' protection, she systematically dismantled the network of legally enforceable rights that safeguarded employees against gross abuse and exploitation, rights that had been long fought for and hard won. Unfortunately, although some commendable advances have been made, Labour has not yet fully reinstated those rights or overturned the majority of anti-trade union laws. The enactment of the trade union freedom bill that John McDonnell MP has proposed would be a good start in redressing the balance between the unions and big business, but a fundamental shift in power and a major change in the economic system are what are really needed. Capitalism cannot meet the basic needs of the world's people, half of whom live on less than $2 a day, despite the record profits for big business. The role of people who represent labour cannot be simply to respond to an increasingly pro-business agenda. We must go on the offensive by challenging injustice and inequality both inside and outside the workplace. The issue is undoubtedly  one of class, and it is important for members of the Labour Party to continually reflect on the party's traditional purpose—the advancement of the interests of ordinary working people. Our party was founded on the need to protect the rights of people who sell their labour and over the years has been responsible for the major legislative advancements that have been made in favour of the working class. I commend comrades who, at last week's STUC congress, highlighted the need to dismantle the anti-trade union laws, and I associate myself with the calls to repeal those laws. Formal recognition of international workers memorial day ought to be implemented to act as a constant reminder of the annual toll of workplace deaths and an impetus to take action. I look forward to a response from the minister about a meeting to discuss that subject. We must all continue to fight in the hope that people who sell their labour can do so with the full protection of the industries and organisations that profit from their toil. I join in solidarity with all members who are present to remember the dead and to fight for the living.

To ask the Scottish Executive what cultural and other links Scotland has with Cuba. (S3O-3011)

Does the minister share my concern about the visits by Caleb McCarry, the United States of America's Cuba transition co-ordinator, to several European countries, including Britain, given that they look very like another attempt by the USA to pressure Europe into adopting the USA's aggressive anti-Cuba policy at a time when there is a favourable European Union rapprochement towards Cuba and a likelihood of the complete elimination of the temporarily suspended sanctions?  Will the minister join me in commending Spain, France and Italy for the huge strides that they have made in cementing more normal trading, scientific and cultural exchanges with Cuba? Given the United Kingdom's stated policy of constructive engagement with the island, will she commit to improving engagement between Scotland and Cuba, where she can?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I was a tad bemused by your advice to the minister that my question about Cuba might not have dealt with devolved issues. I wonder whether you can look into why, under the standing orders, the question was allowed into the Business Bulletin in the first place and what exactly European and external affairs comprises in relation to the Parliament and devolved issues.

Given the SNP's previous supposed support for operating ScotRail as a not-for-profit organisation, I am astonished at this decision. If, as the minister said in his statement, this is good news for rail employees and their representatives, why were the trade unions not consulted? Will they, and will this chamber, be given the opportunity to take part in the decision on whether to stop the extension at the 2009 deadline?

I understand that the cabinet secretary will visit my constituency tomorrow to meet, among others, Strathclyde Police and to support the launch of the Airdrie & Coatbridge Advertiser's nae bother campaign to tackle antisocial behaviour. Does the cabinet secretary agree that antisocial behaviour must be tackled using a multi-agency approach? Can he assure us that the Government will work in partnership with the police, the media, councils and others to ensure that campaigns such as that one, which challenges unacceptable behaviour and acts of wanton vandalism in our communities, are supported fully?

I thank Aileen Campbell for lodging the motion, which I supported. I acknowledge that it is timely to discuss the matter in advance of Saturday's demonstration to show our support for the stop the war coalition. Members will also note from today's Business Bulletin that the president of the stop the war coalition—Tony Benn, a prominent member of the Labour Party—is next week's time for reflection leader. That was the idea of my comrade, Bill Butler. I commend him for it and for good timing, as it has turned out. It is also appropriate to recognise the courage, dignity and determination of mothers such as Rose Gentle and Beverley Clarke five years on from the start of a war that cruelly robbed them of their sons. The Parliament debated the Iraq war on a number of occasions before it was launched and in the aftermath, and I participated in most if not all of those debates. It is a tragedy—albeit a predictable one—that we are still debating it five years on. In one of the first debates, in January 2003, I said: "Whether members believe that it is right or wrong to attack Iraq, they must recognise the consequences. ... there will be consequences for our armed services and for others who are drafted in, such as doctors and nurses, and there might be consequences for our civilians at home."— [ Official Report , 30 January 2003; c 17649.]  All those consequences were suffered: families, including Rose and Beverley, lost loved ones in the war, and the so-called war on terror has since moved directly to our shores, including an attack on Glasgow airport. Also as predicted—and as is the case in modern warfare—the main casualties of the war were Iraqi civilians, including children. Those people were not "collateral damage" as the perpetrators of war like to put it euphemistically; they were ordinary people, indiscriminately killed in a war that was not only of extremely dubious legality but most certainly unnecessary and inhumane. We should also remember that the people who were bombed so that they could be "liberated" had already suffered at the hands of a US and UK-supported policy of sanctions against the Iraqi people that killed millions. It was hoped in March 2003 that the Parliament could send a strong united message by voting for an amendment in John McAllion's name, which I  and four comrades—including Bill Butler, who has stayed for this evening's debate—supported. The amended motion would simply have said, "This Parliament believes that no case for military action against Iraq has been proven" but, sadly, the amendment was not supported by enough colleagues to succeed. I know that some regretted that later. Speaking to the amendment, John McAllion said: "That is a simple but powerful statement. It has the potential to unite all members of the Parliament who are concerned to stop the outbreak of what now appears to be an imminent attack on the Iraqi people. We know that the United Nations has not sanctioned any attack on Iraq. There is no second Security Council resolution authorising such an attack. Those who believe that any attack without explicit UN sanction and authorisation would be wrong and a breach of international law can vote for the amendment, because without such sanction and authorisation the case for an attack on Iraq has simply not been made or proven."— [ Official Report , 13 March 2003; c 19442.]  It was neither made nor proven, nor has it been since, but I am sure that it does not give John McAllion or anybody else any satisfaction to reflect that what he said was correct. The destruction of Iraq continues. A million or more are dead and millions have been driven from their homes. The social and economic infrastructure has been devastated and the powerlessness and hopelessness remain. We also should not forget Afghanistan. Only today it was reported that two women and two children were killed in an air strike carried out by forces there. The countless senseless deaths act as a constant reminder that the decision to invade Iraq has resulted in endless suffering for the victims—not only those who were killed, but those who have died in the aftermath as a result of disease, starvation and an inability to access health care. Nonetheless, British troops remain there. Our years of debate mount up, as does the death toll of the innocents, and Iraq still remains an occupied country. I take this opportunity to express, again, my fervent opposition to the war. I do so on behalf of other members of the Labour Party who protested and marched against the war. I call for an immediate end to the military occupation of Iraq and the full transfer of sovereignty to its people. I will continue to oppose vigorously the seemingly endless war that is imposed by the US and its allies on sovereign states, including the threats that are currently being made against Cuba. I hope that tonight all members can unite in support of peace and stability in Iraq and elsewhere.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to allocate additional funding, over and above the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning's budget, to ensure that all young people receive sufficient education and training to contribute effectively to the economy. (S3O-2548)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that sufficient funding is essential if further education institutions are to be allowed to prioritise the educational needs of the communities they  serve rather than operate as businesses subject to financial constraints based on restrictive performance indicators? Is the cabinet secretary aware of the situation in my constituency, where general education courses at Coatbridge College are under threat? Can he offer any assistance to help secure a future for those vital courses?

Will the Lord Advocate take an intervention on that point?

I apologise—I have to attend a meeting and so I cannot contribute to the debate. Does the Lord Advocate agree that the rape of women by men is an act of violence and the abuse of power and that it is predicated on women's subordination in society and on discrimination? How can attitudes be changed alongside the legal changes that have been proposed? In particular, will the Lord Advocate consider the need to prosecute men who buy sex from trafficked women, as they are in fact raping them?

Is the First Minister aware of the situation at Coatbridge College, where the provision of general education is under threat, with redundancy packages being offered to lecturers this week? Does he agree that highers, intermediate and  access courses provide crucial learning opportunities, particularly for people who, for a variety of reasons, missed out at school? Is he in a position to support my proposal, which has cross-party backing, to shelve the process in order to allow proper community consultation and debate on that vital provision?

Like other members, I am pleased to participate in this debate on democracy in our local health care provision. I commend the cabinet secretary for conducting a subject debate on the issue. Other members have mentioned local experiences and, perhaps unsurprisingly, I will, too. My enhanced interest in the issue stems from experiences in the NHS Lanarkshire area in the past few years, which highlight well some of the dilemmas at the heart of democracy in the health service. Today's edition of The Herald used NHS Lanarkshire as an example in a report that refers to the debate. I am more than happy to discuss the intricacies of the system of direct elections to health boards at another time, but I want to focus on the reasons why we need elections that would, preferably, produce a simple majority. The report in The Herald made it sound as though the idea of directly elected health boards was the brainchild of the SNP as a response to unpopular decisions, such as the decision on the accident and emergency service at Monklands hospital. Although I am sure that those issues had, and will, rightly, continue to have, an influence in the consultation, I must point out that my comrade Bill Butler put the item on the Parliament's agenda in the previous session, through a member's bill. I commend him for all the work that he has done on the issue.

I am happy to agree with that. As Bill Butler pointed out earlier, direct elections would not be the panacea that produced democratic accountability in the health service—the issue requires much further debate and discussion—but they would be a step in the right  direction of improving democracy and ownership by the people. In previous debates, it seems to have been suggested that service users might not be best placed to decide on issues relating to health service policy, practice and delivery, and that it would be better to leave decisions on such matters to the professionals. It is perhaps not surprising that that echoes the BMA's view, as we saw in the briefing that was sent to us yesterday. I entirely refute such suggestions—indeed, I find them to be patronising, unfair and simply wrong. People in my community know and understand their health needs and those of their community. That was well demonstrated in the public meetings that were held during the so-called consultation on NHS Lanarkshire's picture of health proposals. Numerous well-informed individuals spoke with passion and clarity about why they opposed the closure of Monklands hospital's accident and emergency unit and the downgrading of the hospital. The strength of feeling that was demonstrated has persisted, and I can safely say that the people of Coatbridge and Chryston will continue to protest against any plans that threaten their local health care provision and that they will not be patronised into accepting half-baked decisions. NHS Lanarkshire and the cabinet secretary need to realise that. My constituents were as delighted as I was that the cabinet secretary instructed NHS Lanarkshire to continue to provide accident and emergency services at Monklands and that the board agreed to do so, but they also want assurances that that provision will be of a high standard. That means that Monklands must be retained and developed as a level 3 general hospital, for which the required funding must be provided. My constituents were told at the public meetings that continuing to run three accident and emergency units in Lanarkshire was not safe, and they must be assured that it is now safe to do so. The people of Coatbridge and Chryston are entitled to nothing less than first-class provision. We could discuss many areas covered by the picture of health proposals, but the focus for this debate must be on engagement with local people, transparency, openness and accountability. The public must be not only allowed but encouraged and supported to influence health service delivery in their areas. During a meeting with NHS Lanarkshire on its decision to downgrade Monklands, a senior member of staff told me that he was not accountable to me. Such arrogance shows why we need more democracy and accountability in our health service and helps to explain why the views of the thousands of people whom I represent were not given any credence in NHS  Lanarkshire's consultation exercise. The contributions that were made demonstrated that while health professionals bring to decisions their invaluable medical knowledge and understanding, local people bring their knowledge of and insights into their communities and their own health needs. Both types of knowledge are vital in making decisions about local health services. The boards of other services and institutions in the public sector should also be democratised—the boards of further education colleges, for example. I hope that the notion of having more democracy is more widely applied. Directly elected health boards would allow more accountability, but we have heard that that is not the only change that is required. There is a perception that health boards can do what they like even when they are faced with a public outcry—indeed, there is little wonder that there is such a perception in some areas. We must ensure that there is proper respect for consultation processes, that all contributions are fully taken into account and that there is better engagement with and participation by local people and communities. I could not finish my speech without relating the situation in Scotland to that in Cuba. In the wake of the news that Fidel Castro is standing down, and whatever happens in Cuba now, we have a lot to learn from patient representation at every level in the excellent Cuban health service. Let us hope that Scotland can lead the way in the United Kingdom in aiming for a health service that is as democratic and as rooted in the community as the Cuban health service is. Direct elections for health boards would be a good start.

To ask the Scottish Executive what checks are in place to ensure that signs and symptoms associated with oligohydramnios (low amniotic fluid) are identified in the third trimester of pregnancy, particularly after the due date. (S3O-2150)

My question arises from the heartbreaking circumstances that a constituent brought to my attention in which her sister's baby was stillborn 12 days past the due date in November as a result of amniotic fluid deficiency. Is the minister aware that the condition is relatively easily checked out by an ultrasound scan? As the consequences of leaving the condition undetected can be tragic, will the minister consider instructing an investigation into more rigorous procedures for detection and prevention, particularly after the due date has been reached? Will she assure us that she will give urgent attention to the issue, which is literally a matter of life or death?

I am curious to know whether the reason why the member may be inclined to support the Scottish futures trust is that it would involve not public sector ownership but, in effect, private finance.

I note that the legislative consent memorandum refers to three specific areas of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Bill. I was concerned when I saw it last week—I understand that the motion does not include clauses 113 to 120, which relate to pornography. I would be grateful if the minister could confirm that the issues around possession of extreme pornography, which are covered in the Westminster bill, will be dealt with by Scottish legislation, as was indicated by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing in response to an oral question from me. She stated: "We have consulted on new law to prohibit extreme pornographic images, and will now work to implement the outcome of the consultation".— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 15 November 2007; S3O-1282.]  Women's organisations in Scotland and organisations with an interest in tackling violence against women would welcome having input into the implementation of that process and are keen to ensure that the issue will still be dealt with as a devolved matter.

Does Jamie Stone agree that promoting breastfeeding to younger children is also important? The only breastfeeding doll that I have ever seen is the one that is sitting in my office in this building.

I am pleased to be able to participate in this debate, particularly at such a crucial time for health care in Lanarkshire. I want to raise three issues, the first of which is the possible outsourcing of occupational health services at NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to an American firm. Constituents of mine who work in those services have approached me to ask for help to stop the threat of privatisation that is hanging over the excellent provision that exists. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing stated in "Better Health, Better Care" that the national health service in Scotland "will remain firmly in the public sector" and that her Government will "distance NHSScotland still further from market orientated models." Will she reassure my constituents that she will not allow Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board to privatise that provision in effect?

I thank the cabinet secretary for that.  The report that was published last week by the panel that was established by the cabinet secretary to review proposals by Lanarkshire NHS Board states that "the board has not made a convincing case for significant changes to emergency services." That sounds innocuous, but what lies beneath that statement is the anguish, fear and anger of my constituents who, as I did, knew that there was no case for downgrading Monklands general hospital. However, with the honourable exception of Jim McCabe, the board chose to ignore all the submissions that pointed that out to them. The panel's observations are a pretty damning indictment of NHS Lanarkshire's proposals for Monklands. Uncannily like my own submissions, the report points to skewed evidence, bias towards preferred options and flawed financial information alongside a seeming disregard for the opinions of consultees. I trust that the board will now do the right thing and remedy the situation at its meeting on 30 January, as Monklands general hospital must remain a level 3 general hospital. I also trust that the cabinet secretary will step in if that does not happen. Although there is an understandable focus on acute services in the panel's report, it also acknowledges that the general health of the population will not be fundamentally improved through the acute hospitals sector alone. That is something that we all know. Primary care, community services and health promotion all have a key role to play in preventing health problems such as obesity, addiction and mental ill health. Those are areas that Labour considers to be of the highest priority. My main focus today is on infant feeding. The need to support and promote breastfeeding is an issue that I raised in my original submission to NHS Lanarkshire, and it is a matter that needs urgent attention because it is a substantial weapon in the fight against ill health. It is also recognised as being important in "Better Health, Better Care". I would be grateful if the minister could tell us when we can expect the appointment of the infant feeding adviser to continue the excellent work of Jenny Warren. The benefits of breastfeeding are well known and were rehearsed in Parliament during its scrutiny of my member's bill, the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Bill, so I will not go into detail. Suffice it to say that we all know that breast is best and that it has the potential for huge health improvement, not only for mums and babies, but into later life. Unfortunately, I have heard anecdotal reports of the law being broken when women have been asked to leave premises in order to breastfeed. A  campaign to raise awareness of the legislation would be welcome, and women who find themselves in that position should report the matter to the procurator fiscal. Although the benefits of breastfeeding are well known, the perception is unfortunately that support for it is a Cinderella service in the health sector. We need more investment to encourage new mums to breastfeed and to sustain it for longer. I hope that the minister will be able to tell us what plans and funding are in place for this year's national breastfeeding awareness week, in May, which was supported by the previous Executive. I hope that she can also tell us whether the new money that has been announced will promote breastfeeding as an excellent way of tackling obesity in future generations. One of the main threats to breastfeeding is the marketing of formula milk. I raise the topical issue of the new European Union regulations that are designed to toughen the rules on advertising infant formula and follow-on formula. Since 1995, the United Kingdom has had legislation to protect parents' right to receive objective and accurate information about feeding their babies. However, although that means that it is illegal to advertise formula milk for younger babies, it is not illegal to advertise the so-called follow-on milk for babies over six months old. By ensuring that their products for older and younger babies are almost identical, companies can automatically promote one type of milk by advertising the other. There is another loophole in that, although they are banned from putting formula milk brand names on the information that they give to mothers, they can get around that by making the logos almost identical to the brand names. Such aggressive marketing over many years must take some of the blame for the fall in the number of women who breastfeed. In a recent debate at Westminster, David Kidney MP highlighted the way in which commercial pressure is undermining the legislation. He cited the vast sums of money that are involved and said: "After all, the market is big money for the companies. The UK market in formula milk nearly trebled from £119 million in 1995 to £329 million in 2006."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 16 January 2008; Vol 470, c 281WH.] There is an on-going case—which I would not have time to go into even if I were able to do so—in which the new EU regulations are being challenged. However, I am pleased to note that the negative instrument that will implement the European directives on infant formula and follow-on formula was debated and agreed at the Health and Sport Committee last week. Obviously, parents must make up their own minds about feeding, but it is incumbent on the Government to ensure that that their choice is well  informed. We could market breastfeeding to the same extent as formula milk, which would go a long way towards improving the health outcomes of future generations. I hope that the minister will give that suggestion serious consideration.

The important point is not what is in the budget, but what is not in the budget and how the budget was arrived at. The member alluded to that earlier. Does she have an opinion on the lack of evidence that equality impact assessment was applied in the budget process? I refer to what she said at the beginning of her speech.

I commend Cathy Peattie for raising awareness of the challenges that young people face when they enter employment. Two workshops were held this morning as part of the STUC's trade union week in the Scottish Parliament, at which participants learned about the additional challenges that are faced by young people who have dyslexia or who are deaf. On dyslexia, we heard that since 2002, through the Scottish union learning fund, the STUC and individual trade unions have been working to facilitate provision and support for adults and young people in employment who want or need to improve their literacy and numeracy skills. Some of those folk will be facing increasing demands in the workplace, but others will want to improve those skills for their personal development. Through that work, it became apparent to the unions and the STUC that some learners had dyslexia, which for many was undiagnosed. It is estimated that 10 per cent of our population are dyslexic, and that 4 per cent have severe dyslexic difficulties. It is also estimated that 75 per cent of all dyslexic people are identified as being so after reaching the age of 21, which means that many adults with dyslexia did not fulfil their potential at  school because they did not have the right support. They might have inadequate literacy skills, which can impede their opportunities for employment. The problem goes wider than difficulties with reading and writing. Many aspects of the workplace can create problems for people with dyslexia, such as time management and repetitive errors—when someone does something wrong, is told to change it but continues to do it. A dyslexic person's attention span and the speed at which they complete tasks can also be problems. Recent research states that 45 per cent of people hide their dyslexia from employers and colleagues and that 56 per cent do not believe that their employers would be able to adapt to their specific needs. Many people are not aware that they are dyslexic and assessments can be expensive. The process is complex, and people do not know what help might be available to them—access to work schemes for example—if they are identified as being dyslexic. Trade union learning reps have been trained to identify and support people in the workplace with adult literacy and numeracy needs. With further training, it is hoped that they will be able to support people with dyslexia. Employers have responsibilities to dyslexic employees, and the aim would be that the union learning reps could help employers to understand their responsibilities and the ways in which reasonable adjustments can be made. Quite often, that can mean simple and inexpensive adjustments, such as using pastel-coloured paper, large font size and quiet time for reading instructions. At lunch time, we heard from Chris Williams and Neil Bell. Unfortunately I do not have time to go into their experiences, but suffice it to say that they have had difficulties. The STUC is working towards a Scottish trade union strategy to achieve a dyslexia-friendly workplace, and it believes that a national strategy is required. Another group who face additional barriers are young deaf people. Employers need clear information on their responsibilities to provide good access to work arrangements for both groups. Young deaf employees need to get a good start in fulfilling their employment potential for their own job satisfaction, as well as to ensure that they make their full contribution to the economy and to social progress. For some of those young people, British Sign Language is their first language. As with dyslexic young people, there is evidence of significant under-attainment in English skills at school among the whole population of deaf pupils. I would like to say more, but I do not have time, so I will finish by saying that although a lot has undoubtedly been achieved in legislation and policy, there is still much for the unions and  Government to address in ensuring that young deaf and dyslexic people, and others, are able to fulfil their potential in the workplace. I am pleased that Cathy Peattie has given us this opportunity to commend the trade unions for leading the way in supporting and promoting the learning and skills development of young people in the workplace.

Does the minister agree that it is also antisocial and unacceptable that taxi drivers blast their horns in residential areas at all hours of the day and night? Can he advise on the remedies that are available to tackle the problem? Will the issue be included in the review that he mentioned?

Is the minister aware of the deep frustration that people in my constituency feel as a result of the length of time that it is taking to redevelop Gartcosh, which was devastated by Margaret Thatcher's closure of the steelworks? Can he assure me that he will not only insist that the crime campus headquarters with more than 900 quality jobs goes ahead as promised but ensure that progress on developing the rest of the site will be quick and not further delayed by work on other sites?

Like other members, I am pleased to speak in the debate, in the middle of a week of awareness raising in the Parliament about equality and diversity. I thank the Government for bringing the debate. The debate also takes place during the United Nations 16 days of activism against gender violence. Marlyn Glen mentioned that campaign, the theme of which this year is challenging obstacles. I am pleased that the Minister for Communities and Sport is wearing the white ribbon for men who want to observe the 16 days of action. The previous Executive put much effort into the promotion of equality and into tackling the most extreme manifestation of gender inequality: violence against women. The Executive built on the work done by women in the Labour and trade union movements over many years. There can be little doubt that male violence against women is premised on women's inequality and subordination in society. This week, Trevor Phillips described such violence as "an undeclared war on women". Therefore it is vital to focus on challenging and changing attitudes, which are supported and encouraged by social structures and cultural messages. All-pervasive messages portray women's needs and rights as less significant than those of men, suggest that it is normal or natural for men to disrespect women, and continue to advocate rigid models of what it means to be a man or a woman in society. On the continuum of male violence against women and children are domestic abuse, rape, sexual assault, child sexual abuse, sexual harassment, trafficking, prostitution, and pornography. The harm that is caused by some forms of male violence has been recognised, and attempts have been to tackle it, one example of that being the attempts to tackle domestic abuse. I note the good and successful debate in the chamber on that subject.  Today, I will talk specifically about pornography, which is a major obstacle to tackling gender discrimination. In 2004, Malcolm Chisholm, who was the Minister for Communities at the time, stated in the chamber: "Pornography is predicated on abuse".— [ Official Report , 25 November 2004; c 12350.]  That statement was an important one for a minister to make. Over the years, the Equal Opportunities Committee has tried to look into the harm that pornography causes. The task is not easy because of the lack of research. Consideration of pornography tends to attract unhelpful and, at times, hysterical media attention. The debate needs to be around common sense and the evidence that we can find of harm. In 1990, the Home Office published a review of existing research evidence of the effects of pornography. At the time, owing to the difficulty of getting appropriate control groups for research purposes, it was not possible to conclude whether pornography causes sexual violence. However, the report acknowledged that many women find pornography distressing and that it is frequently the case that women who suffer domestic violence have partners who use pornography heavily. It also showed that some sexual offenders use pornography, including in preparation for committing an offence. Just last month, two American academics gave evidence to me, as the Equal Opportunities Committee gender reporter, and MSP colleagues. They showed us the results of more recent studies, which found that exposure to violent pornography directly affects aggressive attitudes and behaviours. The images that are of concern are not only the most extreme. The Home Office report to which I referred stated: "it might be that sexually violent pornography is the most dangerous but that newspaper nudity is still to a small degree harmful & because newspapers are more everyday than extreme pornography their aggregate effects might be greater. The research evidence is silent on this." The many women who have been involved in pornography have not been silent on the harm that it has caused them. Some of their stories can be found in reports of the civil rights hearings in the United States of America in the 1980s and 1990s. One of the women who gave evidence was Linda Marchiano, who is otherwise known as Linda Lovelace. Referring to her appearance in a particular pornographic film, she said: "every time someone watches that film, they are watching me being raped".  Despite protests, the film was shown recently in Edinburgh. That is outrageous. I will not spend further time saying what pornography is. We all know that. We can all see the reality of the pictures and other images that are often accepted as harmless, but that dehumanise women, are regularly associated with violence, and are usually accompanied by crude and derogatory captions. They should all simply be captioned "Women for Sale". The images are predicated on women's subordination and objectification, which means that they are predicated on inequality. Some people argue that pornography is okay because some women make the choice to participate voluntarily in pornography for money. We need to make it clear today that pornography does not exist because of the choices that women make; it exists because men use it at the expense of women for sexual gratification. Pornography is big business. The last statement helps to explain the pervasive nature of pornography. It is everywhere, from the violent hardcore images that can be accessed in minutes via the worldwide web to T-shirts with insidious slogans, and the Playboy merchandise that is now aimed specifically at our children. Indeed, the BBC is even associated with pornography, courtesy of the Spice Girls video that accompanied the children in need theme song this year. It is simply wrong to give out those kinds of message to our children. The message that we must continually reinforce is the one that says, "Women and children are not for sale." Does the minister have plans to tackle the normalisation of pornography that is aimed specifically at children? Will he agree, and put on the record today, that pornography is premised on inequality and that it is part of the continuum of male violence against women? Will he indicate whether there will be further consultation on the proposal to create an offence in Scotland of the possession of extreme pornography? I conclude with the UN declaration on the elimination of violence against women, which acknowledges and confirms the basic tenet that "violence against women is a manifestation of historically unequal power relations between men and women, which have led to domination over and discrimination against women by men".

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps  have been taken to strengthen relations between Scotland and Cuba. (S3O-1168)

I hope that the minister will be able to meet the Cuban MPs who will visit the Parliament next week. I invite her to join me and, indeed, the United Nations in calling for an end to the illegal United States blockade of Cuba, which includes the tightening of extraterritorial elements, thereby directly affecting relations between the European Union and Cuba. Will she join me in congratulating Cuba on exporting its socialism by sharing with the poor and dispossessed around the world its advances in medical science, education, sport and agriculture? Further, I ask the minister to explore options for strengthening relations between Scotland and Cuba, particularly through cultural, scientific, sporting and trade links.

Does the minister agree that there does not seem much point in lifting the cap at the moment in any case, as elderly people who are currently assessed and deemed eligible will not be provided with a central heating system until next spring? Will she tell Parliament today what she proposes to do about the unacceptable situation in which Scottish Gas is telling vulnerable people in Coatbridge and Chryston and in other parts of Scotland that they will have to face the winter with no central heating and perhaps no hot water? Does she consider that acceptable?

As previous speakers have indicated, this debate is not just about food but about a national food policy that must include many different elements—health, the environment and tackling poverty. Over the years, I have taken a particular interest in dietary health and nutrition. I believe firmly that this issue is among the most fundamental that our Parliament and society face. A glance at this morning's BBC news helps to illustrate why. The Scottish bulletin reported that obesity among our children has increased by 50 per cent over the past decade. It went on to report concern that recruitment to the armed forces is falling in Scotland due to obesity among young people. Beautifully juxtaposed with those two items was a report on a pie-tasting competition. The previous Executive made significant efforts to address the issue of food, nutrition and healthy eating—for example, through the introduction of free fruit in schools for young children and the excellent hungry for success initiative. The Parliament also supported and passed the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Act 2005, which I  introduced. That is a good example of support for locally produced, excellent-quality fresh food. I will mention three areas that should be included in the proposed national debate and consultation. The first is food co-ops, which play an important role in our more deprived communities. North Lanarkshire has a number of food co-ops, which come together under the umbrella of the North Lanarkshire Federation of Food Co-operatives. Several of the local co-ops and the central store are located in my constituency. They deliver an accessible supply of quality affordable food to some of North Lanarkshire's most disadvantaged communities and are supported in that by North Lanarkshire Council. Having a full-time community resource worker, Tommy Murphy, who has been involved in supporting the federation from the outset, is vital to the federation's success, as is the good will and hard work of the volunteers involved and partnership working with agencies such as NHS Lanarkshire. Council support is paramount to ensuring the continuation of local food co-ops. North Lanarkshire Council must be commended for recognising the importance of such initiatives and for working with food co-ops to expand their health promotion role. The council has also encouraged the ethos of health-promoting schools and, innovatively, has extended that to nurseries. An example of good practice that the Government might consider in its deliberations on food is the sale to parents of fruit and vegetables, which are supplied by the federation of food co-ops at cost price, at St Patrick's primary school in Coatbridge. Not only does that allow parents to access good food easily; it makes the connection between what children are learning at school and their home life. The second issue is our children's nutrition. There have been strides forward in the food that is provided in our schools. As someone who has consistently supported the idea of free school meals, I am interested in seeing the results of the free school meals pilots. Although there is still insufficient evidence on causal links between nutrition and children's learning among the general population, there is some evidence of benefits for children with learning difficulties. That, along with the fact that obesity in our children is reaching epidemic proportions, highlights the importance of developing a national food strategy, and of monitoring and supporting quality research. I was pleased that the minister said that a new institute of nutrition and health is to open. In order to promote optimum dietary health, we need to focus on the beginning of life—on nutrition for expectant mothers and on breastfeeding. Research has shown that there is a significantly reduced incidence of obesity among children who  have been breastfed, along with a raft of other health benefits. Significant research was published this week that demonstrated a clear physiological link between breastfeeding and improved IQ. The food debate must include breastfeeding. Ministers urgently need to increase funding to support and promote breastfeeding, which should include the promotion of our unique Scottish legislation. This is not rocket science. It is clear that our health is affected by food and nutrition, so we need to start before birth by focusing on better food and nutrition, educating our children and their parents and legislating where necessary. Most important, we must ensure that access to good-quality nutritious food is not restricted to the affluent in our society but is available to all via initiatives such as food co-ops, free school meals and support for breastfeeding. We should ensure that we have nutritional standards in all our public provision, for example in hospitals. The tenacity that was shown by the previous Executive and the Parliament in pursuing the smoking policy was commendable. I hope that the new Government will apply the same level of resolve to food and dietary health.

Is the minister considering the introduction of nutritional standards in the public provision of food, for example in hospitals?

Like Cathy Jamieson, I am concerned about the connections between wildlife crime and animal cruelty—for example, dog fighting and badger baiting—and other forms of organised crime in our communities that make life a misery for so many people. As we have heard, Scotland is a beautiful country that is teeming with wildlife that, sadly, all too often faces real danger when it comes up against humans who are intent on causing harm.  The debate is about wildlife crime, and we must concern ourselves with the crimes that take place not only in our hills and glens but in our urban areas. I am pleased that Labour's amendment recognises that and calls for guidance to pull together all the relevant legislation. I hope that the review that has been announced will cover all crimes of animal cruelty. I will explain why. As a member of the committee that considered the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Bill, I had cause to look into the issue of dog fights when I was researching the section on animal fights. Making arrangements for an animal fight to take place, causing it to take place, attending it and showing, supplying or publishing a recording of it are all illegal actions, but dog fights continue to happen. Historically, dog fighting has tended to be viewed as an isolated animal welfare issue and, as such, has perhaps been treated less seriously than it should have been by the prosecution services. The communities that have been morally, socially and culturally scarred by the prevalence of dog fighting have suffered as a result of that approach. Some people who are involved in the barbaric practice try to justify it as a cultural and historical tradition, along with cock fighting, hunting and so on. Because of that, from an early age some children are routinely exposed to the violence that is intrinsic to this illegal blood sport. The atrocities of the dog fights are absolutely appalling, yet children who grow up exposed to them are conditioned to believe that such violence is normal. They are systematically desensitised to the suffering and, as a result, can develop a distorted sense of societal norms and civilised behaviour. Dog fighting is not only an issue of child welfare and extreme cruelty to animals; it is something that should concern us from the perspective of the cycle of violence and criminal behaviour that it can perpetuate. Not only is dog fighting cruel, sadistic and inhumane, it is an insidious, underground organised crime involving illegal gambling, drug dealing, money laundering and a host of other peripheral criminal activities. It is big business, involving massive sums of money. The links between dog fighting and other forms of violent crime have become more apparent over the years, so it cannot be regarded as merely an isolated animal welfare issue. Nonetheless, it is an animal welfare issue, as the dogs that are used for fighting have been bred for generations to be dangerously aggressive towards other animals. The presence of such animals in communities increases the risk of attacks not only on other animals but on people. Children in our communities are particularly at risk  because of their small size, which may cause a fighting dog to perceive them as another animal. The dogs, too, are the victims of horrific abuse. The injuries that are inflicted on and sustained by them during fights are frequently severe and often fatal. Pit bull terriers, which are used in the majority of fights, have been specifically bred and trained for fighting and are unrelenting in their attempts to defeat their opponents. Often, the dogs die from blood loss, shock, dehydration, exhaustion or infection hours, or sometimes days, after the event. Some owners train their dogs for fights using smaller animals, such as cats, rabbits or small dogs. Those bait animals are often stolen pets or are obtained through adverts that offer them free to a good home. Only a few months ago, BBC Scotland reported that the SSPCA had received reports of Staffordshire bull terriers being turned on domestic cats, and the charity said that cat remains had been found at the scene of a number of organised dog fights. It believes that cats are being used to rile up fighting dogs, which are then allowed to tear those animals apart before they are turned on each other. There is no question but that dog fighting is a barbaric crime, however the involvement of other domestic animals adds a horrible new twist to it and further indicates the kind of people who participate in such events. Although it is perhaps less common than it was, dog fighting is still going on in and around the central belt. Recently, "Panorama" uncovered a network of criminal gangs who were supplying illegal pit bull terriers for fighting, which were brought into the country using false documents. It is important that resources are deployed to catch the criminals who are involved in dog fighting and to make the links between that appalling crime of animal cruelty and the other crimes that I have mentioned. Labour's amendment will make it easier to do that. I hope that the review includes dog fighting in its remit. I ask the minister, in summing up, to say how the Government can help to highlight the SSPCA's anonymous reporting service and the rewards that might be available for those who provide information. Given the vicious perpetrators who lie behind such fights, it is understandable that people who have information might be reluctant to come forward. Badger baiting is another wildlife crime that is linked to organised crime and which is related to dog fighting through similar perpetrators. I note that it seems to be on the increase—according to The Scotsman there were seven cases last year. It is worrying that Advocates for Animals reports that a lesser plea of disturbing a badger sett was allowed in a recent case of badger baiting, in which officers were confident that there was strong  evidence for a conviction. That underlines the need for procurators fiscal who have specialist training, which is outlined in Labour's amendment. Although it is important that we take steps to protect vulnerable pets and wild animals in Scotland from cruelty, persecution and neglect—I welcome the review—we must recognise the links that exist with criminals who are involved in other serious crimes. The stabbings in our schools, the shootings on our streets and the peddling of drugs to children are all linked with members of the criminal underworld who are involved in cases of serious animal cruelty and wildlife crime. I hope that we have a debate about those links soon.

I am pleased that the Solicitor General is present for today's debate, and I hope that he will attend that debate, too.

Is the minister aware of the environmental injustice in my constituency? A section of Dunbeth public park that is currently used as playing fields by schools and the public will be used by private finance initiative contractors to build a floodlit sports pitch, in spite of significant public opposition. The development will involve the cordoning off of a substantial area of a beautiful Victorian park for what will effectively be restricted public usage that will be subject to cost. That will undoubtedly affect health and well-being. Does she share my concerns that the objectives of the contractors have taken precedence over the needs and concerns of the community, and will she undertake to look into the matter?

Given that prostitution is part of the continuum of violence against women, and given  that tonight sees the first screening of the controversial television drama "Secret Diary of a Call Girl", will the cabinet secretary assure me of her Government's support to help women to get out of prostitution? Does she agree that the majority of women who are involved in prostitution are victims of male violence?

I commend the previous Executive and the former Justice 1 Committee for their work on penal policy in the last session, and I urge the Scottish Government to build on that work. I also welcome Pauline McNeill to her new role as Labour spokesperson on justice.  Many areas of penal policy have been covered, but I want to concentrate on the specific issue of women offenders. I trust that the proposed commission will pay particular attention to that aspect of penal policy—indeed, I hope that the commission's make-up will be gender balanced. A number of reports over the past few years have strongly linked women's offending with the three As—addiction, anxiety and abuse—all of which, in turn, are rooted in women's experience of poverty. Although women account for only a small percentage of the prison population in Scotland, as Cathie Craigie said, the number who find themselves in and out of Scotland's only women's prison, Cornton Vale, is concerning. Too often for those women, breaking the law seems not so much a choice as a necessity for survival. Most have not committed serious or violent offences, and therefore pose little threat to the public. Further, many of them are mothers. Not only is the impact on children a personal tragedy, it affects society as a whole. When women are imprisoned, their children might be placed in care, which increases their chances of becoming offenders. In 1998, the Government set a target of limiting the inmate population of Cornton Vale to 100 or fewer by the end of 2000. However, today, there are around 300 female prisoners in Cornton Vale, many of them repeat offenders. Too many of those women are victims rather than criminals. Dr Andrew McLellan, the chief inspector of prisons, concluded in a recent report that, of the inmates, 98 per cent had drug addiction problems, 80 per cent had mental health problems and 75 per cent had a history of abuse and very poor physical health. Undoubtedly, policy on women in the justice system needs to be more focused on addressing the problems that lead to offending. It is inefficient and counterproductive to continue to focus heavily on jailing women who are guilty of minor and non-violent crimes. No one benefits from that approach and too many people, including children, suffer. What do we do, then, with persistent offenders? What happens when all of the alternatives to custody have been exhausted? I agree that there are cases in which custody is the only option. In those instances, attention must be focused on providing support services that offer sufficient help to ensure that, following release, the women are not trapped in a situation in which criminality seems to be their only choice. Women who leave custody desperately need help to reintegrate into the outside world and break the cycle of offending that they are caught up in. Studies show that the period following a woman's release from prison is vital in determining whether she will reoffend.

It is worrying that some women emerge from jail with only the price of a bus ticket and a few pounds to help with resettling. Many of them are not familiar with a settled existence as they are used to living chaotic lives. Intervention is desperately needed in those cases in order to divert them from prison and provide them with the tools that they need to cope with a normal life. The needs of those vulnerable and damaged women are complex. The best chance of tackling persistent reoffending is afforded by adopting an holistic approach that addresses the difficulties that women face and investing sufficient resources in support services that allow community-based alternatives to custody. Many of those women need long-term professional help for everything from coping with mental illness and addiction problems to acquiring parenting and vocational skills. I was interested to hear the cabinet secretary say that people should receive help to turn away from a life of crime. I am interested to know exactly what kind of help is being proposed. A new study by the charity Circle, entitled "What Life After Prison: Voices of Women in Cornton Vale", reinforces the idea that women are leaving prison with insufficient help to prevent them from reoffending, despite the efforts that Margaret Smith outlined earlier. The 107 inmates who were involved in the study were all mothers, but many had lost custody of their children, and most of them had mental health and addiction problems. One in three had already been inside more than three times, and only four said that their experience of support following release was good. To quote one of the pleas for help in the study, one woman said: "I'll need help managing money, I won't manage on benefits and will go back to prostitution and then I can't get my son back." The study indicates that the current system is not working. Of course, there are successful projects, such as 218 in Glasgow, which is supported by Glasgow City Council and was supported by the previous Scottish Executive. The purpose of that project is to address the root causes of women's offending and take an holistic  approach to changing offending behaviour. It is important that such services are extended. Pauline McNeill asked the cabinet secretary to comment on that. I hope that he does so when he sums up. Innovative projects for women in custody, such as the storybook mums project at Cornton Vale, should be supported and encouraged. I would like to go into that a bit more, but I do not have time. However, I ask the Scottish Government to take an interest in that project. It is primarily self-funding, but it could benefit from financial support. In conclusion, many people regard alternatives to custody as soft options. They dismiss women in prison—a lot of whom are addicts and prostitutes—as failures, criminals and a waste of space. The reality is that those women make up one of the most marginalised and vulnerable groups. They have been used, abused and abandoned, and it is likely that their children could meet the same fate. Punishment is not what they need; they need help, support, an opportunity to participate in society and a chance to provide a better life for their families.

Does the member recognise that some of those people might also have an undiagnosed learning disability?

I welcome the Government's commitment to continue the work of the previous Executive in this area. Does the minister share my concern that essential improvements to the prosecution process could highlight the obvious gaps between the law and public opinion? Is the minister aware of an ICM Research poll commissioned by Amnesty International, which indicated the existence of a "sexist blame culture", whereby 34 per cent of those people who were polled believed that a woman is to blame for her rape if she is perceived to be acting flirtatiously, dressed inappropriately or drunk? Is he aware that a recent survey by the Scottish Executive revealed similar worrying attitudes? How does the Government intend to tackle widely held societal attitudes that seem to hold women responsible for sexual attacks that are inflicted upon them, whereas in fact rape is never a woman's fault?

I commend Sandra White for securing the debate and Bill Butler for his work on the issue. Although asylum and immigration remain on the political agenda, I do not think that enough attention is paid to the reasons why people leave their homes in the first place. It is important to acknowledge that few people leave their country willingly and that most are forced to flee because of repression or poverty. Many asylum seekers have fled from persecution that has been induced by western actions, such as wars. They then face a double insult: not only are they forced to flee their country but when they arrive in Britain they are vilified by some people as welfare scroungers who are sponging off the state and flooding Britain. The reality is that Britain takes less than 2 per cent of the world's refugees and ranks ninth among 15 European countries in the number of asylum applications received. I turn to the issue of detention. The beautiful Lanarkshire countryside is the setting for Dungavel house, but the house is certainly not beautiful, because there children and their families are locked up behind barbed and razor wire fences. They have committed no crime. All they have done is seek asylum, having fled circumstances in their country that we would find it hard to imagine. Who would want to flee their own country, leaving behind jobs, homes, friends and family, unless the circumstances were dire? One of the saddest things that I saw at Dungavel house was when, during a rally, a window opened and a hand came out waving a white handkerchief. I felt powerless when I saw that happen. If children were being incarcerated in that manner abroad, we would hear a lot more shouting about human rights abuses, instead of attempts to justify it, ranging from people being silent and thinking, "It's not our responsibility," to people arguing about conditions. We have heard today that children are being housed alongside criminals, which is completely unacceptable. I ask the minister to tell us in his summing up what discussions the Scottish Government has had, or will be having, with the Border and Immigration Agency about the code of practice for immigration staff in order to safeguard children in the asylum process. How will that code of practice apply in Scotland? Should people awaiting a decision on their asylum claim be permitted to work? Yes. Asylum  is of course primarily about human rights and protection, but work is a vital component of helping people to integrate into the society in which they are seeking sanctuary. It gives people a sense of purpose and aids the well-being of individuals and communities. Excluding people from work forces them into poverty and isolation and allows vital skills to remain unused. It also allows asylum seekers to be branded scroungers, which is completely unacceptable. Skills shortages could be tackled immediately if we allowed asylum seekers to work, but, instead, we turn willing people who offer a wide range of skills into welfare dependents. We allow them to be maligned and hated as scroungers and the cause of all social ills. They are branded as such by people who believe the bad press publicity and rhetoric. We need to remember that immigrants have enhanced Scotland over many centuries and demand that the right-wing press stops attacking refugees and asylum seekers. We need to give asylum seekers the right to work, and to grant an amnesty, as Sandra White says in her motion. We must stop the imprisonment of children and families at Dungavel, because we should be welcoming people from overseas who are fleeing wars, poverty, oppression and torture, not only because it is right and humane to do so, but because those people can and do enrich our nation.

Why is the motion not clearly anti-Trident? Why does it include the phrase "at this time"?

It is unfortunate that the back-bench amendment in my name, which was supported by several comrades and is printed in section F of today's Business Bulletin , was not chosen for debate, because it is the only clear anti-Trident position. As it stands, the motion is not anti-Trident; it is party-political posturing by the Greens and is designed to appease the Liberals by using the words "at this time". If we are not to renew Trident "at this time", when are we to do so? A year from now? Two years? Five years? Clearly, it will be at some time. My position is clear: Trident should never be replaced, neither at this time nor at any time. Storing our own weapons of mass destruction is wrong, replacing them is wrong and using them would be not only wrong but reckless, despicable and immoral. I hope that my views are perfectly clear: replacing Trident is wrong and using it would be an abomination. That is also the view of a number of my colleagues on the Labour benches, and it is unacceptable that they cannot express it. If we are going to have a debate, we should have a proper one. The reality is that the Greens thought that replacing Trident was such an important issue that they split their time this morning, giving us only half the available time on an issue of world peace. Then they lodged a motion that is wishy-washy at best and pro-Trident at worst, when they could have set out a clear anti-Trident position by leaving out the three little words "at this time". If we were in the Parliament that actually has responsibility for Trident, a fudge might be better than nothing—if it was the only game in town and we could try again later. However, this Parliament can merely express an opinion. To make that opinion one that says, "We don't want to replace Trident at this time," is ridiculous. It is a wasted opportunity. The motion is not anti-Trident, it is not a principled position and it is duplicitous. On those grounds, I will find it extremely hard to support it at decision time.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Under our standing orders, would it be in order for the member who lodged the motion to withdraw it and to replace it with a motion without notice that omitted the words "at this time", thereby making it akin to the amendment that I lodged, which was not selected? If so, we could have on the table a position that was clearly anti-Trident. That is not the case at present because my amendment was not selected and, as it stands, the motion is not anti-Trident. If that is possible, I trust that Patrick Harvie will act accordingly so that we have an anti-Trident position on the table.

I campaigned against the downgrading of Monklands hospital, primarily on the basis that the decision was based on financial considerations rather than health needs, so I, too, welcome the announcement to retain the A and E unit. However, can the minister advise me whether Monklands will also retain its level 3 status, which will ensure that all of the other services that are required to support A and E, such as intensive care, are retained on site, so that my constituents will be able to access the high-quality health services that they need and deserve? Further, can she confirm that the well-informed and considered views of my constituents, which were ignored by NHS Lanarkshire, will now be listened to?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve the health and well-being of the people of Coatbridge and Chryston. (S3O-152)

I am pleased that the minister intends to continue with the good initiatives of the previous Labour-led Executive. Given the advantages to health and well-being that are conferred on mothers and babies by breastfeeding, does the minister share my concern that breastfeeding rates remain relatively low in constituencies such as Coatbridge and Chryston, despite the evidence on its benefits? What additional support is available to NHS boards and education authorities in areas of multiple deprivation to continue to change attitudes and improve services? When the breastfeeding adviser post is filled—in the autumn, I believe—will that person receive sufficient resources to support the work that is required to improve breastfeeding rates throughout Scotland?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Yesterday, I was not called to ask a question on the statement on Monklands hospital—despite the fact that it serves the majority of my constituents—because other members' questions resembled speeches. Will you advise me on what standing orders say about question time and statements? My understanding is that questions should be put with a minimum of preamble. We have had a similar situation today.

Before taking the oath, I state that I believe that the people of Scotland should be citizens, not subjects, and hold firmly that my allegiance should be first and foremost to them. However, I recognise that to serve my constituents in the Parliament I must meet the legal requirement of taking the oath and will, therefore, do so.  The following members took the oath:  Elaine Smith (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab) Elizabeth Smith (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con)  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Iain Smith (North East Fife) (LD)  The following members took the oath:  Margaret Smith (Edinburgh West) (LD) Stewart Stevenson (Banff and Buchan) (SNP) David Stewart (Highlands and Islands) (Lab) Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Nicola Sturgeon (Glasgow Govan) (SNP)  The following member took the oath:  John Swinney (North Tayside) (SNP)  The following member took the oath and repeated it in Doric and Gaelic:  Dave Thompson (Highlands and Islands) (SNP)  The following member took the oath:  Jim Tolson (Dunfermline West) (LD)  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Stefan Tymkewycz (Lothians) (SNP)  The following member took the oath and repeated it in Doric:  Maureen Watt (North East Scotland) (SNP)  The following members made a solemn affirmation:  Andrew Welsh (Angus) (SNP) Ms Sandra White (Glasgow) (SNP)  The following members took the oath:  Karen Whitefield (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab) David Whitton (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)  The following members made a solemn affirmation:  Bill Wilson (West of Scotland) (SNP) John Wilson (Central Scotland) (SNP)

Does the member agree that the line will also very much benefit the people of Coatbridge?

I am pleased to speak to the motion in Sylvia Jackson's name, which I was involved in drafting. Unfortunately, Sylvia is unwell. She is upset at missing the debate because she is totally committed to gaining improvements in the life expectancy and experiences of young people suffering from Duchenne muscular dystrophy. The issues were first brought to Sylvia Jackson's attention by her constituent Dean Widd on behalf of DMD sufferers in Scotland. On Sylvia's behalf, I put on record her thanks to Dean for his work. I know that, if re-elected, like me and others Sylvia will continue to press the Government on behalf of her constituents. I first became aware of the issues to do with DMD when I was contacted by Sheila Crilly, gran of a lovely wee four-year-old boy from Coatbridge, Alan James Gilmour—otherwise known as AJ—who was diagnosed with DMD just over a year ago. AJ and his family visited the Scottish Parliament as part of a lobby last June and the family attended a meeting in the evening organised by Sylvia Jackson. The family and friends of AJ are currently fundraising to allow him to swim with dolphins. I wish them all the best. DMD is a rare condition that is caused by an absence of dystrophin, which is a protein that helps to keep muscle cells intact. The lack of that protein causes a generalised weakness and muscle wasting, first affecting the hips, pelvic  area, thighs and shoulders but eventually affecting all voluntary muscles, including possibly the heart and breathing muscles. DMD almost exclusively affects boys and signs can appear as early as three years old. Children who are affected are often late in learning to walk and most lose the ability to walk between the ages of eight and 11. DMD affects about 100 boys a year in the United Kingdom, it can be genetic and there is currently no cure. Young boys in Scotland who are affected are dying on average 10 years earlier than their counterparts in north England and much earlier than those in some other countries such as Denmark. Scottish parents of children with DMD, including my constituents, were recently very saddened to hear of the death of Graham Jackson, an 18-year-old Duchenne sufferer from Lanarkshire. I pass on our condolences to Graham's family. Those parents have many questions for the Scottish Executive, some of which were asked in the recent race against time campaign. I will come to them shortly. However, I say to the minister that the most important question is, why are Scottish children dying prematurely? That is a shocking state of affairs. I would be grateful if he would tell us how the Executive intends to increase the life expectancy of children with DMD. Colleagues will no doubt raise specific issues. Before they do, I will highlight concerns that have come to my attention. Improving the quality of life of children with DMD is important if we want to improve their life expectancy. We must ensure that their experiences are as good as they can be. Access to physiotherapy is patchy, but good physiotherapy support can play an important role in helping future mobility. Access to neurorespiratory services is a significant factor in adult survival rates for those with DMD. In that context, assisted ventilation in Scotland requires more funding. The attention that has been given to diagnosing spinal curvature and the surveillance of heart and breathing muscles has improved. I note the work of the Scottish muscle network in that regard. I am sure that the minister will have more to say about its work in his closing remarks. However, AJ's mum, Clare, has told me that Glasgow leads the world in cardiac research, but not for boys whose hearts are affected by DMD. She wanted that point to be made in the debate. Wheelchair provision is another major issue. Wheelchair provision can substantially improve the quality of people's lives, but it is very patchy. Indeed, the matter has been a news item this week following the outcome of the review of  wheelchair services. I would be grateful if the minister would comment on that. Suitable housing and the provision of appropriate adaptations are extremely contentious issues, but suitable housing and appropriate adaptations are vital for improving quality of life. In Denmark in 2005, only one adult with DMD over the age of 23 did not live in his own home; in Scotland that year, only one adult with DMD lived in his own home. That is unacceptable. Perhaps the minister will comment on the relevant provisions of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 and say whether they will change the current means-tested approach that is taken under the housing improvement grant scheme. Elsewhere in the UK, there is a set grant amount up to £30,000, which is not means tested. Finally, I would appreciate comments on the steps that have been taken to encourage and support research on DMD in Scotland and on the lessons that are being learned from research elsewhere. I lodged written parliamentary questions on those matters earlier in the year, but I did not receive robust responses. I am particularly interested in research funding for exon skipping as a possible treatment for DMD. The issues that I have mentioned are the main issues that people have raised with me. I am sure that colleagues will raise other issues. I will finish by quoting from a letter that was sent to me by AJ's other gran, Violet Gilmour, who has said things much better than I can. She said: "My heart aches for A.J. when I think of the hurdles he will have to face in the future but we will be there for him to help him over the hurdles. He is such a happy and funny child, when A.J.'s around sadness is put aside. We all hope and pray that things will change in Scotland and more help and grants will be made available to families of boys with DMD to give them a chance of a much better quality of life. Hopefully this will happen soon and bring Scotland up to the same high level of care they have in Denmark." I say to the minister that time is running out for young Scottish boys with DMD. If those boys were our own children, we would move heaven and earth to help them. The Government in particular has a responsibility to do all that it can to improve the life expectancy, quality of life and life experiences of those young people. It must make that responsibility a priority. I welcome the people in the gallery who have come to listen to the debate and look forward to hearing what colleagues have to say. I hope that there will be a positive response from the minister. Again, I apologise on behalf of Sylvia Jackson, who would have liked to be here.

I know that the minister is aware of the problem of flooding in the Whifflet area of my constituency as I raised it with the Executive some years ago and I discussed it with her recently. Can she give me further detail on the flood prevention work that is taking place in Whifflet and update me on the status of the work, which has been delayed? Can she reassure my constituents that they will soon be able to live and work free from the distress and upset that are caused by the flooding of their homes and businesses?

As I asked Patrick Harvie when he kindly accepted my intervention, would health promotion in our schools include the promotion of breastfeeding as the best start for babies? After all, young children need to understand the benefits of that kind of nutrition.

Does the member think that education on the benefits of breastfeeding is also important?

We had an interesting debate this morning on the amendments to the bill, but I start by saying that the bill is a good, progressive piece of legislation, which deserves support. The Executive should be commended for it. Thanks should go to the committee, the clerks and the many groups and organisations that have promoted the agenda of nutritious school meals for a number of years—particularly the Child Poverty Action Group. Credit should also go to Frances Curran, whose member's bill on free school meals was, unfortunately, not considered by Parliament. Like me and some other members, Frances Curran has consistently promoted the benefits of universal free nutritious school meals. I will come back to that subject later because it was the most controversial aspect of the bill, and I want to make some positive comments first. The nutritional quality—or perhaps the lack of nutritional quality—of school meals was identified as a problem during consideration of the first proposals on free school meals. Indeed, the title of the book edited by Usha Brown and Danny Phillips in support of a free nutritious midday meal was "Even the tatties have batter!" That name came from a comment made by a child about school meals. Other comments were that the food served was "not nice", "disgusting" and "Yuck!", and children complained of being served pink meat, hard pears and green bananas. The hungry for success programme was initiated to help to tackle that issue, among other things. It is now clear that outcomes vary across Scotland, and the bill will therefore ensure uniformly high standards throughout the country. It should mean that all children in the state sector can enjoy nutritionally balanced food and drink if they are provided for them in school. The cashless system helps to reduce stigma, which definitely needs to be addressed. I am pleased to note that North Lanarkshire Council is currently rolling out such a system in its schools. It also makes sense to include health promotion duties in the remit of schools and to ask local authorities to account annually for what they have done. That can only assist with changing the culture and habits of our children with regard to nutrition. It is vital that we achieve that for their future health.  I wonder whether the minister would consider the results of the initiative in Rosehall high school in Coatbridge, which is changing attitudes to breastfeeding via education. That is an interesting piece of work and I point the minister in that direction. Increasingly, our children are becoming obese, which affects their quality of life and life expectancy. Obesity has been described as a modern-day epidemic, which requires to be recognised as a medical and not just a lifestyle issue. When speaking in response to my members' business debate on that subject a year ago, the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care said: "There are no short-term fixes ... Instead, there is a long-term agenda, which calls for concerted and sustained action. That action has already started, and it must continue."— [ Official Report , 2 February 2006; c 23110.]  The bill is part of that process. The evaluation of the initiative to provide free fruit in schools found that it was a positive initiative, and it highlighted the potential to increase the consumption of fruit and improve healthy practices among children; the fruit is given to all children, and that is right. The fact that children have better-off parents does not necessarily mean that they eat well or nutritiously. I also urge the minister to encourage local authorities to provide breakfast clubs. That is important. Given the impact of the free fruit initiative, and considering the scale of the challenge that we now face, Parliament during the next session should look more favourably at the setting up of pilot schemes to examine the possible impact that a similarly large-scale initiative, such as free school lunches, could have. I support the proposal for free school meals, but I am not against pilot schemes because they could help to persuade others. I am pleased that my party has signalled its intention to expand entitlement to free school meals and, if I am returned to Parliament, I will certainly pledge to ensure that that intention is pursued. I remain convinced that the provision of universal free school meals is the best way to ensure a healthier population for the future, although I have no doubt that the Scottish Executive takes the issue of child health and nutrition seriously. The bill shows that.

We are discussing a progressive piece of legislation that could be made much better if we supported amendments that would enable the universal provision of free school meals. I do not understand the objection to giving local authorities the discretion to do that. Child obesity is a ticking time bomb. I secured a members' business debate on the issue about a year ago. There is no quick fix to the problem. The positive health changes that took place in Finland happened more than 30 years after the introduction of free school meals. The sooner we start, the sooner we will get on with making those changes. There is no point in my spelling out the obvious health benefits of free school meals, as they have been well rehearsed for years in the Parliament. It is clear to me that the improvements in health would offset any costs and would be well worth the price we would pay. It is essential that we tackle childhood dietary health. One of the most direct and achievable means of doing that is by providing free, healthy meals to all children at lunch time in state schools—at the very least, in primary schools—for which we ought to establish pilot schemes. I believe in the universal provision of free school meals, but I think that pilot schemes would be a way forward to show that the policy would work and would be of benefit to our children's health. Universal provision seems to be accepted in many areas. For example, there is free bus travel for the elderly, there is the central heating  allowance for the over-60s and there are free nursery places for three and four-year-olds. Indeed, the national health service is provided universally—and we provide free food to people who use that service. The bill accepts the need to provide healthy snacks in our schools, as happens. I do not believe that we can afford to means test children on something that directly affects their health and the future health of the Scottish population. Ever the optimist, I think that we will, eventually, get around to providing free lunches for all children in our state schools. The bill is good and progressive. Those who, over the years, have campaigned for changes ought to be congratulated on getting the bill introduced and, I hope, passed today. I have consistently supported the universal provision of free school meals and I will continue to do so.

On international women's day, and on the  subject of births, will the minister say what the Executive is doing to address the serious and debilitating condition of post-natal depression? What support and services exist for women who are affected by that condition? Given that there has been no epidemiological research on post-natal depression since the first significant Edinburgh study in 1982, are there any plans to carry out such research?

Is the minister aware that some of my constituents, particularly those with mobility problems, rely on the ambulance service, which is under pressure, to transport them to routine medical appointments, many of which are missed when ambulances are diverted to attend emergencies? In light of the unacceptable proposal to downgrade Monklands hospital, which can only place the ambulance service under further strain, can the minister update me on what is being done to improve transport infrastructure in the NHS Lanarkshire area?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Does the member agree that breastfeeding is of major importance and that we need to focus on it more and consider the funding it attracts so that we can help and support the staff and the mothers, and that we should recognise the new research that was published today that underpins the breast is best message?

The debate must be put in context. It must be recognised that prostitution, pornography and other forms of commercial sex are all part of a burgeoning industry that makes millions of pounds out of human misery. That industry is also undoubtedly part of a wider web of organised crime. It promotes alcohol and drug problems as necessary tools of its trade, and it makes rich men out of a minority of predators while simultaneously ruining the lives of thousands of women and children.  Any legislation that the Parliament passes on the buying and selling of human bodies must be predicated on an understanding of the fundamental underlying truth that prostitution in any form is predominantly male violence against women and children. Indeed, the expert group concluded that dealing with prostitution and its effects should be an issue as much of social policy as of criminal law. Therefore, most of the group's recommendations related to the need for local strategies, interagency responsibilities and services, and changes in public attitudes. I make a plea to the minister for further funding commitments and strategies to take that work forward. The bill is an historic piece of legislation. I commend Margo MacDonald for the work that she has done on the issue over the years, but I am sorry that she cannot support the bill at this stage. As gender reporter for the Equal Opportunities Committee, I have previously taken evidence on prostitution. Over the years, our committee has also flagged up numerous concerns and recommendations on the matter. Given that the issue is so manifestly gender biased, and given that the Equal Opportunities Committee has been addressing the issue since its inception, it makes no sense—indeed, it amounts to a missed opportunity—that our committee was passed over when the decision was made about taking evidence at stage 1. I agree with what Cathy Peattie said on that. However, I am not dissatisfied with the Local Government and Transport Committee's report. On the contrary, I think that the report represents a thorough and determined investigation by committee members. I am pleased that the minister has indicated that he is willing to act on the committee's concerns. In particular, I align myself with the committee's recommendation that the new offences should be restricted solely to purchasers. We must lift the cloak of invisibility from men who use women so that the social harm of their behaviour is no longer hidden from their partners, relatives, friends and work colleagues. It must be made clear that such behaviour is socially unacceptable and the committee's suggestion on fine levels might help to achieve that.

In my book, all prostitution and abuse of women is violence. We will need to consider what further steps can be taken after the bill is passed. With the bill, we are taking a small but historic and important step. The provision of alternative disposals and rehabilitation for purchasers is also important. Purchasers must be made to recognise the harm  and human misery that they cause. Ultimately, rehabilitation must have the aim of stopping the abusive behaviour. We also need to think about the women involved. It is clear that they enter prostitution for socioeconomic, not aspirational, reasons. Prostitution is not a career choice. However, our society ensures that, once they have entered that situation, women cannot easily escape because we make it an identity. Once a woman has taken money for sex, she is a prostitute. She is then trapped by, and burdened with, that tag for the rest of her life. That is completely wrong. I am heartened that the Local Government and Transport Committee recognised that the bill's provisions had the potential to stigmatise women who have escaped prostitution and I hope that an answer to that problem can be found at stage 2. Legislation must make it clear that prostitution is not a lifestyle choice or a simple business transaction but violence, exploitation and abuse. We cannot say that often enough. The vast majority of women who are caught up in prostitution sell their bodies because of factors such as previous abuse, current drug dependency, poverty or violent coercion. Furthermore, they might have become caught in the trap of using drugs to try to cope with what is happening to them. We must remember that. Those issues are firmly within the social justice agenda and are not simply issues of criminal justice. I recognise that the Scottish Executive is progressing work in other areas, as the minister outlined at the beginning of the debate. The bill must be considered as a small piece of a much bigger picture, but we cannot legislate in a vacuum. Any legal change must be based on a desire to find an appropriate societal response to violence against women and children. Any change should certainly not make the situation worse for victims or fail to target the users and abusers. I trust that the bill will be sufficiently amended at stage 2 to ensure that those aims are adequately addressed. By legislating in the way that the Local Government and Transport Committee recommended in its report, which the Executive has now accepted, I believe that we can take an important step towards influencing attitudinal change and send a clear message to men and to society that women and children are simply not for sale.

As Margo MacDonald knows, I signed her original bill proposal that allowed the debate to begin. It was hard to kick-start such a debate in the Parliament. However, in what way does she think that tolerance zones would have shrunk the market for prostitution? Does she agree that—as outlined in "Not for Sale: Feminists Resisting Prostitution and Pornography"—tolerance zones, by their very nature and name, simply lead to tolerance of violence and abuse? I, too, have done some homework.

I agree with the minister's last point but wonder whether the Executive has identified any particular funding streams for those strategies.

Carolyn Leckie told us that only 45 per cent of disabled people are in work. During evidence, we heard that only 6 per cent of people with ASD are in employment. Will Marilyn Livingstone join me in congratulating the National Autistic Society on the work that it is doing with employers to try to change that?

I am pleased to hear the minister's comments. However, I want to ask about wider trade union issues. In evidence to the committee, Des Loughney of the Scottish Trades Union Congress said that he was surprised about "the lack of contact between the trade union movement and what I call the world of disability."—[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 10 January 2006; c 1307.] Will the minister comment on the STUC's one workplace equal rights campaign, which is part of the one Scotland, many cultures campaign? Furthermore, will he congratulate the T&G on its recent initiative?

I declare my registered interest as a member of the Transport and General Workers Union. As others have said, the debate is the culmination of more than two years of hard work by the committee. Like others, I thank the clerks, the Equal Opportunities Committee's disability reporter—Marilyn Livingstone—and the many other people who contributed to our inquiry over that time. At an early stage, the purpose of the inquiry was set out as being "to identify the issues that create barriers to the participation of disabled people, in particular in relation to accessing: • work; • further and higher education; and • leisure."  We felt it necessary to have a limited remit. Now that we are at the end of the inquiry, we can see why. It became clear at the beginning of the inquiry that there are a number of cross-cutting issues, such as transport, information and physical access, which we have heard about this morning and which permeate the experience of disabled people and create barriers for them. Perhaps the most fundamentally pervasive issue—which was touched on by Marlyn Glen—is attitudes. Obstacles to equality and participation can take a number of forms, such as structural, organisational and physical difficulties, but it is attitudinal barriers that can cause the most profound damage because they effectively underpin inequality by supporting the continuation of discrimination and inaction. Negative perceptions have a significant impact on the lives of disabled people. They range from apprehension about responding to, and interacting with, disabled people and limited understanding of the nature of disability and the capabilities of disabled people, to more extreme forms of discrimination and harassment, such as that which is encountered disproportionately by people who have mental health problems, learning disabilities and visual impairments. The Executive has a strong record in trying to effect attitudinal change through high-profile campaigns such as the see me campaign and one Scotland, but the Equal Opportunities Committee identified a number of key actions that would help to bolster that work, including the need to support and develop the quality and availability of disability equality training as a potentially effective solution to tackling negative attitudes. Many members have mentioned that vital measure already this morning. The report particularly suggested that DET has a major role to play in securing equity of treatment for disabled people both in the workplace and as consumers and service users. Unfortunately, many employers lack knowledge and experience of working with disabled people, and they sometimes have misguided perceptions that employing disabled people is expensive. Our research found that the only disability training that senior managers often receive is limited to the legal requirements and the compliance of their organisation. That translates into a lowest-common-denominator approach and a can't-do attitude to disabled people. One illustration of that is the frequent citing of health and safety considerations as the reason why disabled people cannot participate in certain activities or workplaces. The value of having more widespread DET would be that it would cultivate a more responsive and open can-do attitude.  The committee found that a number of factors would be crucial to ensuring that more people receive DET and that it is of an appropriate standard: all equality training should include disability equality training; disability equality training should be devised by disabled people; and people who work directly with disabled people should have high-level disability equality training, which should also be available to people who work in medicine, health, education and the wider care sector. As Marlyn Glen mentioned, there are a number of DET providers whose approaches and capabilities are quite diverse, which can be confusing. Our research suggests that there is a need for a central point in Scotland where trainers can register and where organisations can go to seek appropriate DET trainers. The committee recommends that the Scottish Executive develop an accreditation scheme and a quality assurance framework for DET, with a register of accredited providers. That would help to raise the standard and profile of DET, and it could help to ensure its more widespread delivery. The relative invisibility of disabled people in public life was frequently mentioned in the inquiry—Marlyn Glen mentioned public appointments. There is a lack of realistic role models. Disabled people make up 20 per cent of the population, but are seldom represented as such. Consultees felt that, although high achievers such as Scotland's paralympians have a role to play in raising people's expectations, it can be unhelpful if they are the only public role models whom disabled people encounter. We need to take that on board. The committee believes that there is a need for a long-term strategic campaign led by the Executive that is aimed at tackling negative attitudes and at promoting the visibility of disabled people in society. We feel that the Scottish media should work more closely with disability organisations to present more positive images and role models. We spoke to a number of people who feel that citizenship education has great potential to reach young people and instil positive attitudes, so I am pleased that the minister mentioned that in his opening speech. The committee recommends that disability equality training should be included in citizenship education in schools. There are many good sources for educational materials—for instance, there is the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust's respect campaign. We need to adopt a more coherent approach to ensuring that such materials are used in Scottish schools. I was going to discuss the role of trade unions, but I do not have enough time. I will just say that I am pleased that the Transport and General Workers Union has launched a new disability  negotiators' guide "to promote rights at work and encourage participation in the union." Devolution was always intended to be a process rather than an event. The Equal Opportunities Committee's inquiry has shown us how much scope we have to effect change in ways that are specific to Scotland in areas of policy that are often seen as being largely reserved to Westminster. Coatbridge College in my constituency has been following the progress of the inquiry and has responded by setting up an access and inclusion group to tackle the perceived and real barriers for prospective students. The principal of the college commented: "The committee's report and supporting recommendations provide the College Board of management, staff and students with clear direction on how to improve access to further and higher education. It will have immediate and sustained implications for the College by informing and influencing its strategic aims and objectives, organisational structure and estates strategy." That shows the influence that the committee's report is already having and what we can achieve. I urge the Scottish Executive also to embrace that approach by adopting the committee's recommendations. I commend the report to Parliament.

The minister said that the committee's report goes further than that of the disability working group. Will he thoroughly consider the Equal Opportunities Committee's report and not just go along with the working group's report?

I want to talk about Gordon Jackson's amendments 157 and 158. I welcome the deputy minister's manuscript amendments, which, in effect, do what Gordon Jackson sought to do with amendment 158, which is to give Scottish ministers delegated powers to introduce further debtor protections if land attachment results in an increase in homelessness. However, questions remain about how the Scottish Executive will know whether that has happened. No relevant court statistics are  available at present. The latest civil judicial statistics are for 2002 and that service has been discontinued, pending a review by the Executive. How will anyone know how many land attachments or warrants for sale have been granted? More important, without the provision in amendment 157 how will anyone know the impact that land attachment has had on homelessness and debt recovery? As Tommy Sheridan pointed out, we know that, when people were subject to poindings, they would stop paying their rent and utility bills to prevent a warrant sale. That explains why, prior to the abolition of warrant sales, there were 23,000 poindings but only 500 warrant sales. Due to the power of land attachment, a debtor could be forced to stop paying their mortgage in order to pay off a land attachment debt. That could mean that the debtor and their family might be threatened with the absurd situation of becoming homeless through mortgage repossession when, in fact, their homelessness would have been caused by the land attachment. Unless we monitor and record those statistics, no one will know the true impact of land attachment on homelessness. That is why amendment 157, in the name of Gordon Jackson, is absolutely necessary. It requires the Executive to publish a statement on the impact of land attachment within 15 months, setting out the impact of land attachment on debt recovery and homelessness. Given that the minister is happy to support amendments that are similar to Gordon Jackson's amendment 158, which would create a power to introduce further protections for home owners, it makes sense that he should also be willing to provide a statement on the impact of land attachment. Without that statement, no one will know whether Scottish ministers should introduce additional protections at a later date. Therefore, it makes little sense to have that additional power without undertaking to do the necessary monitoring and research. As others have said, the Executive has been happy to provide formal statements on fuel poverty under the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 and on the abolition of priority need tests under the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003. Further, I now understand that the minister will accept amendment 157. The bill contains many progressive features, but it will be improved by amendment 157, which is complementary to the minister's manuscript amendments. I urge members to support amendment 157, in the name of Gordon Jackson.

Given the extent of the obesity problem across socioeconomic groups in Scotland and the Scottish Executive's acceptance of the potential of universality in relation to health promotion through, for example, the free fruit in schools initiative, does the minister agree that there is a real need for pilot schemes for free school meals, and that in dismissing the policy without practical research we might be rejecting prematurely what could be the most effective tool for health promotion policy since the smoking ban?

Does the minister agree that it is unfortunate that some parents in Coatbridge are not as thrilled as they could be about the fabulous new-build St Andrews high school because their children have to walk along an unsafe route in inclement weather? Could he intervene to persuade North Lanarkshire Council that, because of the unusual circumstances, it should relax its rigid bus rules, which mean that, in some cases, a child in one street gets on the bus while a child in a neighbouring street does not?

I am curious to know whether that comment means that the member is in favour of renationalisation.

Mary Mulligan mentioned some of the benefits to her constituents. Does she agree that one of the major advantages for them of this excellent Scottish Executive-funded project will be that it will be far easier for them to come to Coatbridge and enjoy the fabulous facilities there, such as the Time Capsule, Drumpellier country park and Summerlee Heritage Park, when it reopens?

I spoke in Karen Whitefield's members' business debate on this matter, because the line will hugely benefit my constituents in Coatbridge. However, although I very much welcome the project, does the member agree that the minister and the appropriate authorities must also consider car parking provision at the Coatbridge stations, which are busy at the moment and might well come under more pressure when the line opens?

The Environment and Rural Development Committee's inquiry into the food supply chain was short but interesting and informative. Once it was under way, it widened out somewhat, as we have heard. As has been mentioned by other members, support for local food economies was promoted by witnesses from all parts of the food supply chain. There was particular emphasis on the need for high-quality Scottish produce to be marketed with a focus on its Scottishness rather than on trying to compete on price in global commodity markets. It is accepted that, although price is important, many consumers are prepared to pay a wee bit more for high-quality, locally produced foods.  The development of farmers markets has been discussed and during the inquiry it was raised as a positive initiative that can help both to reduce the dependence on big supermarket contracts and to offer a range of high-quality produce to people who might otherwise not have such access and choice. It is therefore disappointing that the farmers market in Coatbridge has withdrawn its monthly event after two years in the town centre. Several reasons have been cited for that, foremost among them being affordability for local people, but there were also cultural barriers surrounding the use of fresh produce. The market has gone from Coatbridge, so I am pleased that the committee has recommended that the Scottish Executive report on the contribution of farmers markets and on what it is doing to support and co-ordinate their development. It is in everyone's interests to ensure that farmers markets are not just the preserve of affluent suburbs or city centres. They should be enabled to have a viable presence in more economically deprived communities; the example of Coatbridge tells us that much more work has to be done. I note the Scottish Executive's response and urge it to look again at the matter. Another issue was raised by several witnesses, but a written submission by a woman called Valerie Carson struck me in particular. It related to what she called "ugly ducklings". She talked about the emphasis on the cosmetic and uniform beauty of products—we have heard about that today—and is concerned about the waste that is created by items that do not conform. The suggestion was that the Scottish Executive could explore the idea of a food surplus agency for the public benefit. I know that committee convener Sarah Boyack mentioned that. I ask the Executive to consider the idea again. It would not deal with supermarket surplus, which FareShare helps with, but it would help when farmers have to destroy products that do not meet a certain standard perhaps because of a contract. We all agree that public procurement policies could be better utilised, so it would be interesting to hear that the Scottish Executive is thinking again and more creatively about those policies to assist local food and drink producers. As the Scottish public's awareness of healthy lifestyles is raised, more interest is shown in the sources of food, what is in it and its effect. That is due partly to Government effort, so it is important that the Government take an interest.

I welcome the minister's statement, but does he agree that the phrase "right to buy" is a misnomer? It is not a right but a right-wing tool of housing policy that was introduced by the Tories to sell off a collectively owned asset to private individuals. With that in mind, will the Scottish Executive make a commitment at least to consider a long-term, wider-ranging review and reform? As the minister said in his statement, there is still further information to be considered.

I agree with the terms of the SNP's motion and, if we get to it, I will support it. However, does the member think that the political posturing that is coming across the chamber from the SNP will  persuade other members to support the motion? Is the posturing not simply designed to do the opposite and to prevent people from supporting the SNP's position?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that the committee's deliberations uncovered many of the issues that he has outlined? Instead of continually denigrating the Scottish Executive, could not the Scottish National Party be gracious enough to commend it for listening to the committee and acting on what it has said?

On behalf of the Labour Party, I thank the clerking team of the Environment and Rural Development Committee for assisting the committee in reaching this stage of our deliberations on the bill. I want to strike a more conciliatory note at the outset. I thank Ross Finnie and Rhona Brankin for their response to the committee's report. Rather than being a climbdown, I think that that is the way in which the Parliament should work. The committee worked hard to produce a report and the Executive responded positively to it. At the start of the committee's scrutiny of the bill, I had little knowledge of this complex system of secure tenure of small landholdings provided at a reasonable rent and protected by a unique code of law. I am rather more informed now, although I do not claim to be an expert. Indeed, it was an aim of the bill to simplify crofting legislation, and that was welcomed by the committee in its stage 1 report. As the minister said, the bill came about in order to implement policy proposals arising from the publication in 1999 of the land reform policy group's recommendations for action, which included proposals to reform crofting law. The Executive consulted extensively on the proposals  for the bill and published an analysis of the responses to that consultation in March 2005. Those proposals, which formed the basis of the draft bill, were for more sustainable crofting communities; more local involvement and accountability for crofting administration; much simplified crofting legislation and administration; more—at least, not fewer—active crofters; and crofters undertaking a wide range of land-based and other economic activity in addition to agriculture. As we have heard, however, the committee's stage 1 scrutiny unearthed a much wider debate about the future of crofting in the context of changing and increasing pressures. The committee heard much evidence about how crofting could be sustained in the modern world and about whether the bill would equip crofting to respond to the challenges that it faces. A range of issues that are outlined in the committee's report dominated the evidence on the bill. They include a debate about the vision for crofting and whether it should be viewed primarily as custodianship of land for future generations or as a private asset to be developed; a debate about whether crofting is primarily an agricultural system or a social and economic development tool; concern about an unrestrained free market in crofts and croft tenancies and concern that the crofting right to buy should not mean an unfettered right to speculate; proposals to dampen that market by imposing obligations on croft owner-occupiers to live on or near the croft and to farm it, such as currently exist for croft tenants; proposals to increase the supply of crofts by creating new crofts; and the relationship between planning law and crofting. As stage 1 progressed, it became increasingly clear that the bill, as drafted, was not going to meet the aspirations of many witnesses. Indeed, there was a pervading concern that it might encourage the marketisation of crofting. In written evidence, Brian Wilson called the bill "a speculator's charter", as it can be seen as legitimising the notion that market forces are already the norm. In its written submission, the National Trust for Scotland stated: "With its emphasis on development, diversification and the protection of individual rights, the Bill at best offers little to change to the status quo, and at worst accelerates the demise of the crofting system by failing to tackle poor enforcement of current regulations and by encouraging a free market in croft tenancies at the expense of the wider crofting system." Had I more time, I could go on quoting in the same vein, but the evidence that I have cited is illustrative of the concerns about a free market in crofting that might have become more entrenched if the bill as introduced had been progressed. That point can be teased out in today's debate.  Concern was also expressed about the role and purpose of the Crofters Commission, and especially about whether it has adequate powers and is making proper use of those that it has. Whether or not the commission's powers are adequate, evidence indicated that there is a real public perception that over the years it has failed to make use of its powers. One of those powers is the power of veto, which essentially allows the commission to regulate the assignation of crofts. In response to questioning from me in committee, Shane Rankin said: "The question is whether the Crofting Commission can go on vetoing assignations ... The power of veto was given so that we could avoid some of the worst excesses."—[ Official Report , Environment and Rural Development Committee , 19 April 2006; c 3010.] At the same meeting, Brian Wilson questioned that statement. He said: "That has never been my understanding. Criteria and definitions apply to what is expected of crofting tenants and potential crofting tenants. If they cannot, are unlikely to or subsequently do not meet those criteria, the regulator should regulate them. Otherwise, what is the point of the law and the regulator? If a doctrine of avoiding the worst excesses is created, we must ask what the worst excesses are."—[ Official Report , Environment and Rural Development Committe e, 19 April 2006; c 3022-23.] At the end of the stage 1 process, it is clear that strong direction must be given to the commission to use its existing powers to act to address some of the problems that are identified in the committee's report and to rebuild trust in the commission. On the issues that I have outlined, along with many others, it is clear that there was dissatisfaction with the bill as introduced. For that reason, the committee proposed that we take the fairly radical step of leaving out large parts of the bill and not introducing the concept of proper occupier, which had been suggested as an add-on. However, I do not recall the committee suggesting that we should not proceed with the bill. I am pleased that the Scottish Executive has listened to the committee and the witnesses from whom we took evidence and that it has responded so positively. It is in no one's interest for us to proceed with the bill as introduced, given that it has stirred up such disquiet among crofters, crofting communities and those who take an interest in crofting. However, it would have been difficult for the Executive to second-guess that until all the evidence had been taken and the committee had reached its conclusions. I am sure that it was always the Executive's intention to introduce a helpful piece of legislation, which has now been informed by the committee's deliberations. I believe that what is now proposed is a step forward for crofting.  The key issues that remain are interposed leases; challenging the neglect of crofts; ensuring that there is an accurate register of crofts; extending crofting tenure outwith the crofting counties; and enabling the creation of new crofts without the right to buy. Progress can be made on all those issues and would be welcomed by most people, so we should proceed in that fashion. The evidence in respect of new crofts focused mainly on Arran. Many argued that, in the past, Arran had unreasonably missed out on being included in the crofting counties. The committee was recently in Arran and took the opportunity to consider the issue further by visiting the areas concerned and speaking to locals. Its visit was warmly welcomed. I commend the Scottish Executive on heeding the committee's report and giving a commitment to drop the more controversial proposals in the bill, including those that refer to the market value of crofts. I am pleased that it has committed itself to instigating a wide-ranging inquiry into crofting issues, including the market for crofts and the status, role, functioning and powers of the Crofters Commission. Given the lack of consensus among crofting interests, that is the right way of progressing the issues and allowing the debate to develop further. A modern vision for crofting cannot lose sight of crofting's unique traditions, especially the principle of giving the crofter security of tenure, at a reasonable rent, with the right to pass on the croft to future generations via a hereditary system. Important provisions will remain in the bill after stage 2 and, unlike some colleagues, I believe that we should take forward those provisions. I urge the Parliament to support the general principles of the bill today, which will allow us to amend the bill at stage 2 in line with the committee's report and the Scottish Executive's extremely helpful response to it.

Is Ted Brocklebank suggesting that, in abandoning the bill, the Executive should abandon provisions—which it intends to leave in  the bill—to create a register of crofts, to extend crofting tenure and to enable the creation of new crofts without the right to buy?

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate, despite my reservations about its sponsors' new-found green credentials. Despite Ted Brocklebank's words, the recent attempts by the Conservative leadership at a Damascene conversion to environmentalism have been as transparent during their rebranding as they have been funny to watch, with David Cameron chartering a private plane to Norway to wedge a few words about melting glaciers in between his camera poses, not to mention his notorious bike ride to work with the accompanying press pack  and chauffeur-driven car for his briefcase. There is also the recent logo change, in which the blue torch—which I presume had to be dumped because it was gas powered—has been changed to a fuzzy green tree. In the words of Robert Macfarlane, writing in The Guardian , Cameron and the Tories have "turned green faster than the Incredible Hulk." That conversion is of a party whose voting record on green issues was, before the most recent European elections, judged by Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth as the worst not just in Britain, but in the whole European Union. As late as January 2005, the current Tory leader and sometime environmental evangelist voted against the Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act 2005, and he continues to decry Labour's climate change levy as a stealth tax on business. However, for the purposes of today's debate, I am prepared to give our colleagues on the right the benefit of the doubt. I am sure that today's debate is not an attempt by them to glean some of that promised Cameron public relations sheen, but is simply an expression of their commitment to the climate change cause. I actually agree with the Conservative motion that global warming is—along with global poverty and terrorism-one of the three great challenges that we face, but I differ in my analysis in that I believe that the three challenges are fundamentally linked and equally exacerbated by rampant global capitalism, which puts profits and market freedom before everything else. I was interested to see on "Newsnight" last night a piece by George Monbiot, who writes in his recent book, "Heat: How to Stop the Planet Burning", about a network of fake citizens groups and bogus scientific bodies that are funded by big business to help to create the impression that doubt about climate change is widespread. He also wrote in The Guardian : "While they have been most effective in the United States, the impacts of the climate-change deniers sponsored by Exxon and Philip Morris have been felt all over the world ... It is fair to say that the professional denial industry has delayed effective global action on climate change by years, just as it helped to delay action against the tobacco companies." The Conservatives must recognise the role of their big business friends in delaying action on the issue. We did not, however, hear much about that today. As a Labour member, I welcome the motion's recognition of the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative because, as Alasdair Morrison said, it was the Executive that set up that scheme and has consistently invested in it, with the most recent boost taking the fund to £3.7 million a year. I am pleased to hear that  support will be forthcoming for Sarah Boyack's proposed energy efficiency and microgeneration bill. That will make a change from the kind of nimbyism that has been displayed by Murdo Fraser in respect of wind farms and which was reiterated today by Annabel Goldie, who suggested that her party is in favour of promoting renewable energy, but only when nobody complains. Where I do agree with Murdo Fraser is on the view that the current pace of change necessitates a more strategic and co-ordinated approach by Government. One specific area of concern that I want to mention is to do with private finance initiative arrangements for public services. Across the country schools, hospitals and other public facilities are, as Karen Gillon said, being built in partnership with the private sector. That is becoming part of the problem, because many investors are reluctant to take on the associated risks or the current costs of installing renewable energy technologies. A recent review found that "Due to a 'risk premium' PPP is not currently seen to be an appropriate vehicle for encouraging renewable energy systems," and that, as such, consideration should be given to ensuring that those projects can access the funding. Given that use of the facilities is often tied down by 20 or 30-year contracts, I am concerned that such arrangements will also preclude future change and development and I fear that, through PFI, the Government is denying itself an opportunity to lead the way on renewables via the public sector. In its fourth report of 2006, on the biomass industry, the Environment and Rural Development Committee expressed concern about how the structure and funding of public-private partnership and PFI projects can allow for inclusion of renewable energy projects such as biomass systems. If we miss the opportunity, we will be left with an unacceptable energy emissions legacy. That must be addressed. I welcome the Scottish Executive's efforts to ensure a more joined-up approach through the consultation on planning policy and renewable energy, and I hope that that will also help to marry the pace of change and development with the target of generating 40 per cent of Scotland's electricity from renewable sources by 2020. I also welcome the commitment that is evident in the fact that, among other achievements, 70 per cent of Scotland's transport budget is spent on public transport. The role of public transport in tackling climate change is important, but we need better regulation of the bus and train industries if we are to ensure that Scotland has an adequate and cohesive transport network. I wonder whether I can take it from the Tories' new-found enthusiasm  for environmental issues that they agree with that. Can we expect an apology for their disastrous transport decisions in the past? The motion is all very admirable, but the Tories would have to commit to action that would involve rooting out Thatcherite conservatism by, for example, imposing rigorous environmental taxing and detaching themselves from their big business buddies, rather than what we see today, which is simply promoting a return to 19 th century genteel Tory paternalism. I support the Executive's amendment.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

I wanted to ask about those future commitments—

Is it Margaret Smith's interpretation of what the minister said that no change will take place at Monklands hospital until such times as those provisions are firmly in place?

It has been an interesting—if short—debate. To answer Sandra White's point, we would have had a better chance of a real debate if it had been a wee bit longer. Perhaps the SNP should have participated properly in NHS Lanarkshire's consultation process. Unfortunately, there has been a lot of brinksmanship and political posturing this morning. Carolyn Leckie demonstrated some of that. Calling members of the Labour Party dishonest was utterly disgraceful. She then showed political opportunism by mentioning elections, because that is really what it is all about for her; for members on our benches, it is about health in Lanarkshire. A key theme in the chamber is that all members are in favour of talking about change, but they are not in favour of any change at all when it comes down to it. Last October, when we voted on the Scottish Executive's action plan, "Delivering for Health", which has been widely mentioned, our vote was based on the service change proposals of the Kerr report. According to the motion, we were attempting "to provide more safe and sustainable local services," for our constituents, "to tackle health inequalities ... in our most deprived communities ... to benefit people wherever they live" and to pursue "greater quality and productivity" in  the NHS in Scotland. That is what we voted on, and Janis Hughes outlined some of the positive changes that came after we voted on the Kerr report. However, we did not sanction the potentially fatal blow that has recently been dealt to Monklands general hospital, which is the busiest, most efficient and most effective hospital in Lanarkshire, serving areas that have some of the worst health and deprivation records in Europe. I was interested to hear that a lot of Shona Robison's speech was comprised of what Karen Whitefield, Cathie Craigie and I have said in the past. She could have said something new, but she said nothing new at all. I agree with Carolyn Leckie on one point. We did not agree to the blatant asset stripping of the only NHS-owned hospital in Lanarkshire by a health board that is intent on justifying the exorbitant guaranteed incomes that it pays to its PFI partners. We did not vote on that. Last October, we would almost certainly have rejected such a fundamental change to service provision, the result of which could mean that the most deprived communities in Lanarkshire become further isolated and socially excluded in relation to access to local emergency care. That shift of provision has been decided without proper access to detailed service planning, outline or full business cases, comprehensive research or costings. The minister's amendment says that the Executive wants an "NHS Scotland which responds to changes in the demands placed upon it." We have to be clear that downgrading Monklands hospital does not do that. The fact that Monklands faces that downgrading is a disgrace. It undermines the very principles of the Kerr report and "Delivering for Health". We have said that since the beginning. This is fundamentally the wrong decision for the people of Lanarkshire. The overarching aims of "Delivering for Health" are right, and I acknowledge the commitment to invest in the area. However, the minister's decision to support NHS Lanarkshire's plans to downgrade Monklands is based on biased, flawed and insufficient information provided to him by the board. Further, NHS Lanarkshire has utterly failed in its responsibility to consult service users, because it presided over a lavish public relations exercise in which it told the people of Lanarkshire what it was going to do; it did not ask them. Even more shameful, the exercise was distilled into a six-month period, so a critical decision that will impact on Lanarkshire and, as Euan Robson said, on Forth Valley, Glasgow and wider areas for generations to come has been rushed through  without adequate scrutiny and planning and in the absence of a rational evidence base. As mentioned, the minister knows that I have asked the Auditor General for Scotland to review the decision. The minister also knows that Karen Whitefield, Cathie Craigie and I have asked for an independent review, in the absence of which we have little choice but to call for a reversal of the decision. It should never have been made and we want the minister to reverse the decision and to take decisive action to guarantee the long-term future of Monklands hospital.

Will the member give way?

I, too, commend Pauline McNeill for securing this important debate. I have been heartened by the growing consensus that decisive action is needed if we are to make lasting and effective improvements to Scotland's bus services. There is general agreement among members that the wholesale deregulation of the bus industry in the 1980s created significant problems and that the time has come for change, although that general agreement might be because the Tories are not represented in the chamber this evening. I have lost count of the number of times that I have been contacted by constituents who are angry about unscheduled changes to their bus services, the cancellation of routes or the fact that they have been left isolated during the evenings and at weekends by their service provider. Judging by some of the speeches that have been made tonight, other members share my frustration about that type of complaint. I want to raise two constituency issues. First, a  crucial section has been cut out of a bus route because waiting times at a particular set of traffic lights do not suit the bus company. Instead of making a five-minute bus journey to reach the post office, shops, dentist, library and pharmacy at Whifflet, my constituents in that area—many of whom are elderly—now have to make two bus journeys that take up to half an hour and involve a 10-minute walk between bus stops. Not only is that unfair on my constituents, it is ridiculous considering the geographical area. However, because the bus service does not receive subsidy from SPT, there seems to be little that can be done. Another issue is the fact that, in the Townhead area of my constituency, no buses are available before 8 o'clock in the morning or after 6 o'clock at night. The area is on the outskirts of Coatbridge. It has a high level of unemployment and a low level of car ownership. The lack of bus services therefore has a significant impact on the local community: it affects access to employment and it prevents people from being able to visit relatives, go shopping in the evening or make hospital visits. It hinders their ability to access leisure and recreational activities in the wider Coatbridge area as well, and it therefore adds significantly to social exclusion. I wanted to talk about the dial-a-bus service, but I do not have much time. It is a good resource although, unsurprisingly, it is oversubscribed. There are also problems such as people having to wait half an hour on the phone to order a bus, which have to be addressed. I would have liked to talk about hospital services, as my workload has been dominated by the reconfiguration of accident and emergency services in Lanarkshire this year; however, I do not have time. Suffice it to say that the reconfiguration will create further considerable challenges for public transport in the area and major problems for my constituents. I recognise the fact that SPT alone cannot improve the situation; it is already operating under considerable pressure and budget constraints. Also, the onerous nature of quality contracts is a barrier to their use, so they are not the answer. I think that we know that, as they have not been used. Undoubtedly, we need more decisive action at Government level to redress the imbalance that has been caused by deregulation. We need to ensure that we put people rather than profits first, where bus travel is concerned. I am pleased to support Pauline McNeill's motion and I await with interest the minister's response.

Is the minister aware of the concerns that exist in Lanarkshire about the apparent Arbuthnott funding shortfall? Given that Lanarkshire NHS Board's recent disgraceful decision to downgrade Monklands hospital was based ultimately on cost and was arrived at through dubious financial considerations, which might even break Treasury guidelines, can the minister tell me whether the board has received fair and appropriate funding since 1999? If not, what can be done about the situation? My constituents and people right across the county cannot be expected to pay the health price of a downgraded accident and emergency service at Monklands simply because of a lack of funding.

I declare that I am a member of the General Teaching Council. Like other members, I am pleased that the Conservatives have selected education for debate. It has given the Scottish Executive and backbench Labour members the opportunity to show the people of Scotland that we are committed to a modern, comprehensive and ideal school education that is based on universal provision and excellence, and is rooted in the principle of equality of opportunity. We have done that throughout the debate. The debate also allows us to reflect on the dark years of Tory Government when, as a young woman, I was keen to teach but had to compete with more than 50 qualified applicants for one place at teacher-training college. Happily, I got that place, but I had then to worry about getting a job that was, if I was being realistic, going to be either a temporary job or a supply job. Now, however, we have a guaranteed one year post-training placement for teachers coming out of  college, the lowest pupil to teacher ratio for more than 15 years, nearly 6,000 classroom assistants, and guaranteed training and skills enhancement for teachers. While I am singing the praises of the Executive and the Labour Party, I point out that we now have free nursery places for all three and four-year-olds, if a place is wanted; investment in early-years education and child care that is well above the OECD average; the first national policy on discipline; and we have introduced community schools. On health and nutrition, we have improved the standards and nutritional quality of school meals, we provide free fruit for primaries 1 and 2 and there is chilled water available in schools. All those things help children to learn and none of them was available under the Tories.

Sorry—I do not have time. On mainstreaming, there is a place for special educational units in schools, particularly for autism, which has been mentioned by other members. However, I aspire to a society in which every child has the choice of accessing their local school and receiving an excellent education that is specific to their needs rather than having to travel miles for their education. That is worth aspiring to; I wonder whether the Tories are against mainstreaming as an idea. Willowbank school in Coatbridge in my constituency offers day support to young people who have experienced social, emotional or learning difficulties that have impaired their academic and social progress and their experience of school. It provides full-time and part-time day placements for up to 50 young people of secondary age. Pupils and staff have visited Parliament and I have visited the school and can say that it is an excellent school in terms of discipline and supporting pupils. I want to take the opportunity to commend the committed teachers in that school. On the wider matters of indiscipline and violence in our schools, a number of informed and innovative projects are being developed throughout Scotland. For example, the Zero Tolerance Trust has developed the respect initiative, which uses curricular materials in primary and secondary schools and youth settings and promotes the values of good citizenship, respect for oneself and others, avoidance of violence, respect for difference, avoidance of gender stereotyping and other forms of discrimination, and the value of collective powers.

The pack of materials addresses all forms of discrimination, including bullying, gendered bullying and abuse, racism and homophobia. Although ZT's main aim is the prevention of violence against women, the respect campaign addresses all the underlying attitudes, actions and beliefs that surround that. The materials are being used in 19 local authority areas. I ask the minister whether all schools could start using the respect materials and I invite him to comment on that.

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome the creation of the offences in relation to animal fights in the bill, which are long overdue. It is time that we took legislative action to eradicate such horrendous practices. Several witnesses suggested to the Environment and Rural Development Committee that if the possession of a recording were outlawed, that would rapidly undermine the entire animal fight industry, which is surely the outcome that we want. Having listened to the minister and to Maureen Macmillan, I am still concerned about leaving in the words, "with the intention of supplying it to another person." I do not understand why we have to leave those words, because they will provide a loophole that could allow the recording of fights to continue. The possible loophole lies in the fact that it is hard to prove that someone intended to supply a recording. It would be tragic if such well intentioned and welcome legislation did not eradicate dog fighting in practice. I do not imagine that the Scottish Executive wants to leave a loophole; I am sure that that is not its intention. I listened to what the minister said about consistency with other legislation. If the bill is to remain as it is, will she—as Maureen Macmillan asked her to—say something about considering other legislation in the near future? I would be concerned if the provision turned into a loophole and did not have the outcome that the Executive wants the bill to have.

Will the minister comment on the idea that prostitution within the UK is domestic trafficking, which has been highlighted in papers that I have read?

I congratulate Trish Godman on securing this debate.  The trafficking of women into forced prostitution is part of the continuum of male violence against women. It is a widespread manifestation of gender discrimination, inequality and patriarchy. It is part of a multibillion pound global industry that encompasses exploitative commerce, which includes adult and child pornography, prostitution, massage parlours, lap dancing, live sex shows, mail-order brides and sex tourism. Those are basically all violence against women. I would be grateful if, tonight, the minister would update us on the progress of the Scottish Executive's work on developing a strategic approach to all forms of violence against women and children. I think that the waters can sometimes get a wee bit muddied. The international trafficking of women as sex slaves is clearly a big business. It is tolerated because, like prostitution and pornography, people have been desensitized to it and it has been normalised. We need to change that. Sex trafficking is the third largest underground economy in the world. More than 2 million women and children are sold, conned or forced into sexual slavery every year because there is a demand for those sex slaves. Millions of men think that it is acceptable to exchange money for access to sex—to buy the bodies of women and children and violate and abuse them, or, as Trish Godman said, to rape them. A report today states that £6.6 million is spent on prostitution in Glasgow every year. The traffickers treat their victims as commodities to be traded for the highest profit. They ought to be punished severely, as the motion says, but the consumers must also be dealt with, not only through severe punishment but through education about the harm that they promulgate.

Yes. We should stop talking about sex workers. We should talk about women who are used. They do not work as prostitutes. They are used as prostitutes. Sex with trafficked women is not consensual sex by any stretch of the imagination: it is slavery, torture, abuse and rape and must be treated as such. Sex trafficking is not happening only on someone else's doorstep, it is happening here in Scotland in the 21 st century. Young women are lured into the nightmare world of abuse and torture by a range of means and for a variety of reasons. Adverts that promise them jobs, money and opportunities abroad can be enough to entice them into the trap that is laid by the traffickers because their economic situation or that of their family is one of extreme hardship. They may be  shown fake visas and false employment contracts and may even be persuaded into a marriage. In the book "Not For sale: Feminists Resisting Prostitution and Pornography", Leslie R Wolfe, a leader in the fight against trafficking in the US, paints a picture of how any of us could be caught in a nightmare web spun by traffickers. She says: "Imagine that you have left home for a new country and new economic opportunity. You have been brought to this new country by a man or men that you fear or even trust, to work and earn money for your family—only to find yourself imprisoned in a brothel or a sweat shop. Imagine your terror: you cannot speak the language; you fear the local police, who may be complicit in the trafficking; and you legitimately fear arrest, imprisonment and deportation to your home country, where you will likely be ostracised because of the sexual nature of your exploitation."

The point that Margo MacDonald makes tends to muddy the waters. If she reads books such as the one that I have cited and other research that has been done, she will find that women who are trafficked into sex shops—that was a slip of the tongue; I meant to say sweat shops—are probably being sexually abused. The issue is being muddied to some extent. I have no doubt that the women in question are sex slaves. Currently, they do not have many rights in the UK and are treated as illegal immigrants who can be detained and deported. I join Trish Godman in her plea for the Government to sign the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, to ensure that women are sympathetically dealt with as victims and not as perpetrators. I do not accept that non-genuine claimants may benefit and that that is not acceptable. Without the convention and its associated action, genuine victims are being denied protection, which is unacceptable. In a paper entitled "Hope Betrayed", the POPPY project points out that, in the period between March 2003 and August 2005, 32 women claimed asylum and one was granted it. In 80 per cent of cases, asylum was granted on appeal. I ask the minister to comment in his summing-up on the possibility of setting up a POPPY project for Scotland. The normalisation of buying and selling sex through prostitution, pornography, lap dancing, massage parlours and so on must be challenged in our society, because it is not normal. It is abuse and violence, with punters seemingly able to buy out a woman's right to say no. That is completely unacceptable. Prostitution and sex trafficking are human rights abuses, whether they are local or  global. I say to Margo MacDonald that the demand for them is one and the same thing. Both are gender-based domination and provide huge financial rewards for the predators, ensuring continued demand and supply. The answer to the abuse must be to address demand, which is its root cause. Contrary to some myths, women do not have a real choice, but the punters do. Men who use prostitutes must be made accountable through arrest and prosecution and thereby persuaded to choose differently, because they have a choice. We should also educate society as a whole and provide better support and services to victims. I would have liked to address the serious health problems of victims, such as post-traumatic stress disorder, but I do not have time to do that. In a world where increasingly capitalism is king, it is incumbent on our Government to send a clear message, through legislation and action, that human beings are not for sale.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will ensure that domestic abuse is fully taken into account when action is being taken against violent crime. (S2O-9960)

Given that research suggests that domestic abuse accounts for 16 per cent of all violent crime and that 45 per cent of female homicide victims are killed by present or former male partners, does the minister agree that, when granting bail or sentencing in cases involving violence, the courts must do more to identify whether domestic abuse is an issue and take steps to safeguard the well-being and safety of the women, children and young people who are affected?

The minister will no doubt be aware of the current controversy surrounding the possible downgrading of Monklands hospital. Is he aware that I lobbied his predecessor and SPT on the issue of improving transport links to health services throughout Lanarkshire over a number of years? Given the possible downgrading of Monklands hospital and its potentially heavy impact on the transport requirements of my constituents, including those living in the northern corridor, to which Margaret Mitchell referred, is the minister concerned that NHS Lanarkshire appears to have given only minimal consideration in its consultation to the weaknesses in the transport infrastructure in the area? Will he take action to ensure that those issues figure adequately in the Executive's consideration of NHS Lanarkshire's proposals?

On the issue of acute provision, the minister will be aware of the vast public opposition to the proposals currently being considered in Lanarkshire. He mentioned the health board's responsibilities under "Delivering for Health". Will he assure me that he will thoroughly assess the extent to which NHS Lanarkshire has honoured its responsibilities? The minister also said that the health board began consulting on the regional impact of cross-boundary patient flow only two weeks ago—a week before the major consultation closed and nearly seven months after the health board began suggesting that Monklands general hospital was its clearly preferred option for accident and emergency downgrade. That proposal is unbelievable and unacceptable. The hospital has the busiest and most efficient accident and emergency unit in Lanarkshire and serves a population with some of the worst ill-health, poverty and deprivation levels in Scotland.

The minister will be aware that the legislative protection provided by the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Act 2005 is currently being promoted at antenatal level by the health service. Does he agree that there are benefits to be gained from promoting awareness of the new legislation among the wider population? Does he further agree that the failure to integrate the message into the national campaign for breastfeeding awareness week last year was a missed opportunity? Will he take action to ensure that the opportunity is exploited fully this year?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you make a ruling on whether it is in order for Ms Robison to use question time to misrepresent the views of Lanarkshire Labour members, who are not against any change that would improve the health of their constituents but who are contributing legitimately to the consultation process that is being carried out by the board of NHS Lanarkshire?

At the end of the consultation, will the minister ensure that it was honest? Given the previous issues around paediatrics, my community has somewhat lost trust in the health board.

Obviously, the fear is that Monklands hospital would die by a thousand cuts if it lost all the essential services.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

My point is about disparaging comments that Mr Neil made. I understand that my colleague Karen Whitefield felt that, as the issue was so important, it would be discourteous to Parliament to deliver a speech and then disappear. She also felt that to risk being late for an important public meeting in her constituency on the issue would be discourteous to her constituents. Does any standing order address  such issues, or are they simply a matter of courtesy?

I welcome the opportunity to discuss "A Picture of Health: A Framework for Health Service Improvement in Lanarkshire", which deals with an issue that is of great importance to my constituents, given that Monklands general hospital has been earmarked as the so-called clear preferred option for downgrading. I welcome the chance to outline the views of the local constituency members who, like me, are battling to retain acute hospital services at Monklands on behalf of the communities they represent. As most members will be aware, and as has been mentioned, Lanarkshire NHS Board is holding its Airdrie public meeting tonight, as part of the consultation process. Given that Monklands hospital is in the constituency of my colleague, Karen Whitefield, and that she has urged thousands of her constituents to attend that forum, she has rightly decided to make that meeting her  priority by ensuring that she is present for the full discussion. She is therefore en route to that meeting and has asked me to convey her apologies, to put on record her unequivocal opposition to the downgrading of the accident and emergency department at Monklands and to record her thanks to our local newspaper, the Airdrie & Coatbridge Advertiser , for supporting both of us in our campaign to save an essential service.

I might do in a moment. In addition, I want to put on record Cathie Craigie's apologies for not being able to attend the debate; she has suffered a family bereavement. Like Karen Whitefield, she wants the Official Report to show her opposition to the downgrading of Monklands accident and emergency. Karen Whitefield, Cathie Craigie and I launched a petition against the closure of that facility in December and, so far, tens of thousands of signatures have been collected. Given those members' reasons for not attending the debate, I think Alex Neil's criticism was a bit of a cheap shot, so I will not take an intervention from him.

I turn to "A Picture of Health". There is a lot to commend in the vision that Lanarkshire NHS Board has laid out, but the consultation raises the serious and contentious issue of acute hospital services and the proposal to downgrade one of Lanarkshire's accident and emergency departments. The proposal is based on the health board's contention that it cannot recruit a sufficient number of clinicians to operate accident and emergency services over three sites; that moving to two sites for emergency in-patient care would concentrate expertise and make services more sustainable; and that reorganisation is necessary if the board is to react to legislative workforce issues. According the board's option appraisal exercise, the accident and emergency department at Monklands hospital has been earmarked as the preferred option for closure. If that department was closed, the hospital's emergency admissions facility and its ear, nose and throat, intensive care, renal and infectious diseases units would all be lost, which in my opinion would be a precursor to the hospital's closure. I therefore urge caution on the option appraisal findings. Many of the contributions were not impartial: the views of patient contributors were weighted more towards Wishaw and Hairmyres and not Monklands. That is despite Monklands being the busiest accident and emergency department, and despite its having the largest population base and serving the most  deprived communities in Lanarkshire. The findings should perhaps have been weighted more equally. Essentially, option appraisal is a private sector tool that is being employed by the public sector to evaluate the decisions it takes to contract out services, but the practice of using option appraisal as the basis for decision making of this magnitude is highly questionable; it is not robust enough for the public sector to use it in this way. If difficult decisions have to be taken, surely they should reflect the fundamental principles of the NHS and be weighted in terms of the impact that they will have on reducing social and health inequalities. Undoubtedly, if the option appraisal had been based on that principle, Monklands hospital would have been discounted as a candidate for downgrading. As a constituency MSP and local person, I am utterly appalled by the suggestion that Monklands A and E should be closed. It is not only the busiest in Lanarkshire, but the most efficient: it lost only 24 hours due to closure last year. Furthermore, the appalling health record that the people in the Monklands area have historically suffered from means that there is a disproportionate need for emergency care in my community. North Lanarkshire Council, which is vigorously opposed to the proposed, has said: "If NHS Lanarkshire elects to support the so-called 'clear, preferred option' it would be downgrading the busiest hospital in its Board area, in its area of poorest health. There may be reasons for making such a decision, but they are not related to need, deprivation or ill-health." Indeed, many of us are under no illusion about the reason that lies behind the proposal: quite simply, it comes down to the 30-year private finance initiative contracts that Lanarkshire NHS Board is bound by at both Hairmyres and Wishaw hospitals. At the first public meeting, which was held in Muirhead in my constituency, Ian Ross, Lanarkshire NHS Board's divisional chief executive for acute services, was unashamed in his admission that "PFI hospitals are 30 year contracts. We have 25 years left so we have to use them as much as possible". That shows that the decision is based more on the contractual obligations to and profits of PFI investors than on the actual needs of the people of Lanarkshire. To add insult to injury, crucial factors seem to have been completely ignored in the process. For instance, the way in which the proposals would affect the ambulance service has been ignored and yet Coatbridge has the busiest ambulance station in Lanarkshire. I am informed that discussions are continuing in that regard. Surely all such discussions should have been exhausted and all eventualities costed before the consultation was even launched. The health board also does  not seem to have taken account of the cross-boundary flow issues that stem from the downgrading of services in Glasgow. The issue is clearly difficult and complex. No one in the chamber actively wants to see the closure of any of Lanarkshire's A and E departments. I am not saying that we should close Hairmyres A and E—I take exception to the suggestion that I am—but we have to consider the vulnerability of Monklands hospital along with the horrendous health record of my constituents and the legitimate arguments that surround the implementation of the working time directive. I make no apology for putting forward as robust a case as I can for the retention of services at Monklands hospital.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken in schools to support health promotion. (S2O-09318)

Given that this is national obesity awareness week and that the Executive will soon publish its infant feeding strategy for Scotland, is the minister aware of any plans to raise awareness among children of school age of breastfeeding as a healthy lifestyle choice that protects against obesity? Is he aware of best practice in my constituency, where the healthy lifestyle project has successfully piloted a curriculum-based initiative in Rosehall high school that has shown positive results?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am concerned about the accusations that  were made from a sedentary position that the rules were broken. If that is the case, do standing orders provide any way in which the procedure can be delayed until the matter is further investigated? It seems inadequate that we have had such a short time for such an important issue.

rose—

If Parliament does not agree the appointment today, will we be left without a standards commissioner? What are the implications of that?

There is much to be welcomed in the minister's statement, particularly the Airdrie to Bathgate line, which will benefit my constituents. However, the minister did not say anything about buses, which are a particularly important form of transport for women. Has the Executive considered the specific public transport needs of women? Does the minister have any plans to consider operating bus services via public provision? The private profit system that we have in many areas at the moment is simply not working.

I declare my interest in Unison, as shown in my entry in the register of members' interests. I am pleased by the Parliament's recognition this year of International Women's Day. Unfortunately, committee business kept me from attending the Scottish Women's Convention event that was held this morning. I was disappointed not to be able to attend. I understand that the theme was women's  representation, participation and empowerment, as my colleague Marlyn Glen outlined in her contribution. The debate gives us the welcome opportunity to reflect on whether we have maintained the momentum that was initiated in 1999 when a critical mass of female MSPs was elected to the Scottish Parliament. The issue of women's representation and participation in the decision-making process is crucial to the entire equality agenda. Although countless studies have examined the ways in which more women can be encouraged to become involved in the political process, the situation is a fairly straightforward one. The fact is that women find it difficult to engage fully in the political process because they do not operate on a level playing field with men. For the same reason, women are underrepresented in senior positions across the public and private sector and overrepresented among the unemployed and the low paid. Women have to face up to and overcome more barriers. As the main carer in most families and as the lone parent in the majority of single-parent families, women have to prioritise their child care commitments over employment aspirations, career advancement, education, community involvement and public service. As the deputy minister mentioned, the lack of affordable child care remains a major barrier for women. I want to take a closer look at that. The Executive's pre-school and day care census for 2005 found that most child care and pre-school education is still provided only on weekdays between 9 am and 12 noon. It also found that only 1,000 of Scotland's child care centres offer out-of-school club services and that fewer than 370 offer a breakfast club. That provision does not reflect the needs of most working women in Scotland today. A breakfast club was introduced only recently at my son's school and I know the huge difference that it has made. Of course, the provision of part-time, free pre-school education for all three and four-year olds is a step in the right direction. We should mention that and we should welcome it. It does not provide an answer to child care requirements for many women, however. The part-time nature of that approach means that parents often have to adopt a fragmented and haphazard approach to daily child care. It can involve nursery, day care, child minders, family support—or maybe all of those—in the one day. That kind of piecemeal approach to child care is not only ineffective, but stressful and costly to parents and, from the children's point of view, confusing and disruptive. According to the Daycare Trust, the typical cost of a full-time nursery place for a child under two in Scotland is £122 a week. That cost has increased  by 8 per cent on last year's figures whereas, in England, the increase is only 2 per cent. In allowing the child care market to run untamed, we are not only letting down women, but creating the anomalous situation whereby substantial public funding is being handed to commercial providers to provide services that could be supplied in a much more cohesive, effective and accountable way via the public sector. I recognise and welcome the commitment that the Scottish Executive has made in financial and policy terms, which the deputy minister outlined. However, I contend that there is an overwhelming need for more extensive public provision of child care. I declared my interest in Unison because I want to mention its submission to the Education Committee's early years inquiry. Unison has called on the Scottish Executive to provide "affordable, universal full-time child care for all ages." I add my voice to that call. Many child care difficulties could be solved if we were to provide sufficient publicly-funded child care centres. That would not only make child care affordable for all, but recognise the importance of child care workers, who are mainly women, as Rosie Kane mentioned. In its submission, Unison also cited examples from Europe and beyond, including Sweden and France, where the early years system is almost universally provided by the public service, and Finland, where every child has the right to a child care place from birth. What benefits would accrue to Scotland from the adoption of such provision? Enormous societal benefits could be harnessed from the provision of universal state child care. There is the potential to lift significant numbers of children out of poverty, through the widening of their parents' access to training and employment. Indeed, the Executive has recognised that in its sure start initiative. There is still a need to build on the policy, however. If universal early years care were introduced, the economy in Scotland would greatly benefit, because more women would be empowered to make a contribution to the workforce. Communities would profit, because women would have more time to become involved in public service. Employers would gain from a lower turnover of experienced staff, reduced absences, a better return on training and better productivity, because more women could return to work without facing the catch-22 situation of needing to work to pay for child care. Most important, women in Scotland would benefit, because the introduction of universal early years care would move the equality agenda forward significantly by helping to level the playing field and allowing more women to achieve their potential. Perhaps then we might achieve the balance in women's representation  and participation in public life for which we are all striving and which the Labour Party has taken action to encourage. Gordon Brown, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, declared in his comprehensive spending review 2004 that the 21 st century would be the era of universal child care and early years services. That must become the reality in Scotland in future. The only decision that we must make is whether we are going to drag our heels and wait for generations before introducing universal child care or whether we make it happen now, for the benefit of the women and children of Scotland.

I do not believe that a PPP approach represents good value for money, but given that the Scottish Executive has already provided funding for such projects, is there any action that the minister can take to stop PPP contractors building on beautiful Victorian public parks, such as Dunbeth park in Coatbridge?

To ask the Scottish Executive what financial support has been provided to assist local authorities to meet equal pay settlements. (S2O-9088)

I thank the minister for his not-unexpected answer. He is of course aware—he alluded to this in his answer—of the tough financial decisions that some local authorities are having to take to meet equal pay settlements. Is he aware of the suggestion that some councils are coming down harder on council tax defaulters as a result and are increasingly using the threat of bankruptcy in cases involving arrears of as little as £2,000, which in effect threatens people with the loss of their homes and therefore works contrary to the Executive's commendable policy on homelessness?

Does the member agree that we should also be teaching young fathers how to cook?

I thank all the members who signed my original motion and all those who have stayed for the debate. Almost weekly, a story breaks in our national press that highlights another aspect of our children's unhealthy lifestyles. This week brought the news that two years into the Scottish Executive's drive to make school meals healthier, pizza and chips still reign supreme among the favourite lunch choices of primary school pupils. Last week, we learned that only 7 per cent of secondary school pupils in Scotland receive their allotted two hours of physical education per week. The situation is even worse in primary schools, where only 5 per cent receive the recommended physical education time. Other recent reports have included the news that children in Scotland drink more fizzy drinks than youngsters anywhere else in Europe, are among Europe's most regular consumers of sweets and confectionery and are among the least likely in Europe to have been breastfed. In December last year, NHS Scotland published findings that showed that more than one third of 12-year-olds were overweight. Of those, 19 per cent were obese and 11 per cent were severely obese. I have no doubt that the Scottish Executive  is taking the issue seriously. Indeed, the World Health Organisation's endorsement last year of the Executive's approach to health improvement as an example to other countries indicates that we are moving in the right direction, but is that enough? The startling figures on childhood obesity and the child health surveillance programme's prediction that as many as 50 per cent of our children could be obese by 2020 suggest that much more needs to be done, and soon. The recent evaluation of the Executive's free fruit in schools initiative is overwhelmingly positive. It highlights the potential to increase the consumption of fruit and to improve healthy eating practices in children throughout the population. It also confounds some critics who have condemned the universal provision of healthy food to children on the basis of a misconception that children will not eat it. Given the impact that such an initiative has had and considering the scale of the challenge that we now face, I fail to see how the Executive cannot look more favourably on the possibility of setting up pilot schemes to examine the enormous impact that a similar, larger-scale initiative such as free school meals could have for our children's future health. Last week, I joined the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People at Shawhead nursery school in my constituency, where he launched the new nutritional guidelines for pre-school children. The enthusiasm that those young children showed towards the healthy food that was put in front of them was extremely encouraging. It underlined the scope for success if we introduce children to healthy eating at the earliest possible opportunity. Research and science increasingly tell us that good nutrition from the start of life, and even from conception, can have a significant impact on our childhood health and on our later lives. Various studies have found that breastfed babies are significantly less likely to become obese. A study that was published in the British Medical Journal found that 4.5 per cent of bottle-fed babies were obese by the time they reached the age five or six, but only 2.8 per cent of breastfed babies developed similar problems. Equally, it found that babies who were breastfed for a year or longer were more than five times less likely to become obese. If we consider that obesity in childhood is a known risk factor for a variety of conditions in adulthood, including cardiovascular disease, diabetes and obesity, the role that breastfeeding can play in public health promotion becomes clear. In September 2004, I took part in an innovative curriculum-based initiative that the healthy lifestyle project piloted in Rosehall high school in Coatbridge in my constituency. That initiative  sought to promote breastfeeding awareness in secondary school children in an area that has some of the lowest breastfeeding rates in Scotland. It focused on the science and nutritional impact of breast milk and the social influences on breastfeeding. Pupils were able to discuss those issues with local health promotion professionals. The project was a resounding success. A significant improvement in positive attitudes to breastfeeding was reported among children in all the age groups that were involved. Most significantly, greater understanding was reported among boys, who had previously expressed more negative views than girls. That project is a valuable example of a way in which breastfeeding awareness can successfully be integrated into the curriculum with positive results. I urge the Executive to examine the project's findings with a view to supporting its roll-out to other areas in Scotland. As members know, the Scottish Parliament has taken steps to improve the uptake of breastfeeding in Scotland. We are making some progress, but the Executive needs to be more proactive in its support. The Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Act 2005 provides an opportunity to increase awareness in the general population, but to date the Executive has not fully grasped that opportunity. Most notably, during last year's national breastfeeding awareness week, the national advertising campaign did not mention the new protection that is afforded to mothers. I hope that the minister will consider that and make amends this year. It is clear that there is no single solution to the problem. A great many factors need to be considered, including the widespread loss of green space, the need to encourage and support opportunities for play in our communities and the action that is needed to tackle the aggressive marketing of unhealthy foods to our children. I am sure that other members will want to address some of those factors. I do not have time to do so. I believe that we need a more overarching national strategy that is mainstreamed throughout departments and tiers of government. For example, a great many initiatives are promoted and developed by both the Scottish Executive and local authorities to improve health outcomes and reduce inequalities, but in my constituency I am still regularly bemused by planning decisions that allow fast food takeaways to open at alarming rates in local communities and often near schools. They offer cheap lunches to children, but the price will be paid in the longer term in their health. I congratulate the Scottish Executive on its commitment to tackling the problem, but I implore it to be much bolder in its aims. It has been robust on tackling smoking; surely it must be equally  robust and radical in tackling the factors that contribute to obesity in Scotland. Tackling obesity is estimated to cost the national health service £172 million per year, but it will cost us a great deal more if we fail to recognise the gravity of the situation right now. The facts could not be clearer. In Scotland, we have reached a crisis point in our children's health. The situation is dire and it is time for urgent and decisive action.

I record my registered interest with regard to Unison, which supports the abolition of prescription charges. We should remember that the debate is about sick people and people who, I am sure, would prefer not to be reliant on prescriptions, free or otherwise. We all agree that the current system is a mess and that, while certain chronic conditions get free prescriptions, many do not. Certain people on low incomes get free prescriptions; many do not. New mothers get access to free medicine for the first year, after which they do not. In Coatbridge and Chryston, there are nearly 8,000 people on incapacity benefit. Most of those claimants do not get free prescriptions; nor do those on DLA, despite the fact that their need for medicines and appliances is likely to be greater than that of people in other sections of society. It is likely that the working poor and people on the minimum wage have to pay for their medicines. Obviously, a few well-off individuals might benefit if we abolished charges, but they are already getting free prescriptions for their children—or themselves if they are over 60 or have a particular chronic condition. On the latter point, it is less likely that such individuals will need prescriptions, because the wealthy are statistically less vulnerable to ill health. They might also attend a private GP, who can write them private prescriptions, which can allow them cheaper access to medicines. I support the general principles of the bill for a number of reasons, most important of which is that it will be of benefit to the vast majority of the people I represent, when they take ill. Prescription charges have proved problematic for the Labour Party over the years. Nye Bevan famously resigned his ministerial post, outraged by the way in which prescription charges compromised the fundamental principles of the NHS. Labour's 1974 manifesto pledged:  "The Labour Government ... will continue the progressive elimination of prescription charges". Subsequent manifestos have essentially sustained that position, although perhaps in subtler language. However, in the intervening 32 years, only the Welsh Labour Party has delivered on it. How would we pay for the abolition of prescription charges? Is the cost too high? I contend that the cost that is too high to pay is the cost of the continued worsening health of people with chronic conditions and sickness who cannot afford their prescriptions; people who are too poor to buy their prescriptions; and those who have to make a dangerous and humiliating choice about which bits of their prescription to buy, such as whether to buy the brown inhaler or the blue one. I would not want to have to make that choice. If costs increase because sick people are taking their medicine, surely that is a good thing. How do we pay for it? What about savings on the price of drugs? Drug companies make a lucrative income from the NHS. Unison suggests that the excess cost could be met by taking a radical approach to tackling the escalating costs of drugs and suggests that the procurement of drugs could be included in the Scottish Executive drive to secure a streamlined procurement strategy. Alternatively, the Chancellor of the Exchequer could adjust the upper earnings limit on national insurance contributions, which is currently £645 a week. That might help to reassure those who worry that we might somehow advantage the seriously rich sick people. We could vary taxes. There are many ways of finding the costs if we are serious about sorting out the prescription fiasco. However, perhaps we could just implement abolition gradually, as the Welsh have done. It is ridiculous to argue that GPs' surgeries will suddenly become so inundated with the wealthy looking for free prescriptions that GPs will be unable to see their poorer patients. Will people suddenly start making themselves ill? No. Do better-off parents run to the doctor when they want paracetemol for their child, who is entitled to free prescriptions? I do not think so; they buy it in the chemist. Do the better-off with chronic illnesses demand that they get every cough medicine bottle and headache pill free? Frankly, it is quite insulting to accuse them of that. On the whole, the better-off will continue to buy over-the-counter medicines, because that is much more convenient. What removing charges would do is to ensure that no one experiences a barrier to medicine because of cost and financial hardship. We should abolish prescription charges. The Scottish Executive has not come up with anything better. Universal benefits are paid by those who can pay and are shared by everyone, to the ultimate benefit of society as a whole.

The minister will no doubt be aware of the positive endorsement, which is detailed in the  recent evaluation, that the Executive's free fruit in schools initiative has received from schools and local authorities. What plans does he have to pursue the recommendation that that initiative should be expanded to include children in more age groups? Does he agree that the success of the measure exemplifies the potential of the universal provision of healthy food to improve children's diets, health and well-being?

Although Post Office Ltd is a commercially run company, I am curious to know whether its own post offices sell alcohol or act as off licences and whether the minister thinks that it is acceptable for the post office in Coatbridge to do so.

I, too, congratulate Elaine Murray on securing the debate. It has been pointed out that postal services are a reserved issue, so I wish to start by recognising the work that my Westminster colleague, Tom Clarke, has done in raising with the Post Office the concerns of the people of Coatbridge.  The main post office in my constituency is set to be franchised as part of the proposed changes. Under the proposals, the central post office in Coatbridge will remain at its present location on Main Street. It will be owned by the Post Office but will be operated by CJ Lang & Son as a combined post office and Spar shop. As with other post office closures, staff have been offered voluntary redundancy packages or the opportunity of alternative employment. That means that CJ Lang will be recruiting an entirely new staff for the branch with, as Elaine Murray and Scott Barrie pointed out, less pay and benefits than those enjoyed by the highly trained and experienced staff in the Coatbridge post office. Current post office staff who want to remain in their jobs and who do not want to transfer or relocate because they have childcare issues, for example, will have to take voluntary redundancy and apply for their own job for less pay—if they are appointed. That is extremely concerning. Despite the Post Office's assurances that it will continue to train staff and monitor the levels of service that are provided in stores, I believe that a drop in conditions for staff will ultimately result in a drop in levels of service. That is unacceptable. Coatbridge post office is a standalone main branch that has an average of between 6,000 and 7,000 customers in a town of 45,000 people. That means that a significant proportion of the population access the branch every week. The recent closure of sub-post offices in the area has increased demand for the services that the main office provides. Scott Barrie mentioned that the same situation applies in Dunfermline. Frankly, it is outrageous to suggest replacing the Coatbridge branch with a shop. Given the small amount of retail space that will be made available as part of the proposed plans, I do not see how CJ Lang can provide adequate retail opportunity on the site to turn around the losses that the Post Office has identified. That leads me to another concern. My initial instinct was that the most commercial option for CJ Lang in the limited retail space that will be provided in Coatbridge might be an off-licence. It would appear that my instinct was correct because the future proprietor has applied to North Lanarkshire Council for a licence to sell alcohol. It did so on 8 December, four days before the franchise announcement was made and the consultation began. It is of grave concern to me that the main post office in Coatbridge—a town that is all too familiar with the detrimental effects of deprivation and alcohol abuse—might end up containing an off-licence in the same premises in which benefits are paid out. If I was cynical, I might think that the proposal was designed to exploit vulnerable  people. Frankly, I am horrified at what has been suggested. Given that a franchise has already been agreed with a commercial partner and—in the case of Coatbridge—that a licence to sell alcohol was applied for before the consultation started, it would appear that the transfers will go ahead regardless and that the so-called consultation is merely a token gesture or some kind of half-baked public relations exercise on behalf of Post Office Ltd. The situation is indicative of the wider privatisation agenda, under which profits are put before public service and people. I say to Bruce Crawford that there are implications not just for Westminster, but for the European Union. The further removed from public ownership post offices become, the less control we will have over the services that they provide and the ethos that has driven the postal service for generations. The result of that is that commercial considerations will take precedence over societal needs and priorities. A clear example of that is the proposal to put an off-licence in the main post office in Coatbridge, which is outrageous. I am happy to support Elaine Murray's motion.

Given that breast-fed children are less likely to become obese, will the minister consider encouraging schools to promote the benefits of breast feeding? That was done in Rosehall High School in Coatbridge as part of its healthy lifestyles initiative.

During the past fortnight or so, there have been some concerning press reports on or around violence against women. The minister and others mentioned the Amnesty International opinion poll, the findings of which are frightening, as they illuminate the extent of the sexist blame culture that exists in our society. However, as other members have talked about the poll, I will not go into it. A recent rape case in Wales showed how such attitudes can manifest themselves in the justice system. That case, which was heard in Swansea crown court, collapsed because the victim had blacked out from excess alcohol consumption at the time of the alleged attack and she could not remember saying no. The judge ruled that drunken consent was still consent, despite the fact that her alleged attacker was a security guard who had been entrusted to escort the girl to her flat because of concerns about her. The case was extremely worrying. There is no doubt that such decisions serve only to discourage women from reporting attacks. Last week in Scotland, the owner of a Scottish Premier League football club openly blamed a 15-year-old girl—a child—for a sex offence for which a 41-year-old man was convicted. It astonishes me that someone with that kind of influence in Scotland has been able to make such a statement without any significant repercussions. I ask the minister whether the Scottish Executive can do anything about that. I welcome the funding that has been announced today and the Scottish Executive's commendable record in tackling violence against women, but we need a more determined and robust approach. As Shiona Baird mentioned, that approach should be based on primary prevention. Earlier this year, the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children found that, within the United Kingdom, teenage girls in Scotland are at most risk from violence in relationships. Research from Zero Tolerance found that as many as 66 per cent of young people believe that girls can provoke violence and abuse because of how they dress and behave. The fact that such attitudes still prevail among our young people is extremely concerning. As ministers will know—I have mentioned this to them time and again—the Zero Tolerance respect project provides us with a tool to move future  generations forward on the issue by changing people's attitudes. Having had demonstrable successes, with positive evaluations from both the Executive and the Home Office, the project has now been rolled out either fully or in part to, I think, 12 local authorities for use in primary and secondary education and in the informal youth sector.

That is completely ridiculous and the local authority should reconsider its decision. Despite its considerable achievements, the primary prevention approach that ZT has promoted seems to have been marginalised in favour of secondary prevention measures such as national advertising campaigns. Although such campaigns are undoubtedly worthy, they do not reach young people to the same extent as primary prevention measures do and they do not have the same potential to secure a lasting impact on societal attitudes. We need an equal focus on primary and secondary prevention measures if we are to effect profound and long-term change. I ask the minister to comment on that. Given that the problem exists nationwide and can be found in every school, we need diverse solutions that are delivered locally but driven at a national level. That means that we need national funding of, for example, the roll-out of the respect project with different formats for different age groups. Finally, we need more robust legal responses to rape and other acts of violence against women. Amnesty International's report states that, for instances of recorded rape, the conviction rate in Scotland fell from 6 per cent to 4 per cent last year. That drop followed Lord Gill's ruling, but I do not know whether that is a coincidence. I had not intended to speak in today's debate as I felt that I might be in danger of repeating myself, but I believe that we all need to repeat ourselves until we sort out the issue once and for all.

I agree with many of the concerns that have been expressed so far, and I am pleased that we are debating the matter. I have been concerned about the issue since it was brought to my attention in April last year, when I took up a constituency case on it. I have been liaising with numerous agencies to resolve the situation, so I was pleased when the Executive recognised the need for investigation by instigating the consultation over the summer months. The Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 brought many positive improvements and changes to the social care sector. It has been recognised that the act strengthened service provision. The type of sheltered housing that we are talking about is provided by not-for-profit organisations such as Abbeyfield and has been reclassified as a housing support service under the terms of the act and, subsequently, removed from some valuation rolls. That is an extremely unfortunate but unintended by-product of the legislation. Indeed, the minister and the Executive have stated that the change in care legislation was never intended to include additional individuals in the council tax system or to increase the local taxation liability of homes such as those run by Abbeyfield. We have a clear responsibility to remedy that mistake. In fact, it would be extremely poor parliamentary practice to  ignore the negative impact of that unintended legislative consequence on vulnerable people or to allow those negative consequences to continue. In my constituency, Abbeyfield Coatbridge operates a home with 10 single rooms. Each resident has their own en suite facility, while all other areas are communal spaces. Since the legislation was enacted, it was decided that each room should be classed as a single dwelling and taxed accordingly. Frankly, as we heard earlier, that beggars belief. These are rooms, not dwelling-houses. The decision is unfair, unacceptable and has placed a considerable financial burden on a number of residents. Indeed, Abbeyfield has suggested that its newest resident might be liable for a council tax bill equivalent to the sum that she paid previously in her council house. The position is particularly flawed given that the majority of students are exempt from council tax. They live in similar circumstances, perhaps in halls of residence or houses in multiple occupation, and I am sure that they have locks on their doors. I do not see a precedent among other people who live in that type of shared accommodation for making the kind of financial demands that are being made. Young professionals and single people who share houses pay a single council tax bill, regardless of house size or resources. In response to the Executive's consultation, Abbeyfield Coatbridge has requested that its house be reclassified as a non-domestic subject and brought back into the non-domestic rating regime. I support that position and hope that the Executive will rule in favour of that. Between its opening in 1994 and its reclassification in 2004, the house was included in the non-domestic rating regime because of its charitable status. Given that the system worked well during those years, that it was acceptable to residents and that the house was never intended to be considered for change under the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, I hope that the Executive will see sense and return the house to that system. The other option that is set out in the consultation, which is advocated by Alex Neil in his motion and by other members, is that local authorities should bill the organisation for the entire property and the cost should be shared among the residents, who would, I presume, pay less than they do currently. However, as my constituents point out in their response, some residents are eligible for exemptions and council tax rebates, so any increase in rent that resulted from taxation of the whole property could be unfair and work to their detriment. Nevertheless, although I support and prefer option 1, option 2 would at least be an improvement on the current system for the majority of residents. Whatever option is chosen—and I hope that it is chosen  soon—the reimbursement of the tax that my constituents have paid under the flawed system is vital and must happen. I urge the Executive to make its decision as soon as possible. Abbeyfield and other such housing providers do sterling work in providing for our older citizens and we are likely to rely on them increasingly as our population ages. It is important that we allow them to focus on that job instead of having to undertake lengthy court battles in defence of their already vulnerable residents because of a mistake. Let us have action to rectify the situation.

Is the minister aware of recent research findings that estimate that poor dietary health in Britain costs the national health service £6 billion a year, which is four times the cost associated with smoking-related illness? Given the Executive's robust stance on smoking, does not the minister consider that simple economics dictate that we should take an equally vigorous stance on improving dietary health? Does he not therefore agree that the universal provision of nutritious free school meals would be a prudent investment in the future health and well-being of our nation?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support structures local authorities are required to have in  place for individuals facing council tax arrears. (S2O-8041)

I thank the minister for his answer and ask him to join me in expressing a warm welcome to the delegation from the Cuban National Assembly who are visiting the Parliament today. Does the minister accept that a significant proportion of individuals suffer sequestration on account of council tax arrears that are not the result of their being unwilling to pay, but are because of difficulties in managing finances and complex systems that are associated with debt repayment? Does he also agree that local authorities could do more to support such people by, for example, arranging fixed appointments with local authority money advisers in order to avert sequestration, and by promoting the existence of advisers more? Does he agree that the Executive could provide clearer guidance on that?

I, too, thank both ministers for their statements. Can the Minister for Health and Community Care confirm that the Food Standards Agency has advised that eating properly cooked poultry products is not considered to present a risk to people of catching avian flu? What is the implication of that for the consumption of raw eggs and raw egg products? Given that there are many worrying rumours going around, can he confirm that it is safe to eat poultry meat and eggs?

Last week, it was reported that the main town in my constituency, Coatbridge, had the highest percentage of growth in house prices in the UK last year. That is certainly good news for many home owners in the area. It is also welcome news for a town that, only the week before, had been labelled in Prospect magazine's annual festival of condescension as one of the most dismal places in Scotland. Property booms do nothing for those who are most in need of housing—the homeless. Increasingly, Coatbridge is facing a housing crisis. The social housing stock has been decimated by 25 years of the Tories' flagship right-to-buy policy, which has reduced the number of homes for rent, creating residual housing of last resort. The housing situation that the Scottish Executive inherited following decades of Tory Government was disastrous. I am proud of the fact that significant action has been taken to try to turn that round. I am particularly supportive of the Executive's stance on homelessness. The Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003 undoubtedly moved the agenda forward dramatically, and it has provided some ambitious and progressive goals for us to work towards. We cannot ignore the fact that the act has posed some serious challenges to local authorities. The legislation's impact on housing allocations policy is an issue on which I am regularly approached by councillors, registered tenant organisations and constituents. Karen Whitefield also spoke about this subject. The current shortage of social housing is undermining the legislation's  effectiveness. That can work to the detriment of numerous other disadvantaged groups, which other members have mentioned. North Lanarkshire Council tells me that its current operational requirements dictate that approximately 70 per cent of lets are made to homeless applicants. Anecdotal evidence suggests that inappropriate housing may be used, such as adapted housing. That is to the detriment of those who are on the waiting list because of health or mobility requirements and families living in overcrowded accommodation. Consequently, there is increasingly a perception in my constituency that the only route to a house is through a declaration of homelessness. The current situation, in which demand drastically outweighs supply, looks set to spiral further. North Lanarkshire Council anticipates that the total effective social stock will decrease by a further 11,000 by 2011. At the same time, the council expects the demand on social housing to rise by more than 30 per cent. I obtained figures on that just before the debate. Between 2003 and 2004, the total social housing stock in Coatbridge decreased by more than 200 homes. At the same time, the council received an increase of more than 1,000 applicants for social housing in the area. As a former homelessness officer, and having dealt with people who were not in priority need and with the heartbreak of their situations, I feel that we must abolish priority need. As Cathie Craigie said, a house is a basic human right. It is more houses that we need. Recent research by Shelter shows that the key concern of the majority is affordability, not ownership, as is frequently suggested. The fact that the right-to-buy policy continues to exist against that backdrop is simply incongruous. The Executive has amended that policy, of course, but if it is to ensure that the 2003 act achieves its objectives, it must seriously consider matching its tenacious approach under that legislation with an equally resolute stand next year on the right to buy. People's aspiration for home ownership is being placed above the absolute need for people to have a house. Margaret Thatcher encouraged the assumption that everyone aspired to own their home because that suited her political ends. The Tories tried to make that happen through the right to buy, which is of course not a right but a tool of housing policy that is designed to sell off a state-owned collective asset to private individuals. That is what it is all about. As we have heard, local authorities can apply for exemptions through pressured area status, but questions need to be asked about why few are  willing to apply for that. Perhaps we need to grasp the nettle nationally. I am confident that the Minister for Communities will consider those issues before he reviews the right to buy, but I impress on him the need for urgent and radical action to stop the rot in our social housing stock. I would like to discuss residualisation, but I do not have time to. I recognise the Executive's commitment to dealing with homelessness and affordable housing, but I urge it to be bolder and more confident in its attempts to curtail the right to buy. We should replace that with a right to rent. I return to my initial point about the property boom. It is clear that we need more state homes, not more stately homes.

To return to something to which the minister alluded earlier, does she have any plans to look into intentional homelessness?

Following the Scottish Consumer Council's recommendations on school transport earlier this year, will the minister tell me whether the unacceptable variations across Scotland have been addressed? Are full vehicle maintenance and reliability records checked before contracts are awarded? I am especially concerned about the age of some buses.

Who decides whether a proposal is competent? I ask because I was told initially that my Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Bill was not competent, but when it was redrafted I was told that it was competent. I would have thought that the decision was the Presiding Officer's. A proposal could come before the Parliament thereafter.

The minister mentioned autistic spectrum disorder. Is he aware that employment rates among people who have autism are particularly low and that only 6 per cent of such people are in full-time paid employment? Will he give more detail about how the work that he mentioned might promote employment opportunities for people with ASD in Scotland? Will he give a commitment to discuss the matter with the National Autistic Society Scotland, which has been researching the subject?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I get enough ribbing about that. I join other members in congratulating Mike Watson on securing the debate. He is right to suggest that the issue is a matter of national concern. I have made regular representations to the Scottish Executive on it over the years. There certainly seem to be substantial discrepancies between national policy on social and environmental justice and local planning priorities. I turn to my area. What I will say follows on from what Murray Tosh said; I agree with many of the points that he made. In 2002, North Lanarkshire Council undertook a consultation on its proposal to refurbish schools in the area. One of the options for the Coatbridge development included building on Dunbeth park—a beautiful Victorian park that serves a central function in staging events, provides the only green space in a built-up part of the town and is well used by adults and children alike. During the initial consultation the community strongly resisted that option, but concerns were allayed in 2003 when the council adopted an option that involved building the new school and all its associated facilities on the site of an existing school and did not use the park. However, following reports last year that the local authority had declared part of Dunbeth park to be surplus to the requirements of the community services department, I wrote to the council, only to be informed that outline planning permission had been agreed for a full-size floodlit Astroturf football pitch on the park. That planning permission was awarded without further consultation of the community. The local college was the only body to be notified, and it objected. When I asked the chief executive about that turnaround, I was informed that, in the PPP process, the bidders were responsible for proposing design solutions and that, accordingly, 1.44 hectares of Dunbeth park had been identified as an area in which the facility should be built. From that, it seemed to me that the PPP bidders were steering the location of the facility through their design process and that their views and objectives took precedence over the concerns of the community. Indeed, the council originally stated a preference that the facility be built on the  school site. I have been advised by building professionals that there is no reason why it could not be built on that site, although that might have increased the construction costs, which would make the project run the risk of exceeding the public sector comparator, which might have meant that the council would not have qualified for PPP funding. During the later stages of the planning process, 575 letters of objection were received by the council along with a substantial petition with about 2,000 signatures. At meetings, there was massive turnout of local people who were against the plans and at which the local councillor stated her support for the community's position. Nonetheless, the project looks set to go ahead. I found the experience to be disheartening and thought that the cavalier attitude of the local planner was cause for concern. I acknowledge that the development will provide improved football facilities for the school, but, those facilities could be provided within the school grounds. I am concerned about the fact that a substantial portion of green space has been handed over for a facility that community members, including children, will have to pay to access. The children are unlikely to be able to afford to do so. I represented the community at the planning meeting, but it was to no avail. The historical and aesthetic significance of the park make it important to the people of Coatbridge. It is a well-used resource whose nature will be altered by the development, which will impinge on valuable green space. Development of the park in that way seems to run contrary to the wider social and environmental justice agenda. I hope that, even at the 11 th hour, the friends of Dunbeth park will be listened to and the facility will be built within the school grounds, where it should be. Having been to the planning hearing to represent people, I do not know where to turn. I hope that the minister will be able to suggest how Dunbeth park can be saved from development.

I thank the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, the clerking team, the Scottish Executive's team and the many organisations such as UNIFEM—the United Nations Development Fund for Women—that have diligently pursued the eradication of FGM and lobbied for legislation for many years. I thank all the witnesses who gave evidence to the committee, particularly those from the Somali women's action group, whom I met on several occasions, as members have heard. The committee found the subject harrowing, but that pales into insignificance when compared with the trauma that those women must have felt when they recalled their personal experiences of the horrendous practice. FGM is clearly violence against women. It is a damaging, agonising and, at times, fatal act of injury that is perpetrated against women and girls. However, the pseudo legitimacy and prevalence of the practice in many communities, particularly in Africa, has led many women to consider it to be a normal and necessary part of womanhood. Last year, the BBC reported the testimony of Amina Ahmed, a woman who had undergone FGM. She said: "One day, I was wearing a beautiful coloured dress and my mum called me. I was held by a strong woman who sat on my chest and hands, leaving me breathless and motionless. There was an old woman there who held dirty old scissors and a sharp knife. This woman was the circumciser. She had no medical training or experience and even her eyesight wasn't very good ... She cut me up and removed my clitoris, put it in a bag and threw it away. I cried, I was screaming but I couldn't escape. The scars and pain from all the health problems I have suffered are still with me today." Amina was told that the operation was her secret and that she should not say anything about it. That is particularly relevant, because the shroud of silence that helps to perpetuate such appalling abuse must be swept away, so that girls and women know that FGM is an abnormal and unacceptable act of violence and mutilation. During the stage 1 debate, the minister told us of Waris Dirie's experience and we have just heard about Amina Ahmed. There are hundreds of thousands of girls who have survived and could tell us similar stories. The unheard victims, such as Waris Dirie's sister, are those who died because of FGM. We should take the time to remember that we are talking about real people and real experiences. Originally, we heard that the bill was to be  similar to its counterpart at Westminster and that we could have progressed through a Sewel motion. It is fair to say that there was a wee bit of cynicism about whether the Executive would accept the changes that the committee proposed, but it did, and I am pleased to commend the Executive for taking on board most of the committee's suggestions, and for giving reasonable explanations when they were unable to accede to others. One of the most important changes was at stage 2 and removed the restriction that stated that aiding and abetting FGM overseas was an offence only if the victim was a United Kingdom national or permanent resident. We heard reference to that earlier. When the Somali women's action group commented on that in its written submission on the bill, it said: "Now we see that it will not protect many of our members who are most at risk—asylum seeker women and children. We cannot believe that what you deem a criminal offence against a 'UK national or a permanent UK resident' is not a criminal offence if committed against asylum seeker women and children. We are distraught." I hope that the group is pleased with the change that has been made. Throughout the evidence taking on the bill, most respondents thought that protection should be extended if possible to all women and girls. There were difficulties in international law regarding further extension of the extraterritorial provision in the bill, which was needed to protect all girls. The Executive agreed to explore how the provisions of the bill might be extended to provide further protection for asylum seeker children from FGM. I commend the Scottish Executive for investigating those legal complexities and resolving concerns. That allowed me successfully to lodge an amendment at stage 2, which means that all girls and women are protected from FGM, regardless of their nationality and status. I make a plea for assistance to groups such as the Somali women's action group that cannot carry out their work without resources. Attitudes towards FGM are deeply ingrained among many people, and while the legislation is welcome, much more is needed to change views. Marilyn Livingstone will expand on that. The progress of the bill was a conciliatory process, helped by the genuine commitment of the Scottish Executive to eradicate the practice. I hope that that will mean funding and direction from the Executive to raise awareness of the legislation, to raise awareness about the harm of FGM and to help community groups in their work to eradicate FGM. I hope that the bill is passed unanimously at decision time. I am happy to support it.

On amendment 3, I should explain that, on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I moved at stage 2 an amendment on reinfibulation, but withdrew it to allow further discussions on the matter. The Scottish Executive has made it clear that the term "infibulation" in amendment 3 covers reinfibulation, which means that the action will be unlawful. I and, I believe, the rest of the committee accept that. I am also pleased that the Executive has lodged amendment 8, which will allow any necessary changes to be made to the actions that are defined in the bill.

As the minister said, amendments 2 and 10 seek to ensure that there is no ambiguity by clarifying that the term "prepuce"—which was inserted in the bill by a committee amendment that I moved at stage 2—refers to the female clitoral hood. I am pleased that the Executive has, as it promised at stage 2,  lodged the amendments and I very much welcome them.  Amendment 2 agreed to.

I am pleased to support the Executive's motion. Earlier this year, I took part in an enterprise culture debate, in which I argued for more investment in the social economy as a means of closing the opportunity gap and thus contributing to community regeneration and strengthening the wider Scottish economy. The social economy in Scotland has enormous potential, as we have heard in a number of speeches. Be it in financial services, in child care or in retail, the social enterprise sector has the  ability to make lasting changes in communities throughout Scotland. We need only consider the growth of credit unions and the difference that they have made to the lives of countless individuals to appreciate the potential and the demand for such enterprises and services. If I am correct in recalling this, I think that it was the Executive that made the case in Europe to which Jim Mather referred earlier. I am sure that the minister will pick up that point when he winds up. The social economy is frequently at the forefront of developing innovative new ways to do business, to create wealth and jobs and to promote change. The volunteering opportunities that are presented by the sector often create a valuable route to permanent employment for volunteers, and provide worthwhile and fulfilling opportunities for others. In my constituency, there is a range of social enterprises that provide valuable services to the community. The Deputy Minister for Communities mentioned child care services in her opening speech, and it is important to mention Lanarkshire Childcare Services, which provides a range of child care options for families, including breakfast clubs, after-school care and holiday play schemes. I suppose that I should declare an interest, in that my son participates in that organisation's activities.

It is certainly important to explore that, but I am not sure that Linda Fabiani's amendment is the right way forward. I will be interested to hear what the Minister for Communities has to say on the points that have been made about the amendment. There is certainly no doubt that such organisations need funding to continue. They provide an important service in the community. Another enterprise that has had considerable success is the North Lanarkshire Federation of Food Co-operatives, which operates as a small company limited by guarantee and runs 11 co-ops throughout North Lanarkshire on a not-for-profit basis. The co-ops are community centred and driven and provide low-cost, high-quality produce and groceries. The federation has grown in strength since its inception in 1989 and regularly works in partnership with Lanarkshire NHS Board and North Lanarkshire Council as well as with national agencies such as the Scottish community diet project. Central to the success of the federation is the considerable support and recognition that it has been given by North  Lanarkshire Council. The federation regularly supplies nurseries, playgroups and schools with produce for educational initiatives. Donald Gorrie referred to such work in his speech. Most recently, the federation has been in talks with North Lanarkshire Council to secure a service-level agreement to provide fruit for the 5,000 children who are set to benefit from the council's initiative to provide free fruit to nurseries. That partnership agreement will enable the federation not only to double its capacity and potentially extend its workforce but to consolidate its role in helping to deliver national priorities at a local level. The federation's local co-ops, a number of which serve some of the poorest communities in North Lanarkshire, report year-on-year growth in the sale of fruit and vegetables, with one co-op reporting a turnover of £500 per day on fruit and vegetables alone. Not only are food co-ops making a difference in economic terms by reducing the household food bills of local families, but they are playing a key role in promoting and improving access to healthier dietary choices for people in key communities. I think that that is the type of work that Linda Fabiani is referring to in her amendment, but I want to hear what the minister has to say about it. The North Lanarkshire Federation of Food Co-operatives provides an excellent example of the way in which social enterprises can offer the Government a range of solutions to meet its goals, whether on health improvement priorities, sustainable economic development or aiding public service delivery. I agree with Des McNulty's comments on awareness raising. In order fully to harness the potential of the social enterprise sector we need to increase promotion of it as a viable option for major service providers such as local authorities and health boards. We also need to encourage greater recognition of social enterprises among grant-making bodies and foster a culture of social enterprise within communities. I am sure that members throughout the chamber agree that the Scottish Executive has made a significant commitment to developing the social economy in Scotland. The £18 million futurebuilders programme has awarded some £3 million to 80 organisations in the social economy and £150,000 to 85 individual social entrepreneurs, and that is just since December. As we heard today, the Executive has also made a commitment towards establishing a co-operative development agency, which will, I hope, work further to galvanise and promote the sector. I understand that an announcement on that is expected soon, and I wonder whether the Minister can comment on it in his closing remarks.  In closing, I congratulate the Scottish Executive on its willingness to support the voluntary sector and the development of our social economy. I welcome the commitment that has been shown by local authorities such as North Lanarkshire Council and other service providers to invest in local social enterprises. Most of all, I commend the many thousands of individuals who work in the social enterprise sector in Scotland, both the paid and the unpaid.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action was taken at a national level to promote breastfeeding in Scotland during national breastfeeding awareness week. (S2O-6787)

I welcome the action that was taken last week. However, the minister knows that, despite significant progress in Scotland in recent years, the national breastfeeding target that was set more than 10 years ago has not been met. Will she say what action will now be taken to revise the target and the current breastfeeding strategies to galvanise future progress? Will raising awareness of the legal protection that mothers now have under the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Act 2005 form part of that strategy?

Will the minister clarify whether college lecturers will require to have teacher training and to be GTC registered, and whether their salaries will be similar to those of school teachers? How will the Executive ensure that school pupils are not dumped into college, which Peter Peacock mentioned?

I welcome much of what the minister has said. He has spoken of the role of other institutions. Are there any plans to examine the links between schools and higher education institutions? Recently, there have been some difficulties in my constituency around that issue.

The murder of Mark Cummings shocked and horrified people throughout Scotland. I commend Paul Martin for demanding a review of the arrangements for managing sex offenders and I congratulate him on securing the debate. Last year, in my own constituency, the horrific crime perpetrated by James Campbell—that of abducting and attempting to rape a two-year-old child—caused outrage within the local community and confirmed that the management of sex offenders is a nationwide issue that requires the urgent attention of the Scottish Executive. The community protests and demonstrations that took place in Coatbridge last summer showed the strength of feeling about the issue. Although such crimes may be rare, people are nevertheless scared about their children's safety and lack faith in a system that should safeguard their well-being. We have a duty to take action to address those concerns. I welcome the announcement by the Minister for Justice of a national audit of sex offender cases, following the Social Work Inspection Agency's report into the incident in Coatbridge. I also recognise the commitment made by Jack McConnell last week during First Minister's questions that the Scottish Executive will move quickly to end automatic early release for sex offenders following the recommendations of the Sentencing Commission for Scotland.  Both those actions move us in the right direction, but more must be done, and it must be done urgently. Appropriate sentencing of those who commit sex offences against children is essential, because they are the perpetrators of despicable crimes and society demands that they are punished accordingly. However, punishment is only part of the equation. The reality is that the majority of child sex offenders will be released into the community again at some point in the future. It is imperative that when they are released, the necessary monitoring and support services are in place, as Paul Martin said, and that prior to their release they receive adequate treatment to address their offending. Perhaps the most concerning finding of the SWIA's report into the James Campbell case was that that offender, who was only 17 when he committed his first serious sexual offence, was not assessed for, or given, any rehabilitation intervention when he was in prison. The fact that that disturbed young man was released back into the community without any treatment is of huge concern. I accept that the volume of receptions in prison in this country makes the provision of rehabilitation programmes for every prisoner difficult, but in the case of high-risk sex offenders, such programmes are essential. Rehabilitation and risk assessment should form an integral part of every sex offender's sentence and the Scottish Executive must take action to implement such an approach. As SWIA's report states, risk assessment must be a dynamic and on-going process. In the case of James Campbell, supervising officers appeared to have a different level of supervision because the homelessness unit had closed-circuit television and a 24-hour concierge. However, the CCTV took only internal footage and the staff had no knowledge of the offender's record. That was totally inadequate monitoring of the offender's behaviour. I ask the minister what consideration has been given to introducing more comprehensive methods for monitoring high-risk sex offenders following their release. Paul Martin also raised that issue. Another concern raised by the report relates to the housing of sex offenders. James Campbell was accommodated in a homeless unit that overlooked two primary schools. That was completely inappropriate. Mistakes were made by the various agencies involved and they have been quick to recognise that. The SWIA's report highlighted the fact that confusion between North Lanarkshire Council's social work and housing departments about their responsibilities in relation to housing sex offenders exacerbated the situation. The report describes the relationship between the two departments as  "complex and cumbersome" and suggests that the absence of national guidance hinders agencies in trying to find their own solutions. I hope that the minister will indicate in his speech what stage the Scottish Executive has reached in developing a national strategy for Scotland on housing sex offenders and when we can expect that strategy to be put in place. There is no doubt that the issue of managing sex offenders is extremely complex and emotive. The Scottish Executive has recognised the concerns that exist throughout Scotland and it has shown a willingness to take action. I hope that the Executive will now take on board the recommendation in the SWIA's report and will work to ensure that every possible precaution is taken in future to try to prevent crimes of the nature that we have spoken about in the debate or, at the very least, to minimise the risk of such crimes.

On the slightly different issue of public services, I have concerns about joint ventures, as does the Health Committee. What is Brian Adam's opinion on the amendment in the name of Carolyn Leckie? Does he think that it is rather sweeping, in that it says that "section 31 of the Bill compromises the general benefits to health from the Bill"? I have not heard much about the amendment this morning.

Will Carolyn Leckie give way?

As someone who has recently, finally, stopped smoking, I wish that I had never started.

Thank you. Is there any evidence that a smoking ban will help to prevent young people from starting to smoke, which is crucial?

As the First Minister is aware, the report of the Social Work Inspection Agency's investigation into the events surrounding the horrific crime perpetrated by James Campbell in Coatbridge last July was published this week. The report highlighted a number of issues, some of which have been mentioned in response to the previous question. Among the issues that were highlighted was the fact that when he was in prison James Campbell did not receive any treatment to address his sexual offending. Although I welcome the swift action taken by the Minister for Justice to initiate a national audit of sex offender cases, can the First Minister tell me what action will be taken to ensure that all sex offenders receive assessment and treatment that is appropriate to their needs and to the risk that they pose? Also, at what stage is the Scottish Executive with regard to developing a national strategy on the housing of sex offenders?

My interest in women in the justice system was fostered after reading Helena Kennedy's book "Eve Was Framed: Women and British Justice" in the early 1990s. Although by the end of the book, the jury is still out on whether Eve was framed, Helena Kennedy leaves the reader in no doubt that women do not get a fair deal at the hands of the criminal justice system. I am pleased to speak in support of the Executive motion. The Executive is undoubtedly committed to reforming the criminal justice system and to reducing the number of women in prison. A number of initiatives have already been introduced as alternatives to custody. We need to be clear that community sentences are not a soft option. They provide an element of punishment and—perhaps more significantly—of rehabilitation. Most important, community sentences keep families together and so are better for the welfare of children. Kate Maclean and Patrick Harvie referred to that fact. Separating young children from their mother causes trauma that can often lead to mental illness or profound emotional problems. Recent research shows that 30 per cent of prisoners' children suffer significant mental health problems; the comparable figure for the general population is 10 per cent. The Prison Reform Trust estimates  that only 5 per cent of female prisoners' children remain in their own home after their mother is imprisoned. When we note that many of the young women offenders who enter the system come from chaotic family backgrounds and that a high proportion of them were looked after by local authorities, we see that imprisoning mothers can become a self-perpetuating cycle. Society has nothing to gain from enforcing increased instability in society and from perpetuating looked-after situations in the lives of more and more children. Research has shown that even short stays in prison can make it more difficult for women to settle back into their community. They result in problems with housing, with taking back care of their children and with reconnecting to services outwith prison. We should be concerned about the number of women who are held on remand for short periods of time in Scotland's prisons. Between 1994 and 2003, the number of female receptions on remand almost doubled. The report "Punishment First—Verdict Later?", which was published by Her Majesty's inspectorate of prisons for Scotland in 2000, reminded us that individuals on pre-trial remand are innocent in the eyes of the law and that a large proportion of those in post-trial situations are unlikely to receive a custodial sentence. That begs the question why we feel it is necessary to imprison women when they pose little or no threat to their communities. Since 2003, the Executive has taken action on the issue and has developed an innovative initiative in the 218 time-out project, which is the first of its kind in the United Kingdom. The initiative was mentioned by the minister and also by Pauline McNeill. The 218 project offers programmes of care, support and development to women offenders that are designed to stop their offending by tackling substance misuse and the trauma and poverty that drive that misuse. The 218 project combines a detox facility with residential and day programmes and provides support and outreach to heath, social work and housing services. Given that the project is expected to restore and promote greater confidence in community disposals, I was concerned to hear the point that Pauline McNeill raised and would be interested to hear the minister's comments on it. I would also be interested to know from the minister whether the project has been a success so far and, if so, whether it will be rolled out. In any discussion about female offenders, it is essential to consider the overarching influence of poverty on patterns of female offending—an issue on which we have amendments today. Women are  disproportionately represented in the figures for so-called crimes of indecency, namely prostitution, and they comprise a higher than average proportion of those who are convicted for shoplifting, other theft and non-payment of TV licences—the kinds of things that other members have mentioned today. All those offences are either directly or indirectly linked to financial hardship and poverty. Frankly, it is ridiculous that financial penalties, followed by prison when women fail to pay, are imposed on women whose behaviour is in effect the result of poverty and social exclusion in the first place. It makes no sense. Dr McLellan of HMIP summed up the situation in his report on Cornton Vale in 2004, when he said: "Eighty per cent of prisoners ... have a history of mental illness ... 90% of admissions have addiction problems" and "Over 60% have a history of being abused". The question must be asked: what will prison do for them? The minister touched upon the fact that we must examine what prison can offer in terms of rehabilitation. I want to mention briefly the storybook mums initiative, which is due to be introduced in Cornton Vale next week. It is a positive initiative that was outlined in the Sunday Herald a couple of weeks ago. The project will allow mothers to record CDs of stories in their own voices for their children, which is important when we consider that research shows that prisoners are less likely to reoffend if they are able to maintain contact with their families while in custody. It is also important for the children. Another worthwhile project is being developed by Routes Out, which I do not have time to go into, but it involves intervention within prison. It makes no sense to send women to prison as a punishment, as others have said. I return to Helena Kennedy's book. She proposed in 1992 that real alternatives to prison should be created, such as appropriate community service, hostels and rehabilitation centres. She made the sensible suggestion—which might address the point that Kate Maclean made so passionately—that before any mother is sent to prison, the court should obtain the details of the likely impact on their child, and reasons should be given for not imposing an alternative to incarceration. She stated: "If the modern spirit of sentencing policy behind the new Criminal Justice Act 1991 is truly that prisons are places for dealing with serious crime, particularly violence, then it should be translated into reality by the judges, and our female prisons particularly could virtually be emptied." Sadly, more than a decade later, the number of women in prison is actually going up, which is uneconomical, unnecessary and unacceptable.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The sound system does not seem to be working, so we cannot hear the minister's speech properly.

I start by picking up on a point that David Davidson made earlier. Growing an enterprise culture is clearly a vital component of growing the economy, which is the Scottish Executive's top priority. I think that that goes without saying. However, economic growth does not guarantee the eradication of poverty and deprivation, which is something else that the Scottish Executive is pursuing. Direct Government action and intervention are required for that. A bigger cake will help only if it is redistributed fairly; if it is not redistributed fairly, relative poverty will continue to increase. I do not believe that it is sustainable to continue to take a symptomatic approach to poverty and social exclusion. The root causes need to be tackled in a systematic way, which means fundamental economic and social change. I am not promoting some previous forms of state ownership as the best way to deliver control of the economy to the majority of the population—or, indeed, as the best way to alter the balance between the few who have power, wealth and influence and the many who do not. However, democratic state ownership is appropriate in particular areas—for example, in transport, energy and, indeed, drugs manufacturing—and makes  economic sense. I am taking part in today's debate because I want to promote an ideal that underpins Scottish Labour's campaign for socialism: "the transformation of our society from the alienation and exploitation of capitalism, to the equality, justice and freedom of the socialist vision." I expect that most members would agree with the concept of a democratic economy and society, providing choice, diversity and high-quality goods and services. Where we might disagree is in how we can achieve that. Various forms of social ownership as mentioned by Susan Deacon—such as co-operatives and democratic mutual organisations—can deliver such an aim. Therefore, I welcome the Executive's commitment to the establishment of a co-operative development agency. The consultation on that finished last year, so perhaps the minister can tell us what stage the proposal is at. Local government must, alongside delivering local services, play a leading role in co-ordinating local economic and social activity. That must be done in conjunction with more democratic control and participation by communities. The social economy is often at the forefront of developing innovative services that can help to close the opportunity gap, contribute to community regeneration and therefore play an important part in the economy. The £18 million futurebuilders Scotland project—which the Executive put in place last year, I think—is very interesting. That project can help to assist the social economy and, again, I wonder whether the minister can tell us of progress. I turn to the Scottish Executive's plan for growing an enterprise culture. Components of the plan include improving further and higher education; encouraging more business start-ups; improving productivity; and teaching children about enterprise—all part of the Executive's vision of a smart, successful Scotland. Achieving some of that vision will mean co-operation with colleagues in Westminster. Specifically, to improve access to further and higher education, more work will be needed to provide ways out of the benefit trap. Recently, I met a group of young constituents who are involved in ACCESS—accommodation, employment and support services—which is a new futures fund employability initiative for young homeless people. Incidentally, the initiative is under threat because of the winding down of funding. Those young people were extremely frustrated by the catch-22 situation whereby accessing further or higher education would impact detrimentally on their benefit entitlement and consequently their tenancies. Ultimately, that  excluded those young people from further or higher education and from developing entrepreneurial skills. That kind of situation has to be tackled. On business start-ups and productivity, the Scottish Executive must tackle gender-based occupational discrimination, which Christine May touched on. An Equal Opportunities Commission report, "Jobs for the boys and the girls: promoting a smart, successful and equal Scotland", which was published last month, highlights the fact that such segregation has a damaging effect on productivity and exacerbates skills shortages and the gender pay gap. I welcome the Executive's targets for female entrepreneurs, which are to be reached by 2008, but the issues are interrelated and the Executive must take action to tackle occupational segregation as part of a wider strategy to improve the economic position of women. Improving productivity in existing firms is dependent, primarily, on engaging with the workforce to encourage people to share their skills, knowledge, ideas and experiences. However, to do that one has to build trust and the key to doing that and to creating an environment in which management appreciates the benefits of investing in its workforce lies in the trade unions. I would be grateful if the minister could update us on what engagement is taking place with the trade unions as part of building a smart, successful Scotland. Giving children the opportunity to learn entrepreneurial skills and expanding the number of schools that are involved in enterprise in education will help to grow an enterprise culture, but such skills must be taught within a curriculum that also teaches co-operation, confidence and compassion from a young age. That might ensure that we have a just society. I do not believe that a private sector-led economy is the answer to increasing social and environmental responsibility and delivering social equality. The profit-driven economies of capitalism serve only to foster selfish consumerist greed and individualism. Here in Scotland, we can change our culture and embrace a much more collective approach to economic growth and enterprise using the ways that I and others have outlined. Surely, when we talk about raising our game, our vision for the best small country in the world should not be limited to having a smart, successful Scotland; we should strive to achieve a confident, compassionate and co-operative Scotland. The Labour-led Executive has started on that road. I hope that it has the confidence to continue to the logical conclusion—a socially owned economy for the well-being of all our citizens.

I welcome the minister's excellent statement. I am sure that it will be welcomed throughout Scotland. Given the fact that the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Act 2005 will come fully into force tomorrow, does the Scottish Executive plan to take any action to clarify and promote the dental health benefits that are associated with breastfeeding?

Although I welcome the principle of increased infrastructure investment and the publication of the infrastructure investment plan, my concerns about the PFI/PPP procurement process that the minister mentioned are reflected in the recent decision on the Skye bridge scheme. Will the minister reassure all of us who share such concerns that PFI/PPP procurement processes will be subjected to rigorous scrutiny before they are agreed to and that they will be monitored thereafter to ensure best value?

Like other members, I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing the debate. I also recognise the work that my colleague Cathie Craigie has done over the years to bring the issue of deafblindness to the Parliament's attention, as well as the work of Kate Maclean in that regard. I am pleased that so many members of Deafblind Scotland are in the public gallery this evening. I commend the organisation for its continuing work and its active campaigning over the past few weeks. The Equal Opportunities Committee is undertaking a disability inquiry this year in which it is looking at barriers and problems and identifying areas of good practice. It is opportune that this debate is taking place during that inquiry, as it can help to inform that process. I understand that Deafblind Scotland will participate in the inquiry's events that are taking place around Scotland. The impairment of both a person's ability to hear and their ability to see has a profound impact on their life. Everyday activities that so many of us take for granted, such as communicating, travelling and accessing services, pose significant challenges for deafblind people. The potential for isolation and marginalisation is huge. The availability of relevant support services can make overcoming such challenges much easier; unfortunately, as members have said, such services are either not available to or not adequate for many deafblind and dual-sensory-impaired people in Scotland, and a one-size-fits-all approach to services is unacceptable. The uniquely disabling nature of deafblindness means that mainstream services or those that are designed for people who are specifically deaf or blind may not be of automatic benefit. There are also different forms and causes of deafblindness. Some people are born deafblind, whereas others become deafblind for various reasons, and their needs and problems will, therefore, differ. It is important to remember that many deafblind people  may not be totally deaf or totally blind and that people with deafblindness have varying skills, abilities, aspirations and requirements, just like any other group of people. Therefore, there is a need to provide sustained and cohesive services that are tailored to individuals and are not susceptible to the vagaries of a system that means that some people can access appropriate services while others cannot, depending on where they live. That is unacceptable. Deafblind Scotland points out that, of its 700 members, fewer than 100 receive a guide-communicator service, although such a service can make a huge difference to the lives of many deafblind people and can help them to achieve a greater degree of independent living. Guide dogs, too, can help some people, and I understand that the first guide-and-hearing dog in Scotland is working in my constituency. In response to a question that was posed by Cathie Craigie in December 2002, the then Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care said that there were no plans to issue guidance similar to that which exists in England. However, she gave assurances that the Executive was "reviewing objectives, agreeing priorities and devising a strategy for future developments."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 12 December 2002; S1O-6069.]  Can the minister outline what progress has been made on that, and will she undertake to revisit the guidance issue? It seems that such action has been successful elsewhere. I understand from a recent meeting with a constituent that the services and support that deafblind people receive can depend on assessment by one individual. When a person's quality of life is so dependent on such an assessment, it is vital that the assessors are trained consistently and to the highest possible standard. I ask for the minister's support for that. It is clear that deafblind people in Scotland require better services than they receive currently and that there is a need for increased access to the services of professional guide-communicators. That would allow people to maximise their potential and lead independent lives.

Mary Scanlon mentioned the lack of prosecutions under the existing legislation. I asked the Somali women why they believed that there had been no prosecutions in Scotland and they said that that was because of the fear of prosecution. They were quite clear that there could be cases of children being sent abroad to have FGM carried out. Does she agree that the passing of the bill may have a deterrent effect? That said, it is important that we consider education, training and so on.

I am pleased to speak in support of the Equal Opportunities Committee's recommendation that Parliament agrees the general principles of the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Bill. Like other committee members, I thank the clerks. The bill extends the provisions of the existing legislation, which makes it an offence to carry out FGM in Scotland. It increases the maximum penalty and changes the terminology that is employed from "circumcision" to "mutilation". The latter change is particularly important to ensure that the horrors of the procedure are not hidden by softer terms. The Somali women's action group was clear that circumcision was the wrong definition for what is performed. The minister has indicated that were it not for the coincidence with the Scottish Parliament elections, the bill would have been dealt with via the Sewel route when the similar legislation was progressing through the UK Parliament in 2003. Although that might have been an acceptable route, it has been useful to undertake our own legislative process. That has allowed us to make some recommendations that differ from the Westminster bill, which I hope will be accepted by the Executive as improvements. Aside from the reasonable changes that are proposed, undertaking our own legislative process has permitted us to have a better understanding of the matter. It has allowed for awareness raising and for the identification of potential gaps in service provision, education and training. During stage 1, it became clear to the committee that despite legislation having been in place since 1985, there is a worrying lack of understanding of FGM among health professionals and others and that little, if any, support is available. That has led to alarming situations, such as the one that was described to me during evidence taking, in which a Somali women last year underwent a caesarean section, against what she would have wanted, due to a lack of knowledge about FGM among staff. FGM is not widely known about in Scotland and it is unlikely to be particularly widespread. It is most commonly practised in African countries, as well as in the middle east and Asia. However, its prevalence has been increasing in western Europe, Australia, Canada, the USA and New Zealand. It is estimated that around the world more than 100 million girls and women have undergone FGM and that every year a further 2 million girls are estimated to be at risk. Scottish legislation will not eradicate the practice worldwide, but it will send a strong signal that FGM is unacceptable. By addressing cultural attitudes among the affected communities in this  country, it will undoubtedly have some effect on attitudes elsewhere. I believe that FGM should be a legitimate reason for granting asylum. However, during evidence taking I found that women might not volunteer FGM as a reason for seeking asylum due to its personal and sensitive nature, which might result in a refusal decision. I know that that is not part of the report, but it is important to take the opportunity to urge immigration officials to take the lead and sensitively ask questions to elicit a response. The Somali women also explained to me the pressure from family to have FGM carried out on their children and to return them to Somalia to have it done. As we have heard, the process of FGM can involve different types of mutilation. According to the World Health Organisation, the most common is type II. The most extreme form is infibulation, which involves cutting out the genitalia and stitching up of most of the vaginal opening. To put that in context—it goes further than what the minister described—the male equivalent would be the removal of the penis. The process tends to be carried out on girls between the ages of four and 13. Short and long-term health consequences include death from haemorrhaging or septicaemia and, in later years, sexual dysfunction and childbirth complications. There can also be psychological consequences, such as anxiety and depression. We must be clear that FGM is part of the spectrum of male violence against women and children. Although women physically do the cutting, the process is based on a culture of patriarchy, which ensures chastity and virginity before marriage and fidelity thereafter. Type III is a hellish form of flesh chastity belt. Ultimately, it dictates the matrimonial potential of women. In many cultures in which FGM is prevalent, a girl who remains unmutilated will not be a suitable candidate for marriage. Therefore, parents view the process as a necessary "act of love" to gain a secure future for their daughters. In my first meeting with the Somali women, they made it clear that "There is intensive pressure within the Somali community to carry out this procedure on girls. One of the group explained that in the minds of every female there is the thought that they are required to arrange this procedure for their daughter." They also "indicated that men instructed their wives to ensure that this procedure was carried out on their daughters." Changing such in-built cultural influences is no easy task. It involves education and awareness raising for all in the community of the dangers of the practice. I think that that is particularly true for  the males—because when men start demanding unmutilated brides, FGM will come to an end. I have a previous interest in this subject; I questioned the Minister for Health and Community Care during a ministerial statement in 2003. However, my recent knowledge has come primarily from contact with the Somali women's action group. I want to take this opportunity to thank those women for their full and frank discussions with me and for appearing at the Equal Opportunities Committee, albeit anonymously. It was brave of them to speak about such a personal and distressing issue to a stranger, and giving oral evidence to the committee must have been even more daunting. All the evidence that we took was extremely helpful. However, the most compelling evidence came from the Somali women who had direct experience and who were determined to protect their daughters from such mutilation. Their courage and resolve were admirable and inspiring. Reports of my meetings with them are available within the stage 1 report. It is worrying that those women became involved in the process by sheer luck. The Executive seemed to be unaware of their existence. I hope that ministers will reflect on that point when considering consultation processes in the future. Ministers might also consider the barriers—such as language barriers—that people face when they respond to consultations. When we were taking oral evidence from representatives of the Somali women's action group, we had some problems with interpretation. As a result, there was some dubiety over whether the witnesses considered it appropriate that the bill should include a cut-off age. That prompted the committee to ask me to meet the group a second time. At that meeting, the group was quite clear that FGM was wrong and should not be legally permitted whatever the age of the woman. That opinion coincided with all the other evidence that the committee had heard. Very little service provision exists with regard to FGM. Legislation is welcome, but it must be accompanied by support services, which should be centrally driven and resourced by the Executive. It should include assistance for groups such as the Somali women, to allow them to educate their communities. The women particularly asked me about resources to help them to do positive work to raise awareness about FGM. They are asylum seekers and have little funding of their own. The women asked whether a mother could be prosecuted for having FGM carried out on a daughter if she was not aware that it was illegal. When they were told that that would probably not be an acceptable defence, they pointed out the importance of education for their community,  because of the impact that the law would have on their lives. I congratulate the Executive on this piece of legislation, and I congratulate the minister on her moving speech, which made the horrors real for us here in the chamber. I commend the Equal Opportunities Committee's recommendations to the Parliament, and I hope that the legislation, alongside appropriately resourced service provision, will help to eradicate the horrendous practice of mutilating girls and women.

Is the minister aware that many people in the Labour and trade union movement will oppose the EU constitutional treaty on the grounds that it will move Europe in the wrong direction by binding us to free-market economics, further privatisation of public services and less accountability to the electorate? Does he share my concern about the proposed change in the rules that will make it far easier for the EU to take areas such as health and education into the general agreement on trade in services, which could ultimately mean the end of publicly owned and publicly accountable health and education systems?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My question was about the EU constitutional treaty, not the EU. The minister perhaps made a mistake in the answer that he gave.

I am pleased, if a little disappointed, to find myself back on this familiar territory. I supported the School Meals (Scotland) Bill in the previous  session of Parliament and I am a vocal supporter of the on-going campaign. Although the defeat of the bill was disheartening for everyone who was involved, the campaign has moved on since then and has gained strength and perspective as a result. Since 2002, the campaign, which is co-ordinated by a coalition of charities led by the Child Poverty Action Group, has continued to build on a wide range of support from individuals and organisations, including the Scottish Youth Parliament, Unison, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, NCH and the British Medical Association. There has also been an increase in the amount of research that is conducted in areas such as the extent and cost of the obesity problem in Scotland and a study was undertaken by economists at the University of Dundee on the distributional benefits of free school meals. Similarly, some local authorities have committed themselves to the introduction of a policy of providing free nutritional meals universally. In Hull, the city council is just coming to the end of the process, as we have heard, and the initiative has been praised by the Minister of State for School Standards, Stephen Twigg MP. In Glasgow, the council has committed itself to the principle of delivering universal free provision and will do so in primary schools by 2007. Just as the Parliament's surroundings have changed and evolved since 2002, so have the arguments surrounding the validity of the case for free school meals. In the interim period, the Executive has also taken steps that focus on child health and nutrition. Several commendable initiatives have been introduced, such as the hungry for success programme. New nutritional standards in schools, increased health education and promotion and the universal provision of free fruit for primary 1 and 2 children are just some of the measures that are beginning to make a difference for schoolchildren in Scotland. There is nothing wrong with the words of the Executive's amendment—apart, perhaps, from the fact that the Tories support them. The amendment merely points out what is being done. Nevertheless, it intrinsically alters the motion and is, basically, an amendment against the universal provision of free school meals. I have no doubt that the Executive is committed to improving the health prospects of our children; in fact, there is a general consensus in the Parliament that improving the dietary health of our children must be a priority. The question is how we can do that. The sheer scale of the challenge that we face in turning around the health prospects of our nation has convinced us that the issue needs decisive, radical and sustained action. For that reason, the Parliament should not dismiss the notion of  universally free school meals without proper scrutiny and consideration. In saying that, I am not suggesting that the committees that were charged with scrutinising the member's bill in the previous session did not do that to the best of their ability. However, many of the arguments that were employed at that time by both sides were based on speculative evidence. The Health and Community Care Committee suggested, during stage 1, that a pilot scheme would be of benefit in gauging the merits or demerits of the proposal. I think that a pilot scheme would be a rational and pragmatic way in which to proceed, be it in Glasgow, across Scotland, or in primary 1, 2 and 3. With recent figures suggesting that a third of 12-year-olds in Scotland are overweight and that one in five is clinically obese, there is no doubt that we are facing an obesity time bomb in this country. We must lead from the front and educate all our children about what it is to eat a healthy diet. I can see no better or more effective way of achieving that than by providing a free nutritional meal for every child on every day of their young school life. I hope that the Parliament will keep an open mind on that prospect, support further independent research and consider implementing pilot schemes. Do something about obesity we must.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assistance is being provided to local authorities to support the implementation of the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003. (S2O-5469)

The minister might recall that I have already raised with him the subject of housing allocations in North Lanarkshire. I understand that he recently discussed the matter with the council. Although I commend the Executive on its projected aims for homelessness legislation, will the minister tell me what action is being taken currently to address the immediate problem of protracted waiting times for allocations that are being affected by homelessness allocations and, as a consequence, the inevitable perception among my constituents that the only route to an allocation is through a declaration of homelessness, regardless of personal circumstances?

I am delighted that this motion has been chosen for this evening's debate as it serves to highlight further Macmillan Cancer Relief's excellent campaign. It also provides an opportunity for us to discuss the role that we can play in supporting the campaign's objectives and the action that is needed to tackle the related problems. I therefore thank those members who signed the motion and those who have stayed for the debate. My focus on the subject stems from a meeting that I attended last year with my colleague Tom Clarke MP, Maria Eagle, who is the Minister for Disabled People, and members of the Lanarkshire speakeasy club. The speakeasy club is a voluntary peer support group that works with people who have developed cancer of the larynx and undergone a laryngectomy, or removal of the voice-box, as a result. The secretary of the group, Anne Muir, is in the gallery this evening. I am delighted that she has joined us and I welcome her to the Parliament. During that meeting, we heard first-hand accounts of the harrowing situations in which speakeasy members found themselves after they had surgery. Effectively, patients have to relearn techniques to enable breathing and communication and they can be faced with the  possibility of further surgery in order to improve vocal ability. In addition to the physical and emotional upheaval, group members found that their illness introduced new and varied constraints on their finances and that accessing benefit services was far from straightforward. Obviously, the debilitating effects of a laryngectomy pose specific challenges for patients who need to access the Benefits Agency; for example, services such as telephone advice lines are no longer practical. That makes engagement more difficult. The difficulties encountered by speakeasy members were not limited to that area. They range from problems with interpreting forms to struggling to have their condition adequately understood. Macmillan Cancer Relief has found that financial concerns are second only to physical pain as a cause of stress for people with cancer and their families. The financial implications of a cancer diagnosis can be immediate and severe. At a time when income, energy and resources start to decrease, expenses usually increase. General living costs such as housing, debt and mortgage repayments conspire with increased bills for essentials such as travel and parking, child care, heating, laundry, food and prescriptions to push many patients and their families to their financial limit at a time when they should be concentrating on their immediate health concern. In June last year, Macmillan reported that 77 per cent of people who responded to its CancerVOICES survey had incurred extra expense as a result of their cancer. Given the fact that more than £126 million in disability benefits went unclaimed by people with a terminal cancer diagnosis in the United Kingdom last year and considering the fact that Scotland has the highest non-claimant rate—64 per cent of relevant Scottish patients did not claim the benefits to which they were entitled last year—it is apparent that we have a significant problem to address. Much of the work on assessing the scale of the problem, identifying barriers and developing solutions has already been done. During its 2001 strategy review, Macmillan found that current trends suggest that more people will be diagnosed with cancer, that more people will survive cancer for longer and that more people will live at home with cancer for longer. From previous surveys, Macmillan knew that financial concerns were prevalent among cancer patients. However, its analysis of the plans of statutory and voluntary services showed that none of them had plans to address the need for practical support that the trends and surveys identified. In recent years, Macmillan has carried out several research projects and has initiated high-profile campaigns such as the campaign for a better deal for people dealing with cancer. Central  to much of its recent work are the findings of a report that was published last year on benefits access for cancer patients in Northern Ireland. The report aims to identify the relevant barriers to benefits access and makes recommendations on how improvements can be made. Its findings are comprehensive and wide reaching. Crucially, they encompass both reserved and devolved issues. Many of the recommendations in the report relate to the operations of the Benefits Agency and are, therefore, reserved. However, much of the report recommends closer working between health and social care professionals and social security agency staff to enable a greater understanding of their roles and to develop clear pathways of referral for advice for patients. Perhaps the most significant recommendation—the one that has been echoed in the better deal campaign—is that every cancer patient should be made aware of the fact that they may be entitled to benefits at diagnosis and that specialist help and support is available. In Lanarkshire, there is a service that aims to do just that. In 2001, Macmillan Cancer Relief joined forces with the Lanarkshire citizens advice bureaux to provide a point of contact for referrals and advice for cancer patients. Project workers liaise with a range of nursing and other staff in Lanarkshire's three main hospitals to raise awareness of the service and to encourage the early referral of patients, who are then offered a range of options for guidance and support, including advice sessions and home and ward visits. The project is now in its third year of funding from Macmillan and has achieved considerable success. In 2003, the project was successful in securing more than £500,000 in benefits for cancer patients in Lanarkshire. That figure more than doubled last year, with more than £1 million secured for the project's clients, 99 per cent of whom were new or upgraded claimants. The project exemplifies what can be achieved through partnership working and engagement between relevant stakeholders. I encourage the minister to liaise directly with Macmillan, with a view to learning from the project and, possibly, rolling variations of it out across the country. The statistics show clearly not only that the problem exists throughout the United Kingdom but that we face a particular challenge in Scotland, making the need for decisive action on the part of all the stakeholders all the more urgent. I congratulate Macmillan Cancer Relief on the commitment and initiative that it has shown on the issue, and I encourage the Scottish Executive to engage with the charity to tackle the problems effectively. In closing, I refer to the words of a cancer patient from Luton, who summed the situation up concisely when she said:  "I really think that you should be able to talk to somebody straight away after you or your partner has been diagnosed with cancer. This way so much unnecessary worry could be avoided."

I welcome the Scottish Executive's commitment to eradicate racism in Scotland. That commitment is based on the belief that a just society is one that is free from prejudice and discrimination.  People are not born racists; such attitudes grow as children's views and beliefs develop. They are influenced by those around them, including friends, society and the media. Like Marlyn Glen, I believe that educating children about racism is vital. The websites for young people that the Scottish Executive has developed are excellent resources for assisting that education. The website for 12 to 26-year-olds gives background to and understanding of what racism is and why it is wrong. It encourages young people to speak out against racist behaviour and language, as we all should. Educating children to ensure that they do not develop racially prejudiced mindsets must be a major part of the strategy to tackle racism. However, we also need to examine whether there are any anomalies in the language that we use in society and the messages that that gives that might adversely affect the Executive's work. On asylum seekers, I believe that we have seen mixed messages and unacceptable use of language that can pander to and foster racist attitudes within our country. As we have heard, the leader of the BNP was due to participate in a debate at the University of St Andrews yesterday, but the invitation was withdrawn after a concerted effort by the Labour and trade union movement, by Positive Action in Housing and others. According to one point of view, preventing the BNP speaking publicly threatens free speech. However, like Bill Butler, I believe that giving racist, fascist thugs a platform can serve only to legitimise their vile messages. In any case, human rights law places the rights of personal safety, liberty and security above the right to free speech when such free expression is used to incite racial hatred. Unfortunately, the BNP has won council seats in England. I believe that some of the language that is used about asylum seekers has served to aid that. Insidious terms such as "bogus asylum seeker", which by the way was this week attributed to a spokesperson for the First Minister, and "illegal immigrant" are repeated so often and dominate public discussion of asylum issues to such an extent that the adjectives have almost become ingrained in the psyche as automatic prefixes. As a Parliament we have a responsibility to question the widespread acceptance of such language, which has emanated from right-wing rhetoric. Outrageous, unsubstantiated and untrue newspaper stories such as "Swan Bake", with the strapline "Asylum seekers steal the Queen's Birds for BBQ" and the more subtle and sinister "Halt the Asylum Tide now" headline, which called asylum "Britain's biggest crisis", are commonplace. If the public are fed a daily diet of anti-asylum-seeker rhetoric it is little wonder that many people  mistakenly believe that asylum seekers are milking the system, taking houses, spreading disease, causing antisocial behaviour and generally creating a drain on our resources. I have to say, anecdotally, that I noticed that some constituents used such rhetoric at the time of the European election campaign when the BNP was given increased media coverage and a leaflet drop. Draconian asylum legislation, aside from being ethically wrong, panders to right-wing racism: talking tough about asylum only serves to foster a racist attitude. Ultimately, the only party that can win from an obscene competition to see who can get toughest on asylum seekers is the BNP. The point is made on the Executive's website that the prevalence of racism tends to be related to particular economic and social circumstances; it tends to have been most prevalent when migrants have been perceived by the resident population to represent an economic or social threat. The irony is that in Scotland, which has a declining population, we need immigrants. That is evidenced by the fresh talent initiative, which the Scottish Executive has introduced. For that reason, and for reasons of humanity and compassion, we should welcome asylum seekers and allow them to work rather than lock them up in Dungavel or evict them from their homes. That approach to those who are fleeing poverty, oppression, violence and war sends out entirely the wrong message to society and acts as a barrier to achieving one Scotland, many cultures. On a positive note, research commissioned by Oxfam found that more than 83 per cent of people who were surveyed agreed that individuals seeking asylum in Scotland should be given the opportunity to work, 64 per cent maintained that Scotland should be a safe haven for those fleeing persecution and 60 per cent believed that children should not be held in detention centres. Those findings serve to illustrate some of the good will that exists towards refugees and asylum seekers in Scotland. I believe that the Scottish Executive has a responsibility to recognise, promote and encourage such attitudes as part of the anti-racism strategy. I ask the minister to comment on whether asylum seekers in Scotland will be allowed to use their skills and abilities to work while they await immigration decisions. The Parliament should speak out for humane immigration rules, fair and just decisions, careful use of language and effective responses that recognise Scotland's distinctive needs. I commend the Scottish Executive's strategy and its commitment to tackling racism. I also recognise the work that it has already done. However, I believe that more attention must be paid to promoting respect for asylum seekers and to  challenging right-wing rhetoric. Then we may see the combating of the far right, better community cohesion and further tangible steps being taken towards eradicating racism in Scotland.

In relation to the work that is scheduled for the A80, what consideration, if any, has been given to the concerns that my constituents in Mollinsburn have about road safety?

Given the minister's answer, I ask him for reassurance that private sector involvement in the treatment of NHS patients, which is sanctioned by the Executive, will in no way serve to undermine or to reduce the current or future capacity of the NHS in Scotland, and whether it is intended as a short-term measure while NHS capacity is increased?

I thank Mary Scanlon for bringing this debate to the chamber. I am pleased that the Parliament is debating infertility, as there is no doubt that it desperately needs wider public discussion. For most people who are affected by infertility, it is an extremely private issue that can cause  mental and emotional anguish, and can lead to long-term problems such as depression and the breakdown of relationships. The nature of the condition and the complexity of the emotions involved mean that many of those who are affected avoid speaking openly about their experiences, even with the closest of family members. For women, feelings of sadness, jealousy, anger, grief and loneliness are all associated with the experience of infertility. Equally, men can suffer from emotional anxiety, stress, feelings of inadequacy and low self-esteem. A sad result of the trend is that we rarely have open, honest or poignant discussions about infertility in the public domain. Those who are unaffected by infertility are therefore too often reliant on sensationalist reporting and public discussion, such as the recent outrage over the case of 66-year-old Romanian mother Adriana Iliescu, which can form their perception of the condition and its treatments. In reality, of course, the sad truth for infertile couples is far more fundamental and heart-rending than such high-profile cases sometimes suggest. An estimated one in seven Scottish couples experience fertility problems. Waiting lists can be as long as four years. As Mary Scanlon pointed out, a cut-off age of 38 for IVF treatment for childless women, plus an average two-year wait before GP referral, means that the real cut-off age for discovering fertility problems is closer to 32. In a country where political will is being applied to tackle a declining population, surely it is time that our society recognised that infertility is a legitimate health care need that requires nationwide commitment. We have to open up widespread discussion of infertility to ensure that there is greater understanding of all the issues involved. As important as the need for a comprehensive and consistent nationwide approach to infertility is the need for a dedicated strategy to tackle the underlying causes of the condition. While current levels of involuntary childlessness can be attributed to different factors, such as women waiting longer to start families, previous illness and a fall in the average sperm count—as outlined by Mary Scanlon—the alarming rise in sexually-transmitted infections in Scotland in recent years could override all those contributing factors as the main cause of infertility in coming decades. It is therefore fitting that this debate should follow the Minister for Health and Community Care's statement on a sexual health strategy for Scotland. As many as one in 10 young people in this country could have the sexually-transmitted infection chlamydia without knowing it. In some  areas of Scotland, clinics have reported finding that as many as one in four young women are infected with the disease. The silent harm of chlamydia is of great concern. In a significant proportion of cases—particularly among women—it can be asymptomatic, and so can remain undetected, which puts women at risk of developing pelvic inflammatory disease and infertility. It is essential that we take action. Money that is spent now on better information services and testing the population, coupled with a national screening programme such as that in Sweden, could save us a great deal in future decades. There are other causes that require attention. Once again I draw attention to endometriosis, which we debated four years ago. I wish to put some questions to the minister. In 2001, the estimated waiting time for the diagnosis of endometriosis was seven years, which highlights an urgent need for better understanding. Could the minister investigate whether the diagnostic situation has improved? Will she reconsider the possibility of having a public awareness campaign to encourage greater interest in and understanding of the condition among the public, the medical profession and the scientific community? Once again, I thank Mary Scanlon for raising the subject of infertility. In the spirit of talking about it, I say that my husband and I have personal experience of infertility, having tried unsuccessfully for a number of years to start a family. We were extremely lucky to conceive without IVF—it was a miraculous occurrence—but I have not forgotten the emotional turmoil at the prospect of not being able to have a child. I hope that the forthcoming review of guidance on the provision of fertility services in the national health service will result in improved services and greater reassurance for couples that their decision to try to have children will be supported and resourced.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what success the crèche facility has had so far in improving the accessibility of the Parliament for people with young children. (S2O-5047)

I am sure that other members join me in picking up Duncan McNeil's point and commending the facility, the only one of its kind in Europe, for providing a unique opportunity to achieve greater participation rates among parents and others who care for young children who visit the Parliament and family-friendly support services for staff and members. Does the SPCB plan to take action to promote greater public awareness of the facility? Will it consider reviewing and extending the service that is provided to staff and members, by prioritising breastfeeding mothers' babies, for example?

Many of my constituents have approached me about those waiting times, which are a concern. Has any consideration been given to extending the programme to include perhaps the option of grants or reimbursements for service users so that the backlog could be better tackled? That might prevent people such as a 73-year-old constituent of mine from having to wait five months with no heating or hot water over the winter.

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to increase the availability of social rented housing and affordable housing to buy. (S2O-4659)

The minister knows that I am always keen to commend the Executive on its radical homelessness legislation. What specific assistance is being provided to aid local authorities with the implementation of the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003? Is the minister aware of the circumstances in areas such as my constituency, where the sheer scale of homelessness allocations threatens to jeopardise regular housing allocations policy because of the lack of council housing?

On 14 September 2001, George W Bush made one of the most ominous declarations of his presidency. He said: "Just three days removed from these events, Americans do not yet have the distance of history, but our responsibility to history is already clear: to answer these attacks and rid the world of evil." Of course, history has shown us that some of the worst manifestations of evil since then have resulted directly from the United States Administration's efforts to rid the world of evil. The SSP's motion outlines some of those efforts. George Bush's allegedly selfless undertaking to bring freedom and democracy to Iraq and Tony Blair's quest to rid the world of other people's weapons of mass destruction have resulted in widespread bloodshed, chaos, suffering and terror. With estimates suggesting that as many as 100,000 civilians have died and calls this week for an independent public inquiry into those deaths, can we really be expected to view the carnage as a necessary sacrifice for the greater good? We  have already been expected to tolerate and accept far too much in the name of ridding the world of evil, but what evils have we unleashed? First, there is the lying. Two years on, we have not seen any evidence of the supposed threat that was given to us as the premise for the war. Then there is the hypocrisy. I note that a Dutch national this week faces charges of supplying chemical materials to Saddam Hussein. That is certainly a heinous crime and, if the allegations are true, the matter should be dealt with accordingly. However, according to a Campaign Against the Arms Trade report on the supply of British military equipment to Iraq between 1979 and 1990, 13 UK companies—including, I say to Murdo Fraser, British Aerospace—attended Iraq's first major arms fair in Baghdad in April 1989. That was one year after Saddam Hussein's forces dropped chemical weapons on Halabjah. Should we expect the British establishment to show repentance about that at any point soon? There has been torture. The calculated abuse of prisoners by the US military at Abu Ghraib caused outrage everywhere and in the Arab world in particular. Last week, the International Committee of the Red Cross was reported to have berated the US Administration for overseeing the intentional physical and psychological torture of prisoners who are being held at Guantanamo bay. There has been profiteering from misery. Before the war even began, I spoke about my disgust that the US had already handed out contracts to US companies for the rebuilding of Iraq. At the time, Tam Dalyell MP described that as "vomit making". According to the American Centre for Public Integrity, contracts worth almost $11.5 billion have been awarded since 2000 to Kellogg Brown and Root, which is a subsidiary of Halliburton, for services to the US military and the rebuilding of the oil industry in Iraq. Of course, Halliburton is the multinational company of which Vice-President Dick Cheney was chief executive officer until 2000. On the killing of children, UNICEF stated in a 1996 report: "It is the singular characteristic of warfare in our time that children suffer most." At the start of the war, children under the age of 15 comprised 42 per cent of the population of Iraq. Will we ever know how many have died? The US military refuses to track civilian casualties. That is the reality of the 21 st century war against terror and evil, as championed by George Bush. What has been achieved for the people of Iraq? Since the occupation, the US has failed to address properly the basics such as power shortages, sewerage floods, the 70 per cent unemployment  rate, and the rampant crime and lawlessness that have resulted in the complete breakdown of society. Children are suffering from poverty and malnutrition. Saddam has been toppled by his former friends, but with every passing day of the occupation, every civilian death, and every display of arrogant American imperialism, more and more Iraqi citizens are seeing the coalition forces as occupiers and not liberators. A realistic date to end the occupation must be set so that there is a target to work towards. A UN peacekeeping force must be considered as a solution to ending occupation and insuring against civil war. Of course, we are where we are, and the withdrawal must now take place after the January elections. However, if those elections do not take place, a planned withdrawal must proceed anyway. There is not much wrong with any of the positions that members have taken today, but none provides an answer. Whether in the Parliament or outwith it, if we do not keep expressing our opposition to pre-emptive wars, where will it be next? Iran? Syria? Cuba? What of Palestine? Where is the commitment to ending the evil and atrocities that are happening there? It is quite clear that the war was waged to further the aims of a neo-liberal US Administration that is hell-bent on furthering its imperialist, capitalist and exploitative agenda. This pre-emptive, illegal war has been a disaster for the UN, a tragedy for the families of the coalition troops who have died, and a catastrophe for the Iraqi people. The policy of combating evil by unleashing more evil has clearly failed. It is now the task of us all to bring the conflict in Iraq to a swift and peaceful solution. That must mean a planned end to the occupation at the first practicable opportunity.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

This welcome debate allows us to focus on and explore some of the prejudices and problems  that women face and that manifest themselves as violence against women and children. As Cathy Peattie, Pauline McNeill and others have pointed out, the poverty, oppression, inequality and suffering of women permeate the globe, which is why we need an international day and days of action. Wars such as that in Iraq, which are fought not for freedom and democracy but to advance the interests of global capital, impact most severely on women and children. Around the world and at home, women suffer disproportionately from the effects of poverty and the unequal distribution of wealth and power. No matter whether we are talking about stoning women to death for alleged adultery, female genital mutilation, rape, trafficking or domestic abuse, violence against women is a worldwide phenomenon. As for the situation in Scotland, I commend the Scottish Executive for its obvious commitment to tackling violence against women and for initiating this debate. I particularly welcome its intention to set up an expert group to look at the issue strategically. Many problems, including violence, that women face in our society must be tackled in a unified manner as part of a comprehensive approach towards challenging gender discrimination. As Rosie Kane suggested, part of the solution lies in changing attitudes that are supported and encouraged by social structures and cultural messages portraying women's needs and rights as less important than men's. Women are still disadvantaged in many areas of their lives, as the minister pointed out. They earn less than men and they are more likely to live in poverty. Moreover, they are held back from leadership positions in society not through lack of ability but because they have to meet home and caring responsibilities while holding down paid employment—in other words, the double work day. That kind of structural inequality at social, cultural and political levels gives men the advantage over women and can create the conditions for violence. I, of course, sympathise with any man who faces domestic abuse. However, some colleagues who continually raise that issue during debates on violence against women are failing to see the big picture. Male violence against women is premised on women's inequality and subordination in our society and across the globe.

I am sorry; I do not have the time. The continuum of male violence against women and children includes domestic abuse, rape, sexual assault, child sexual abuse, sexual harassment, prostitution and pornography. As Christine Grahame has pointed out, I will be  looking into that last issue for the Equal Opportunities Committee. Although the evidence of harm to women who have experienced male violence has been well documented, the underlying connection between all forms of male violence against women has not been properly explored. As a result, I believe that there is a clear need for the Scottish Executive to undertake a comprehensive analysis of the whole continuum of male violence against women. I am pleased that, having rightly put so much effort into tacking domestic abuse, the Executive is now examining the wider aspects of violence against women and children. I look forward to following the expert committee's work. We need extensive research that considers male violence against women in the context of a widespread manifestation of gender discrimination, demonstrates the evidence of harm and establishes links between different forms of violence. That information should then be used to help to combat all forms of gender discrimination, to produce cohesive social policy that tackles the impact of male violence across all areas of social and public life and to provide enhanced legal protection against male violence, including protection against the harm caused by prostitution and pornography. Taking such action will help us to meet the ultimate aim of eliminating violence against women and children. The voluntary and statutory sectors in Scotland now have considerable experience of delivering high-quality support services to those who have experienced rape and sexual assault. There is also a growing recognition that agencies have to work together to be effective. As Pauline McNeill pointed out, the Glasgow violence against women partnership has presented a multi-agency proposal for a pilot rape and sexual assault referral centre that would bring forensic, health and support services together in one location. I encourage the minister and the new expert committee to give early consideration to that welcome proposal in their discussions with other ministerial portfolios. Attacking injustice and winning reform have been an integral part of the long struggle for women's emancipation and the raising of social consciousness. We should not forget that it is women who have led that struggle over the years. Achieving genuine liberation for women depends on rejecting a social order in which women are systematically undermined by the pervasiveness of all forms of male violence. However, we must also acknowledge that female oppression, poverty and inequality are directly linked to capitalism and economic exploitation. The eradication of class and labour exploitation and the embrace of true socialism are an essential prerequisite for the  emancipation of women at home and around the world. I will conclude with the words of Lucy Gair Wilkinson, which were written at the turn of the previous century and are still relevant today. She wrote: "It is to Socialism that women must look for their freedom; & Socialism can only be achieved by a united working class. Let the women workers of today unite with their brother wage-slaves to put an end to the suffering & subjection in which silent generations of the women of the past have lived & died."

Will Margaret Mitchell take an intervention?

Does Margaret Mitchell not recognise that male violence against women is premised on inequality? There is a big picture here.

On the subject of female genital mutilation, there has been some comment that that tends to be carried out by women. Does the minister agree that it forms part of the violence against women by men because it is men who require it as part of a tradition?

I have registered interests in relation to the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Bill. I thank everyone who has contributed to this  afternoon's debate, It has been very positive, which I am pleased about. I thank the visitors who have attended this final stage of consideration of the bill, including my son, Vann, who played an important role in inspiring this bill. He and I experienced at first hand some of the negative attitudes to breastfeeding that exist in Scotland. As has been the case with previous breastfeeding debates, many parents and children have joined us—most of them are watching from committee room 1. I find it difficult to believe that we have now reached the final stage of the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Bill, the fate of which will be sealed at decision time. I have been working on the bill for the past three years, but certainly not alone, and I take this opportunity to thank everyone who has helped get the bill to this stage. When I first had the idea, I sought legal help for drafting a proposal from Mike Dailly of the Govan Law Centre, and he kindly agreed to assist. My thanks go to Mike for his hard work and commitment in turning my idea into a workable piece of legislation. I set up a steering group to advise me and to inform the process, and I invited a wide range of organisations to participate in it. In eliciting that support, I merely scratched the surface of the total number of people who work in the sector. That was enough, however, for me to witness the vast amounts of enthusiasm, dedication and commitment that Andy Kerr has spoken about. Those people deserve our support, and I hope that, if it is passed, the bill will go some way towards providing that. Unfortunately, time does not allow me to name all the individual members of the steering group. Suffice to say their help has been invaluable throughout the process. Thanks are due to Unison for funding a piece of research and to Kay Sillars for producing it. I thank Boots and the Royal College of Nursing for sponsoring a reception tonight. I also thank the committees that considered the bill—particularly the Health Committee—and their clerks. The Health Committee's scrutiny of the legislation and its robust stage 1 report evidenced an excellent understanding of the issues. In his previous brief as Minister for Health and Community Care, Malcolm Chisholm scrutinised my proposal and my thanks go to him and the Scottish Executive for their support. I also thank my MSP colleagues and Jenny Warren, the national breastfeeding adviser. My staff also deserve recognition. In the early days, Margaret McGregor, John Rowan and Frances Wright gave me important assistance and my current staff, Lesley Dobbin and Catherine Murphy, have provided invaluable help on the bill. Last, but far from least, my thanks go to Susan Deacon MSP and her researcher Ann Henderson.  As Susan Deacon has pointed out, I first approached her with the idea when she was Minister for Health and Community Care, and in that role, although naturally wary of how the legislation might work, she supported the principle. Over the years since that first conversation, Susan has been a source of help and advice, culminating in her agreeing to close for me in the stage 1 debate and to open in this debate. I am extremely grateful to her for that. As the final hurdle approaches, I must address a few issues. On the whole, the bill has attracted positive support, but a minority has tried to undermine it by saying that it is a politically correct and trivial issue. In fact, this small, but important bill is a good example of how the members' bills system can work under devolution and how it can allow members to take forward important constituency-led issues to effect legislative change for the benefit of Scotland as a whole, and to lead the way in the UK. It was the discovery that Coatbridge had one of the lowest rates of breastfeeding in Scotland that provided me with the impetus to pursue the bill, so it arose directly from my constituency work. If the bill helps to encourage more women to breastfeed, it will have a significant effect on the future health of children and women in Coatbridge and Chryston and right across Scotland. I was also motivated by the Executive's response that it had no powers to do anything about the incident of the woman who was put off the bus. Perhaps it will have those powers shortly. The most controversial part of the bill seems to be that it provides legal protection only for children up to the age of 2. It is regrettable that an age had to be included at all, but because it is criminal legislation, it must be clear and unambiguous and it must define what "child" means. We heard all the arguments during the discussion of amendments so I will only reiterate the point that the status quo prevails for children beyond the age of 2, and it is not illegal to feed your child. The bill is important in underpinning the sterling work of health professionals in the NHS and in providing encouragement to the Scottish Executive to focus on the way in which breastfeeding is promoted and supported by the Executive. Further, given the low breastfeeding rates in more deprived communities, the bill could also be regarded as another tool to help tackle the social exclusion and poor health that is linked to poverty and deprivation. Indeed, last week when Professor Stewart Forsyth was referring to follow-up data from the Dundee infant feeding study, he commented on breastfed babies from poorer backgrounds by saying: "babies who were from poorer communities actually do better in terms of health outcomes than many of the  children from the more affluent areas who were bottle-fed." I have never promoted the bill as a panacea. It is part of a wide-ranging approach that encompasses many different health departments, voluntary sector initiatives and Scottish Executive policies and programmes. If the bill is supported this evening, it will show that Scottish parliamentarians are prepared to play their part in helping to underpin the work being done elsewhere and send a clear message that breastfeeding is normal, nurturing and maternal behaviour and it ought to be supported. I asked Susan Deacon to open the debate so that I could have the final word. If passed, the bill is not an end, but the beginning of the Parliament pursuing practical ways to support and encourage breastfeeding. Although I am having the final word in this debate, I assure Parliament, the minister and all those with an interest in breastfeeding that I will have much more to say on the subject during the rest of this parliamentary term and I am sure that many of my colleagues will too. I am pleased to acknowledge the Executive's commitment to breastfeeding and its current plan to produce a Scottish strategy. However, it falls upon us all to ensure scrutiny of the Executive; given the interest in the bill, I am sure that we will rise to that challenge during the coming months and years. The leader in The Herald in August 2002 was about the bill and it carried the headline "Natural act is overdue official respectability". The article concluded: "Signalling to society that breastfeeding is an acceptable part of modern life is a message that is long overdue in its delivery." Colleagues, at decision time, let us deliver that message.

I recall from the evidence that was given to the committee that the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland said that it would not want to use breach of the peace legislation. The witnesses did not think that that was a realistic option.

Amendment 6 is a technical amendment that will merely—

Amendment 6 will merely help the clarity of the bill on an issue that the Scottish Executive helpfully brought to my attention last week. I apologise to the Health Committee that the amendment was not considered at stage 2, but I hope that Parliament will agree that it is a practical amendment. As it stands, the long title does not employ the exact wording of section 1. It is imperative that the bill be as precise as possible so that we end up with good law. The main thrust of the amendment is to replace "being fed milk" with "feeding milk" to ensure that there is no ambiguity. I ask Parliament to support the amendment. I move amendment 6.

Similar and identical amendments to those that are being moved by Carolyn Leckie today were rejected unanimously by the Health Committee at stage 2, but I am happy to debate the issues once again, because the more the subject is debated, the better for raising awareness and challenging some of the prejudices and misconceptions about breastfeeding. I will provide a bit of background. It seems from research that the norm for weaning from the breast around the world is between two and four years, although in some cultures it happens when children are older. For example, custody law in India decrees that any child under six years old must reside with the mother because such children are considered to be of suckling age. Research that compares humans with other primates suggests that humans' natural weaning  age is a minimum of two and a half years and a maximum of six to seven years. It should be entirely up to mothers and babies when they want to stop breastfeeding and there should be no stigma attached to that, because it is their choice. However, we do not live in a breastfeeding culture in Scotland and there are, of course, cultural issues to address, to which Carolyn Leckie referred. The reality is that even a small baby who is utterly dependent on its mother's milk can be looked at askance when feeding in public and can be segregated or ejected from public places and licensed premises. The bill is intended to offer them protection in law and to promote breastfeeding, thereby—I hope—assisting in changing attitudes and impacting positively over time on how society views all breastfeeding. I turn to the amendments. When proposed legislation seeks to change existing law it must be clear, unambiguous and precise, as other members have said. To leave the term "child" undefined would not make good law. Without a definition, "child" might include anyone from one day old to 18 years old. Given that the bill will create a criminal offence, "child" must be defined so that everybody knows exactly what the offence entails. Carolyn Leckie's amendment 1 must be rejected based the basic tenets of good Scots law. Carolyn Leckie's other amendments relate to a more substantive issue, which the steering group that I set up with professionals discussed in several meetings. The group finally agreed to the age of 2 as a cut-off point. Given the research on weaning that I mentioned, we could argue that seven years would have been a more legitimate cut-off point; I note that Carolyn Leckie did not include the age of 7 in her suggestions. The age limit of two years was inserted in the bill because the World Health Organisation recommends that children be breastfed up to two years and beyond. It does not set an upper limit, but it does mention two years. It does not recommend that children be breastfed up to a year and beyond, three years and beyond or four years and beyond; it mentions two years and beyond. The age is not entirely arbitrary and there is logic to it. The commonsense point was made to the Health Committee that children under two years cannot understand the concept of waiting for a feed, whereas older children can, and can generally communicate their feelings, wants and needs.

They will still be able to feed. There is a misconception about the bill, which will protect children up to two years old who are being breastfed in public; it will not make it illegal to feed them if they are aged over two years. Over time, we will begin to change the culture, to which Carolyn Leckie rightly referred. The bill is about safeguarding and protecting the right of young children to feed. It will create a criminal offence that will ensure that babies have the unfettered right to feed in certain public places. After much deliberation, the steering group fixed the age at two years to define the meaning of "child" for the purposes of the bill. That decision is measured and proportionate. In considering the evidence at stage 1, the Health Committee concluded that to define "child" for the purposes of the bill was appropriate. In the vote at stage 2, it unanimously rejected leaving out the age or changing it to a higher age. As I said in response to Carolyn Leckie's intervention, if the bill is passed benefits will accrue in changing attitudes, in making breastfeeding more culturally acceptable and in encouraging breastfeeding of children beyond the age two. I reiterate that the status quo will prevail. It will not be illegal to breastfeed one's child after the child is two years old; that is the misunderstanding. Although some children are breastfed for longer than two years, the majority are weaned far too early, as is evidenced by the Executive's target of having by next year 50 per cent of children still breastfeeding at six weeks. That target is far from being realised—we are at below 40 per cent at present. Attitudes have to change and I think that they will evolve to embrace all breastfeeding as normal and nurturing maternal behaviour. We have to consider the realpolitik. It is a bit of a quantum leap in the United Kingdom to introduce legislation on the matter. The provision of legal protection for breastfeeding of children up to two years old is reasonable, sensible and realistic for the reasons that I have outlined. However, if members take a different view and wish to insert an age other than two, that is their prerogative. The bill is in their hands at the moment and I would be relaxed about such a change. I do not know where members will set the age limit; I do not know which of the options they will pick or what logic they will use. However, I am clear that the term "child" must be defined. Although I think that women and children should make their own choices about weaning from the breast, I must stand by the definition that is set out in the bill, as was agreed at stage 2.

I was pleased to go to the Scottish Women's Aid conference at Our Dynamic Earth last week. It was well attended and well organised and it involved children and young people. As other members have commented, the ministers' announcement at that event of £6 million for improved services was of huge significance. I am pleased that the Executive has made such a substantial commitment towards working to improve the lives of children and young people who are experiencing domestic abuse. The Parliament and the Executive can be proud of the work that has been done on the domestic abuse agenda since devolution. Since the publication of the "National Strategy to Address Domestic Abuse in Scotland", the Executive has displayed a consistent determination to tackle all the related issues. With an estimated 100,000 children and young people in Scotland affected by domestic abuse, the funding that has been announced by the minister will build significantly on the £500,000 that has already been provided since 2003 to ensure that every Women's Aid group in Scotland has at least one dedicated children's worker. The additional funding will also allow Scottish Women's Aid to secure its existing provision as well as expand its support services. In fact, it will double its number of dedicated children's workers. I understand that the funding will also assist in the provision of more outreach workers to address the needs of children who are living outwith refuges and the immediate reach of specialist services. Given the suggested correlation between domestic abuse and the physical and sexual abuse of children, it is vital that we make reaching those children a priority. That requires the strategic and co-ordinated involvement of many different agencies. I am pleased to note the importance that the Executive has placed on that. I stress in particular the role of education in both the prevention and the outreach aims of the agenda. I  ask the Executive to ensure that essential support in the form of training and resources is provided for those education sector workers who are often the first point of contact for many of those vulnerable children. Like Shiona Baird, I sound a note of caution about the plan to amend family law. Although, for the most part, the proposal to extend access to parental rights and responsibilities to unmarried fathers is laudable, when we consider all the provisions, we must take adequate precautions to ensure that those rights cannot be manipulated, thus allowing abusers access to families and ex-partners. Without such safeguards, the measures will fail to protect the best interests of the child and could endanger a significant number of women and children. Indeed, one Women's Aid circular tells us that 76 per cent of children who are ordered by courts to have contact with a violent parent were said to have been further abused as the result of contact being set up. One child said: "It is better for my dad just not to know where we live, to keep our safety." We have to bear that in mind. I realise that the Executive has recognised those concerns and I urge it to take action. To achieve the objective of eradicating domestic abuse, we have to be willing to take bold action and we need to work harder to reduce inequality, to tackle the pervasive culture of violence towards women and children and to foster an understanding of the importance of equality and respect among our young people. With that in mind, I am glad that the Equal Opportunities Committee has asked me, as gender reporter, to undertake an inquiry into pornography and possible causal links between it and violence against women and children. I am also pleased that the minister wants to have a debate on the wider issues that surround the subject. I have a little problem with today's amendments. I agree with much that is in them, although my point to Margaret Mitchell is that I note that the Conservatives have taken great pains to make their amendment gender non-specific. We have to accept that we are talking about an inequality issue that mainly affects women. The Executive motion is perfectly acceptable as it stands. I welcome the commitment that the Executive has shown to the issue and I congratulate it on its past record and recent moves to provide better services.

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made towards the initiation of a national review of the nursery service. (S2O-3662)

I am pleased to hear that the review is progressing, given the commitment that was given by the Executive earlier this year during my members' business debate. I note from the Executive's press release at the announcement of the review that the review aims to consider "the potential implications ... for pay and conditions." Can the minister inform me whether workers can genuinely expect to see a material improvement in their pay and conditions as a result of the review, especially given the gender issue?

I agree with Shiona Baird in that I, too, want to see the right to buy go. However, does she acknowledge that the Executive has reduced the discounts on right to buy?

Does the member not agree that the Executive has introduced one of the most radical housing policies ever? I refer to the  homelessness legislation, which will entitle everyone to a home. Does she not recognise that, in the short term, of course there will be a rise in the homelessness figures, but that in the long term, there should be a decrease in those figures? Will she not congratulate the Executive on taking that action?

I am happy to welcome the improvements  in housing quality that are mentioned in the minister's motion. However, does he agree that such improvements could also be possible if councils' debts were paid off in order to allow them to retain housing in that particular form of community ownership and thus improve the quality of their stock?

Has the minister any plans to consider extending assessment and recognition of dyslexia to children at a younger age, perhaps when they are in nursery rather than in school? Will he join me in congratulating North Lanarkshire Council's Coatbridge network support team, which runs excellent workshops for parents of dyslexic children?

Given what she says about schools, does Christine Grahame welcome the respect project that is run by the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust?

How will I follow that? I congratulate Sandra White on securing tonight's debate. I read the document, "Improving the position of women in Scotland: an agenda for action", which was produced by the strategic group on women that Margaret Curran set up last year. I noted in that document that Joan Stringer refers to the famous observation of the Irish author, Rebecca West, which she made in 1913 and which I think is worth quoting in the context of the debate, particularly given what has been said so far. She said: "I have never been able to find out precisely what feminism is; I only know that people call me a feminist whenever I express sentiments that differentiate me from a doormat." Things have improved somewhat since 1913—at least, I would certainly like to think so. Donald Gorrie touched on the possible underlying reasons for gender inequality, and the Parliament can be proud of the fact that it has debated the subject and its associated consequences many times since its foundation. However, we have not yet achieved equality with men. Sandra White's motion provides one particular example out of many. There is little doubt that there has been an improved approach towards equality issues in Scotland since 1999. As the gender reporter for the Equal Opportunities Committee, I have met people from groups and organisations over those years who have been supported, encouraged and driven to achieve more by the new opportunities that have been afforded through devolution and by the Executive. While the Parliament and the Scottish Executive can be commended for taking the issue of equal pay seriously, we must be realistic in recognising that we have yet to make sufficient progress in closing the gap and that much remains to be done.

I will come on to that, but of course it is true that equalities are a reserved matter. According to EOC research, women working full time in Scotland earn an average of £482 less per month than men. Debates such as this are crucial for reminding us that the battle is far from won and that we cannot afford to be complacent about equalities. As Linda Fabiani said, from a legislative perspective, the matter clearly remains reserved to Westminster. I welcome the fact that the guarantee of a decent income, a rising minimum wage and equal pay between men and women was outlined as a priority by the Prime Minister this week. Sandra White quoted Gordon Brown. I hope that, in the spirit of a members' business debate, she will welcome my referring to what the Prime Minister said, too. The Parliament and the Executive have done much to improve the representation of women in public life but, to answer Linda Fabiani's point, we have a fundamental responsibility to ensure that every little bit of devolved power is utilised by us to help to close the pay gap in Scotland. I would have liked to have talked about mainstreaming, but I do not have time. I will quickly turn to one of the ways in which the Scottish Executive can assist people in working towards equal pay, which undoubtedly involves an evaluation of those sectors of employment that continue to be undervalued, underpaid and overpopulated by women, as was touched on by Carolyn Leckie. I, too, wish to refer to the nursery nurses. I welcome the commitment that the Executive made earlier this year towards a review of that service, and I look forward to its commencement. Indeed, I would welcome any indication that the minister might be able to give me tonight as to the progress of the Scottish Executive's plans in that regard. I again congratulate Sandra White. I share her concerns regarding the pay gap in Scotland. I feel that the Executive has taken the issue seriously and that it is aware that we face an uphill struggle. I am not sure whether the worrying statistics warrant a complete step change in the Executive's policy, because I know about the work that it is doing, but I agree that the statistics indicate an unacceptable situation. I welcome any opportunity to discuss possible solutions, and I look forward to the minister's comments.

On that point, does the member agree that it is amazing that companies make so much profit from ensuring that the artificial milk is as like a mother's milk as possible, yet the world's poorest and most oppressed people are women, who are the producers of the real thing?

Does Nanette Milne agree that providing private facilities forces women to be segregated from the rest of society? They might not be able to sit and have a coffee with their friends, for example. If they go to their GP's practice, why should they have to be segregated? I tried to let Nanette Milne in when I was speaking, but she did not want to intervene. I ask the question again. When she says that shops and restaurants should be free to decide whether mothers should be allowed to breastfeed on their premises, is she condoning the expulsion of breastfeeding mums and babies?

An age limit was included because it was thought that there should be a legal definition of the word "child". I am sure that we can consider that at stage 2. We decided on a limit of two years—rather than one, three or four years—because WHO advice is to breastfeed for "up to two years and beyond". Of course, although it would not be illegal to prevent a child over two from being breastfed in public, the status quo would prevail. Once a cultural shift has taken place, I think that we will find that all breastfeeding is much more accepted in society.

As Malcolm Chisholm has outlined, there is a lot of work going on in the Executive, and I have cited an example from a school in my constituency. The bill is part of a multifaceted approach; it is one way in which we hope that we can effect a change in cultural attitudes, which will help to increase breastfeeding rates.

I am hopeful that the bill will be part of a multifaceted approach. Will the member join me in congratulating Rosehall High in Coatbridge, which is bringing in mothers from the community to work on educating first year pupils about, and highlighting the importance of, breastfeeding?

I refer to my registered interests that relate to the bill, which include assistance from Mike Dailly of the Govan Law Centre and funding from Unison. I welcome the visitors who are in the public gallery, particularly the mums and babies who have come along. I thank everyone who has helped the bill to get to this stage, including the Health Committee, which recommended that the bill proceed to stage 2, its officials and the secondary committees that have been involved. I am pleased that my first speech in the new Parliament building is on my own piece of legislation. I add to the many positive comments that have been made about the building by commending its accessibility. The bill promotes accessibility for families in all public places in Scotland. The idea for the bill arose after my members' business debate on breastfeeding in May 2001. It seemed to me that such an important health issue should not merely be mentioned once a year during breastfeeding awareness week, but that it deserved practical action by the Parliament. During that debate, I related the experiences of a mother who was put off a bus in Edinburgh for breastfeeding. In response, Malcolm Chisholm said: "Ministers wrote to Lothian Regional Transport ... but under current laws we do not have powers to enforce anything on a bus company in that regard."— [ Official Report , 17 May 2001; c 902.]  Three years later, the Parliament has the opportunity to change that situation. If we enact the bill, in future no mum will have to suffer the stress and indignity of being harassed, segregated or ejected from a public place merely for wishing to give their child the best start in life. The principal aims of the bill are to ensure that breast and bottle feeding mothers are given equal and unimpeded access to public services and spaces where children are entitled to be, and to encourage and make provision for the promotion of breastfeeding. I have been asked many times whether women actually experience such ill treatment. The simple answer is yes, they do. In evidence to the Health  Committee, Rosemary Dodds of the National Childbirth Trust said: "I deal with a slow but steady stream of concerned women who have been asked to leave premises."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 11 May 2004; c 853.] Indeed, Kate Maclean MSP recalls being frogmarched out of the powder room of an Edinburgh department store for breastfeeding while, at the same time, a staff member ran off to get water for a customer's dog. Some of the many incidents that have been brought to my attention include a mother who was chastised over the tannoy in a Clydebank shopping mall, a women being slow handclapped out of a Glasgow cafe and two women being asked to leave general practitioner and dental waiting rooms in Dumbarton and Ayrshire respectively. Of even greater importance than those examples is the impact that they have on women's choices for feeding their babies. Figures released by the Department of Health last May showed that more than two thirds—67 per cent—of women believed that the general public find breastfeeding in public to be unacceptable. That clearly indicates that the 16 per cent of people who objected to the idea of women breastfeeding babies discreetly—which was the word that was used in the question—in public have a significantly disproportionate influence on women's perceptions. If we allow the barriers that make breastfeeding a largely hidden practice to remain unchallenged, future generations will be denied any positive reinforcement of breastfeeding as normal, everyday, maternal nurturing behaviour. Scotland has one of the lowest breastfeeding rates in Europe and one of the highest rates of ill health. Coatbridge has one of the lowest breastfeeding rates in Scotland and—perhaps not coincidentally—has some of the highest rates of ill health in Scotland. It also has significant levels of deprivation. The correlation between areas of higher deprivation and poverty and low rates of breastfeeding is clear. Jenny Warren, the national breastfeeding adviser, makes the following observation: "The mothers who have most to gain in terms of their own and their babies' health, namely the young, poor and least educated, are least likely to breastfeed ... They are more likely to be dependant on public transport and lack the confidence to breastfeed in public." Given the importance of breastfeeding for the future health of our nation, it is vital that the Scottish Executive continues actively to promote breastfeeding. Section 4 of the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Bill will help with that. Other members will no doubt expand on the many proven health benefits of breastfeeding. Suffice it for me to say that the wealth of scientific research into the benefits of breastfeeding  suggests that there would be massive societal recompense in increasing the levels of breastfeeding. Indeed, research indicates that improvements in the levels of breastfeeding could save the national health service in Scotland an estimated £3.82 million a year through associated reduction in gastro-intestinal infections alone. That does not begin to take into account the savings associated with all the other health benefits to mother and child. While the legislation would undoubtedly help to achieve those goals, it has been suggested that there might be alternative means, such as changing the civil law. However, that would put the onus on mothers to engage in civil action and would force them to endure the associated cost and stress involved. Another suggestion is to take the licensing route. However, the bill is not simply to do with improving access to restaurants, cafe and leisure facilities; it is primarily about ensuring that all breastfeeding mothers are given equal access to public services and are able to visit local authority offices, use public transport, attend doctors' appointments and so on. No one should be excluded from public areas because of the way in which they feed their baby and, as many of those areas are not subject to licensing laws, a change in that regard would have limited impact. It is not envisaged that this legislation will result in many prosecutions. It is intended to act as a deterrent. Indeed, in evidence to the Health Committee, Deputy Chief Constable David Mellor, who was representing the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, said: "My view is that it would be good law in that it would be symbolic, it would reinforce the aims of the bill and it would exist as a threat. Sometimes people need a threat so that they change their attitudes and behaviour. In support of the bill, I say simply ... that I anticipate that prosecutions would be few in number."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 11 May 2004; c 866.] I hope that that gives comfort to anyone who might be putting their concern about fines before the need to protect vulnerable women and children. In any case, the fines in the bill are based on the fines in current disability discrimination legislation and go up to a maximum of £2,500. The Scottish Human Rights Centre believes that "this approach is a reasonable one to take" and that it is likely to be "considered, under ECHR, as a 'proportionate' measure". The Conservatives' spokesperson Nanette Milne said recently: "Owners of cafes, shops and restaurants should be free to decide for themselves whether to allow breastfeeding or not on their premises." Surely she cannot be condoning the expulsion of  breastfeeding babies and their mothers. The example of the mother from Dumbarton who was told to stop breastfeeding in her general practitioner's waiting room while sitting under a sign that said "Breastfeeding mothers welcome here" shows that voluntary means have only limited success. In evidence to the Health Committee, Ellen Kelly from the City of Edinburgh Council said: "After more than 25 years in local government, I can say that people do not do things unless they are compelled to do so, particularly in the field of equality. No advance in equality has been achieved without accompanying legislation".—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 1 June 2004; c 928.] The issue is not party political but has support across the political spectrum. Winston Churchill said: "There is no finer investment for any community than putting milk into babies." If we strengthen legislation, that will help us to meet our legal obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and various other human rights obligations and it will allow us to respond pro-actively to the World Health Organisation's call for Governments to adopt imaginative national policies and strategies to support breastfeeding. A change in the law will not immediately effect the big shift in attitude that we need in Scotland, given our non-breastfeeding-friendly culture, but in time it will do just that. The Minister for Health and Community Care seems to agree. Malcolm Chisholm said in his evidence: "the bill will certainly help to change cultural attitudes."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 1 June 2004; c 904.] In the meantime, by legislating we will send a strong message that Scotland supports breastfeeding and will not tolerate the exclusion, segregation and harassment of mothers and babies that is legally permitted at present. The legislation's primary aim is to protect and promote breastfeeding, but it protects all infant feeding of milk in public places. It is child centred and it is based on the protection of a child's right to eat while accessing vital public services. Health professionals throughout the country do commendable work and should be proud of their success in improving uptake and duration rates, but by the new year we are supposed to meet the challenge of 50 per cent of mums to be breastfeeding at six weeks, and as we stand now the figure is less than 40 per cent. The extent of the challenge in turning the tide towards breastfeeding in Scotland means that those health professionals undoubtedly need the Parliament's political support.  A mum, Shelley Joffre, highlighted the need for legislation when she said: "The simple fact is, if you can't do it in public, then you face weeks of living under house arrest." Breastfeeding should not have to be carried out in private as if it is something shameful. It should be supported, protected and celebrated in our society. The bill protects the right of hungry babies to eat—it is as simple as that. Today, the Parliament has the chance to take a practical step towards providing that protection and I urge all members to support the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Breastfeeding etc. (Scotland) Bill.

I understand that the new service-level agreements have been designed to ensure that the vital funding link between local authorities and networks remains strong. However, what input will local authorities have in the new structure to enable them to steer local strategies towards encouraging visitor numbers in their areas? I have in mind facilities such as North Lanarkshire Council's Time Capsule, Summerlee heritage park and Drumpellier park in my constituency.

Given Nicola Sturgeon's last comments, does the First Minister agree that the truth has come out about Holyrood precisely because he set up the inquiry? Looking to the future and to the lessons that can be learned, following the defect period, and given the fact that this is a specialist building that might require high maintenance, does the First Minister know what maintenance arrangements are in place? Will construction professionals be involved in maintenance, or will we be tied to the original contractors? If so, are we talking about blank cheques again? Can they charge what they like? We need to ask those questions.

I congratulate Chris Ballance on securing this debate. I am grateful to him for providing us with an opportunity to speak about such a fundamentally important issue. It is unfortunate that the peace movement has historically been viewed as the domain of hippies and flower power. Alternatively, it is associated only with high-profile religious figures, such as those who have been in the Parliament recently—the Dalai Lama and Ravi Shankar. However, what struck me about Chris Ballance's motion is the  recognition that it gives to the fact that the peace movement is, of course, a great deal more far-reaching and grounded in reality than stereotypical perceptions suggest is the case. The key message that I have taken from the motion is that peace is, and should be, a basic, everyday issue. On closer inspection, it is possible to see that many of the campaigns that have been launched in the Parliament and in wider society on issues such as domestic violence, racial tolerance, antisocial behaviour and sectarianism have all essentially had the attainment of peace at the core of their aims. It is understandable that we tend to consider the concepts of peace and conflict resolution primarily in macro, global terms—for example, war. However, given that the Scottish Parliament has a responsibility for improving people's quality of life, it is equally important that we recognise the significance of peace in micro terms by continuing to acknowledge the fundamental right of every human being to live out their daily lives safe from violence or persecution—in other words, to live in peace. In recent years, a number of high-profile, worthwhile campaigns have been launched with the aim of promoting tolerance, respect and peace. Among them we can note the Executive's "One Scotland. Many Cultures" campaign, which aims to tackle and to eliminate racism in our country. Similarly, we can look to Unison's high-profile action plan to reduce violence against health service workers as a campaign that puts the principles of non-violence, co-operation and conflict resolution at its core. Given some of the things that Chris Ballance said, it is apposite to mention one of the initiatives that I am most impressed by—the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust's excellent respect programme. The programme is about primary prevention; it aims, through its work with young people and educators, to contribute to the prevention of violence and abuse by challenging root causes, by empowering young people with useful knowledge, skills and understanding and by promoting positive, non-violent relationships that are based on equality and respect. Zero Tolerance's approach towards primary prevention through empowerment and education is clearly analogous to the World Peace Prayer Society's work on the promotion of peace education in schools. In my constituency, the Global Education Centre in Coatbridge works with local schools and the wider community to promote understanding of development issues and of our responsibilities as individuals within a global context. Those initiatives are of great significance and they must be supported and assisted to develop and grow in significance.  The Scottish Executive clearly has a role to play in engaging with those initiatives and I am happy to support Chris Ballance's call for a cross-sectoral review of peace initiatives. I do not think that we can doubt the Executive's genuine commitment towards promoting peace and tolerance in Scotland, which is evidenced by a number of the issues that I mentioned. However, I am concerned that, in some areas, the good work is being undermined by the realities of life for some people in this country. I refer particularly to the plight of asylum seekers and refugees in Scotland. I do not think that I have time to go too far into the detail of that but, over the past year, I have become concerned about the noticeable increase in the number of constituents who seem to be eager to blame asylum seekers for any number of problems, from housing shortages to justice issues. That is a result of the fact that the public have been fed a diet of misinformation and propaganda. We must challenge such attitudes and ensure that asylum seekers are treated with the human decency that they deserve. When I, along with Chris Ballance and others, had the pleasure and privilege of meeting the Dalai Lama recently, I asked whether he had a formula for achieving inner peace and happiness. He did not give me a recipe for that, so I cannot share it with members, but he pointed out that achieving peace throughout the world must start with individuals understanding the value of peace. It really is as simple as that. I thank Chris Ballance, whose motion has my whole-hearted support. [ Applause. ]

Is the deputy minister aware that I have written to the Minister for Communities about Dunbeth park in my constituency and the fact that school public-private partnership bidders have dictated the location of an all-weather, floodlit football pitch on a piece of historically and  aesthetically significant green parkland in Coatbridge? The PPP bidders, as the main developers, seem to have circumvented the usual system of notices of intention to develop, to which local authority developments are subject. Does the minister share my concern that the views and objectives of PPP bidders are taking precedence over the concerns of the community? Will she undertake to look into that as a matter of urgency?

If the member thinks that the system has so much support, why is he scared to put it to the people?

I am pleased to support amendments 24 and 25 in Helen Eadie's name. We have heard much talk about democracy. If the Parliament imposes the proposed major change in how our citizens are governed locally without their direct involvement, that will be an affront to local democracy in Scotland. The Parliament must recognise that PR for local government is not simply a policy issue; it is a major constitutional change to another tier of government that will affect directly the democratic system in this country. It will change the relationship between the electorate and their local representatives and it has implications for accountability, representation and local democracy. The bottom line is that the PR proposal has nothing to do with democracy and everything to do with coalition politics. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities  briefing quoted the Westminster Parliament's Scottish Affairs Committee, which questioned the "strange decision by the Scottish Executive to introduce STV for local government elections, when the overwhelming majority of local councils oppose such a move, and there is scope for causing confusion amongst electors." I accept the legitimate arguments from both sides about the merits or otherwise of PR, but I do not accept that we can debate that sufficiently and make decisions without the input of those who will be affected. To dictate such a fundamental and far-reaching change to the governance of Scotland in the high-handed fashion that has been adopted is arrogant effrontery against our citizens. They expect better from us.

The Communities Committee and the clerking team worked very hard to scrutinise and make many improvements to the bill and I commend the Executive for embracing certain changes. However, the bill is now somewhat flawed because my successful stage 2 amendment has now been overturned, although I acknowledge that the whole Parliament has the right to vote on the matter. As we know, amendment 49 sought to allow children who are guilty of the same antisocial behaviour and are subject to ASBOs to face different consequences because of the type of house in which they live and their family's social status. That provision is unjust and discriminatory. However, having been assured that ASBOs will not be used as a matter of course for children, I hope sincerely that such discrimination will not take place in practice. As Parliament might have gathered, I feel strongly about the issue and am disappointed by the decision to accept amendment 49. That said, now that the bill has been amended at stages 2 and 3, many of its aspects will make a difference in tackling antisocial behaviour in our communities. My constituents in Coatbridge and Chryston will expect me to support the bill for that reason and not to throw the baby out with the bath  water, even though I feel that it has been somewhat contaminated by the fact that amendment 49 has been agreed to. As a result, I support the bill with a slightly heavy heart. I hope sincerely that it will make the kind of difference that we all expect it to make in our communities.

The aim of my amendments, which relate to the definition of antisocial behaviour, is to highlight the possibility that such a wide definition could discriminate against people with disabilities. Obviously, that was not the intention of the Executive when it decided on the definition, but it might be an unintended consequence. Organisations such as the National Autistic Society Scotland, Capability Scotland and Leonard Cheshire, as well as the cross-party group on autistic spectrum disorder, which I convene, have raised concerns that someone with a disability could display strange behaviour that harms no one but that could be interpreted as being behaviour "likely to cause alarm or distress". I recognise that the minister has met with groups, including the cross-party group, to discuss those concerns. However, evidence from England, where a similar definition is used, shows that ASBOs are being served on children with disabilities. The National Autistic Society took a call from the parents of a 13-year-old boy with autism. He had been served with an ASBO after neighbours complained about the noise he was making when jumping on his trampoline. Of course, trampolining has been found to be therapeutic for people with autism. It is all very well saying that public bodies should adhere to equal opportunities legislation but, in that case, the local authority was aware that the boy had autism when it applied for the ASBO. That demonstrates that robust safeguards need to be in place to protect people with disabilities from being  punished because of behaviour caused directly by their disability. I am pleased that the Executive has taken note of the recommendation about guidance that was made by the Communities Committee in its stage 1 report and I welcome the publication of the draft guidance for parts 1 and 2 of the bill. I was pleased that the guidance on part 2, relating to ASBOs, states that "it would not be appropriate to use an ASBO where an individual cannot understand the consequences of their actions" and goes on to refer to people with autism, developmental conditions and medical conditions. Later, the guidance states that, when a local authority or an RSL receives a complaint, they should consider, among other things, whether the person has a medical or developmental condition that affects their behaviour. Those safeguards are significant, but there is no mention of considering the behaviour of people with disabilities in the draft guidance on part 1. The measures in the bill could impact negatively on children and young people with disabilities such as ASD, Tourette's syndrome and Huntingdon's disease, as well as on people with learning disabilities. Those people could be subject to a raft of measures, such as fixed-penalty notices and community reparation orders, and their parents could be subject to parenting orders. I would therefore like the Executive to give a firm commitment to the Parliament that the guidance for the whole bill—not just a section here and a section there—will provide for people with disabilities. That has to be a principle that runs through all the guidance. Without such a commitment, the bill will need to be amended to ensure that people with disabilities are protected. I ask the Executive to address the fact that, although the guidance refers to "developmental conditions" and "medical conditions", not everyone with a disability will fall into those categories. That means that we could end up with a two-tier system in which people with autism are protected but people with learning disabilities are not. I await the Executive's response on those points. I move amendment 161.

I acknowledge the minister's intentions and I am pleased that she will discuss the guidance. The final test will be in the practice of the law but I am happy with the minister's reassurance.  Amendment 161, by agreement, withdrawn.  [Amendments 162 and 163 not moved.]

As the minister said, amendment 49 seeks to remove the provisions that were  inserted by a successful stage 2 amendment that broke the link between ASBOs for children and the tenancy of their whole family. I remain convinced that such a link is unjust, and that it would add to inequality by having one law for the poorer in society and another for the richer; the bottom line is that children in the social rented sector and their families would be treated in a harsher manner than those in owner-occupied houses for the same antisocial behaviour. There are many measures in the bill that should be supported because they will help to tackle unacceptable behaviour in our communities, but amendment 49 adds nothing to that aim. It is discriminatory. My amendment was lodged at stage 2 to address concerns that had been raised by Shelter Scotland, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and Barnardo's Scotland, and it was supported by a majority of the committee. I am not sure what the precedent is for the Executive overturning a successful stage 2 amendment, but the fact that it is seeking to do so is disappointing. The background is that the Executive seems to be applying ASBOs for children in the same way that it applies ASBOs for adults with regard to tenancy. The minister explained how the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 linked ASBOs for adults to tenancy, which was contrary to the original concept that ASBOs should impact solely on the individual who performed the behaviour. If amendment 49 is agreed to, that system will be extended to children and the powers that are given to sheriffs to serve ASBOs on under-16s could lead to a child's behaviour impacting on the tenancy of their whole family, including other children, which could lead to homelessness. That would mean that there would be more innocent victims of antisocial behaviour—the people who live with the child. Although I remain concerned about ASBOs for under-16s, welcome changes have been made, which recognise that children's ASBOs are different from adults' ASBOs. The stage 2 amendment ensured that ASBOs for children would be different from ASBOs for adults in the case of SSSTs, and that they would apply equally to all children. It ensured that a child's ASBO would not constitute grounds for converting a tenancy, which meant that the ASBO would impact only on the behaviour of the child in question, not on the whole family. That would not have undermined the Executive's view of ASBOs as effective measures for children. There would still be robust responses, but they would be the same for all children. Currently, support for adults with ASBOs is provided only when a tenancy is being converted. For under-16s, it would be more appropriate to link that support to the ASBO, so that all children would be treated the same, whatever housing type they lived in.  In a letter to the Communities Committee, the Deputy Minister for Communities stated: "The alternative to maintaining the power for social landlords to convert a tenancy to a SSST is that landlords who have serious concerns about the behaviour of young people living in their properties may move straight for eviction. There is no doubt that the ASBO could be used as evidence to support the application for eviction on grounds of antisocial behaviour." But it is not that easy to evict. The court has to give the go-ahead based on grounds that are given by the landlord, and it would be expected to take reasonableness and family circumstances into account. However, if the tenancy is converted to an SSST, eviction can take place on application without any grounds being given, so eviction is much easier and can be done on the whim of the landlord. That is ironic, given that the Executive, rightly, has just received an international award for having the most progressive legislation on homelessness in western Europe. This creation of the risk of eviction for families does not sit well with the Executive's progressive agenda, which I fully support. Shelter believes that support is an alternative to eviction and that, as the costs are much the same, it is better to give support. Why cannot support be given without conversion to an SSST? The minister seemed to say that support could be given, so why not do it? That is a bit of a red herring, because if amendment 49 is agreed to, we will not be able to get away from the fact that the parents and family of a child who lives in social rented housing will be treated differently in law from those who live in owner-occupied housing. That is unfair, and it runs counter to the principles of social justice; antisocial behaviour, as we know, is not confined to the children of the working class who live in rented houses, so responses in law to antisocial behaviour should not discriminate on that basis. Surely the perpetrators of the same antisocial behaviour should be treated in the same way, regardless of their social background. The stage 2 amendment would have put all children on an equal footing in terms of ASBOs, regardless of housing tenure type. If amendment 49 is agreed to, some children will be treated differently from others, depending on whether they live in social rented or owner-occupied accommodation. That is discriminatory and unjust. The stage 2 amendment, which the Executive now seeks to overturn, ensured parity for all children, irrespective of parental wealth and social background. On those grounds, I cannot support the Executive's amendment 49 and I urge other members not to do so.

I remain concerned about ASBOs for children. However, given that most of the chamber supports the approach, I welcome the amendments that have been lodged and will support them. I have already expressed my concerns in committee, so I will not reiterate them. Will the minister clarify that the amendments have been lodged in the recognition that children's ASBOs must be different from adult ASBOs? We cannot simply copy the existing system, because children require different responses. Will the minister indicate what the process and penalty will be if children breach ASBOs? It is important for the chamber to hear that.

Does Donald Gorrie agree that other groups that should be consulted on the strategy include the National Autistic Society and disability groups that represent people with fears about the issues that we are discussing?

It is particularly poignant that we are debating the Iraq issue on a day when we have been fortunate enough to have been addressed by one of the world's leading advocates for peace, His Holiness the Dalai Lama. More than 19 months after the massive rallies for peace here and abroad and more than a year since the so-called end of the war in Iraq, we are living in a much more dangerous and unstable world. In true Orwellian style, war is peace in this new world order. The phrase "war against terrorism" is incongruous. What does it mean? Does it mean killing innocents because innocents were killed? Does it mean protecting western lives by sending western forces to their deaths? Does it mean bombing people to liberate them? Does it mean promoting democracy and freedom by the use of force and occupation? Does it mean ridding the world of WMD by using WMD? The latest estimates put the fatalities at around 11,000 since the Iraq war began. Despite President Bush's proclamation last year that the war was over, made as he stood in front of a banner that declared, "Mission Accomplished", hundreds are still dying in Iraq—soldiers and civilians—just as hundreds of innocents died before this professed war of liberation from the sanctions that were imposed on Iraq, just as thousands died in Afghanistan in the first attack against the so-called axis of evil and just as hundreds are still dying in that country, seemingly forgotten by the west. In the same way, the people of Cuba are suffering from a cruel regime of economic sanctions imposed by the USA and are now under threat, as President Bush showed last year when he said, "One thing we believe in in America is freedom for everybody. We love it for the people of Cuba. We love it for the people of Iraq. We love it for the people of Afghanistan." I think that people in Iraq and Afghanistan might question that idea of freedom and whether the end justifies the means. The Cubans certainly do not want it. What was the mission and what has been accomplished? Well, where is the freedom for the people in Palestine, where is the freedom for trade  unionists who are attacked and imprisoned across the globe and where is the freedom for the poverty-stricken millions throughout the world? In the absence of any weapons of mass destruction, what was our mission and reason for such unconditional alignment with the US? What has the war on terror, with its promises of liberation and democracy, meant here at home? It has meant cuts to public spending to pay for the wars. It has meant people being scared to travel and travel being made more difficult by new rules, with armed marshals on flights out of Glasgow airport. There are reports today of a worrying rise in Islamophobia and an unprecedented rise in British National Party activity. Mission accomplished? The war has meant attacks on civil liberties, including new proposals to arrest, detain and even find people guilty without proper recourse to our legal system. People, including British citizens, are still detained in Guantanamo bay, and there are draconian proposals for asylum seekers, with Government ministers referring last week to "illegal asylum seekers", when there is no such thing. Children and their families are still locked up, to Scotland's shame, in Dungavel. Mission accomplished? We have witnessed a scramble to join the carpet-baggers descending on Iraq to get their hands on oil and reconstruction contracts—the spoils of war for the winners—but even those entrepreneurs are now having second thoughts as they are targeted in the unstable aftermath of the war, which has bred terrorist attacks. The troops are now increasingly viewed as an army of occupation, and that view is exacerbated by the reports of atrocities against prisoners in Abu Ghraib prison. Mission accomplished? So much for this brave new world. Like many people, I fear that what we are seeing is, in fact, the projection of a new American century. People throughout the world are suffering and dying from the effects of rampant capitalism and the middle east is in turmoil. The world is more violent and unsafe than it was before the attack on the twin towers. How can it be safer, with cluster bombs, unexploded mines and depleted uranium littering the globe? How can we liberate people by waging war on them, bombing them and allowing them to suffer in the aftermath? Why are innocent civilians in the countries that we wage war on merely collateral damage? Why are innocent American lives worth more than innocent lives in the middle east? How do we teach our children that violence and terrorism are wrong while war is waged in our name using weapons of mass destruction against innocents? Mission accomplished? There were no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq posing an imminent threat to us, and war cannot be justified on the  ground of regime change. The troops should be replaced with a UN peacekeeping force until stability is established in Iraq, and Britain must re-engage with the UN and with our European neighbours and put some clear blue water between us and US imperialism. Unfortunately, none of the suggestions before us today provides a satisfactory answer to the unholy mess of our making. However, that does not detract from our debating the issue or from the fact that voices in this Parliament should join with those in the anti-war movement to redouble our efforts for peace in this world. In solidarity with our brothers and sisters across the world, we should speak out for an end to poverty, deprivation, suffering and imperialist wars. That would be a mission worth accomplishing.

What progress has been made in decreasing the number of women in prison in Scotland for the non-payment of fines—fines that were imposed in the first place for crimes connected to poverty, such as not having a TV licence or soliciting?

At a reception held last night to highlight national autism awareness week, we heard from a young man with Asperger's syndrome who wanted to study medicine but did not get a good enough degree the first time round. He returned to university and got a 2:1, which would have been good enough, but it seems that only the first degree counts. He is understandably disappointed and frustrated by that and he has a lot to offer. Will the minister tell us whether it is within his remit to investigate such cases?

Like others, I support a review and, unlike some members in Opposition parties, I believe that having an in-depth debate today is helpful for such an important subject. I was a bit baffled by Margaret Mitchell's closing comments; having this debate does not mean that we will not have any further debates on the subject. As members will know, the children's hearings system is 33 years old and it has never been subject to a review. Therefore, it is imperative that we take full advantage of our opportunity to assess how this world-renowned system can be improved. I am sure that everyone in the chamber must welcome that step. Having the debate might help to raise the public's awareness of issues that have been discussed previously and bring it home to the public that referrals to children's hearings are not a soft option. The debate might help to clear up some of the myths about the system. I ask the minister to clarify whether, given Paul Martin's earlier examples, in-depth research to establish the facts about the process would be appropriate during the review.  As members will know, the review of the hearings system was included in the partnership agreement. However, I would have liked the review to be finished prior to the introduction of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. Surely it would have been more practical and strategic to review the system prior to passing legislation that will directly affect it. The bill will be in place before the review concludes, so perhaps the impact of its provisions relating to children can be considered during the review. I hope that the minister can comment on that. I remain concerned that antisocial behaviour orders for children could result in an undermining of the nature of the hearings system. Scott Barrie referred in his speech to parenting orders and his support for them. Originally, I had concerns about parenting orders, but most of my concerns have been allayed by the stringent requirement for support systems to be in place before parenting orders can be used. There are no such systems at present. That is an important point that must be made when we talk about parenting orders. Nonetheless, we are now at the review stage and it is important to remind ourselves of the founding principles of the hearings system, in that it takes children and young people out of the criminal justice system, involves local people and focuses on the care and welfare of young people. Those are fundamental principles that must be safeguarded throughout the review. I am a bit concerned about comments that indicate that everything could be subject to change. I hope that that does not include the fundamental principles. I would like the review to build on the strengths of the hearings system, and particularly on the fact that it is simpler, quicker and cheaper than the courts and offers a more flexible response to a young person's situation, making decisions based on their needs. Young people play an important role in explaining their conduct and deciding on the best course of action. There is a high level of community involvement and the system provides a single forum for interagency co-operation. Other members have referred to NCH Scotland's report "Where's Kilbrandon now?", which highlights the fact that, despite its many strengths, the children's hearings system has weaknesses that need to be addressed. The most significant point that the report makes is that the system has never been reviewed—it is welcome that that is now being attended to. I hope that the review will address the other weaknesses to which the report refers. Many of the difficulties that the report highlights are related to the lack of resources and a shift in referrals from offence grounds to welfare. Referrals in recent years indicate that over the  past 30 years there has been a huge change. As we have heard, care and protection referrals now account for 60 per cent of the total, compared with 16 per cent in 1976. That statistic is worrying, although I take on board Johann Lamont's helpful remarks on that. The review must also consider how multi-agency working operates at present and, importantly, how experience and expertise in the voluntary sector can be better used and best practice rolled out. There has been discussion of the fact that we need our social work departments to be properly staffed and funded, so that social workers can provide the service that young people need. Some of the difficulties in social work relating to retention and recruitment have had an impact on the efficient running of panels. Often reports are not prepared in time. They may even be prepared by social workers who are not allocated to the young person in question. I commend the Executive on the action that it is taking to address that. Another difficulty that the NCH report highlighted was in recruiting and keeping panel members. Of course, that may be related to the failure to provide resources to implement panel members' decisions, which will inevitably lead to low morale. That crucial point needs much consideration during the review. It is imperative that resources are available to ensure that disposals that panels make are implemented properly and effectively. If that does not happen, the system will be undermined and will fail to provide the help of which many children and young people are desperately in need. We should not lose sight of the fact that young people who appear before panel members come from some of the most damaged and vulnerable families in our communities. In many cases, there is a need to remedy behaviour for the benefit of the child and of society as a whole, but that should be done through a preventive rather than a punitive approach. A well-resourced and well-supported hearings system is crucial in helping to turn around the behaviour of young people. Like other members, I do not believe that we should follow the lead of England and Wales in taking a punitive approach to under-16s. The use of adult court processes for children is not only inappropriate to their level of understanding and capacity, but will increase, rather than reduce, criminality and delinquency. As Colin Fox pointed out, the punitive approach that has been taken in England and Wales has resulted in a high prison population among juveniles and non-custodial punishments based on deterrence and containment, rather than rehabilitation. Evidence suggests that such a system is not successful for children. Evidence in  the NCH Scotland report shows that many young people in custody try to harm themselves, are subject to bullying, and that around 75 per cent of them reoffend. That is not the kind of system that I want to be copied in Scotland. Instead, the review should focus on the importance of sustaining rehabilitation, the need for early intervention and appropriate disposals. In his opening speech, the minister mentioned last week's press reports relating to concerns that the system may be dismantled, with panels dealing only with children who are referred on grounds of care and protection, while children who offend are dealt with by a juvenile court system. That would make no sense, because children who offend can also be vulnerable and in need of help. Offending behaviour can have its roots in the fact that someone is the victim of violence or abuse, perhaps in the home. The consultation document makes that point. Scotland's children's hearings system was established in recognition of the inability of the court system properly to consider welfare and justice issues together in respect of children, so it makes sense to ensure that the system remains the main decision-making forum for children and young people. I hope that in his summing up the minister will make it quite clear that there is no intention to use the review to split the hearings system. In his opening speech, he used the word "scrapping", which means something different. The review signals the Scottish Executive's willingness to improve our children's hearings system, but I trust that the founding principles of the system—which are every bit as important now as they were 33 years ago—will remain as the foundations on which to build better-funded, better-resourced and better-supported services. Getting it right for our children will benefit not only the individual children, but society as a whole. Despite the Tory belief that there is no such thing as society—whether that is the original Thatcher version or the Monteith interpretation of it—society has a duty to our children to get the hearings system right.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am pleased that my motion was chosen for debate this evening at this critical stage in the dispute and I thank the members who signed the motion and those who have stayed for the debate. I also want to thank the nursery nurses who have made the journey to Edinburgh today, including a party from my constituency. I welcome them to Parliament this evening. [ Applause. ] Given that the most recent debate on the subject, which was initiated by the Scottish Socialist Party, did not provide back-bench MSPs with an opportunity to speak because of the short time that was allocated for debate, I hope that tonight's debate will help to redress that by providing members with an opportunity to express their views. It also gives me and my Labour comrades an opportunity to register our continuing support for the nursery nurses and to dispel the myth that we are somehow unsympathetic to their cause. Although it is arguably acceptable to view the nursery nurses' dispute in simple terms as a pay dispute between employers and employees—third-party political interference can often prove unhelpful and counterproductive in such situations—I am convinced that the dispute  represents an issue that is of great significance and one that we must address with the powers that we have in this Parliament through a national review. During a members' business debate in September last year, I asked why, as a society, we have allowed the job of nursery nurse—a job that ensures the delivery of a valuable pre-five curriculum to our children—to be overlooked and undervalued for so long. Sadly, I do not think that it is a coincidence that that is the experience of a profession that, according to Unison, comprises almost entirely women. The job of nursery nurse undoubtedly represents one of the few remaining professions in Scotland that are characterised both by an almost exclusively female work force and by an overarching legacy of low pay. As a young Parliament with an increasingly impressive record in championing equality issues, we have a responsibility to recognise the potential opportunity that the dispute creates—the opportunity to strike a real blow against a legacy of low pay for women in this country. [ Applause. ]

By ensuring that the nursery nurses' professional responsibilities and value to our society are properly recognised and remunerated, Parliament can send a strong message that it will no longer tolerate the marginalisation of women in the labour market. The gender issues that are at play here cannot be ignored. I note that Edinburgh's nursery nurses left their picket lines yesterday to join arms in Charlotte Square to mark the 90 th anniversary of the first force-feeding in Scotland of hunger-striking suffragettes. From an equalities perspective, one of the few positive aspects of this protracted dispute has been the consistent public support that the nursery nurses have received. There has been little argument about their professionalism and the value of their role in the early-years education of our children and in our society. I have received several letters from constituents about the industrial action; none has disputed the nursery nurses' claim. In recent months, Parliament has seen the First Minister and other members of the Executive  acknowledge the additional academic and professional demands that have been placed on nursery nurses since devolution. Scottish Executive policies on curriculum development and social inclusion, as well as funding initiatives such as sure start Scotland, the child care strategy, and education funding for three and four-year-olds—which are aimed at securing the best possible start in life for our children—have increased responsibilities. They have also increased class and group sizes and they have initiated major changes in the work load and role of nursery nurses.

I thank the member for that helpful intervention. As I recall, that happened last year in acknowledgement of the first graduates, and it confirmed the Executive's commitment to recognising the professional status of nursery nurses. Unfortunately, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities does not seem to have acknowledged that yet. The Scottish Executive should be congratulated on its willingness to effect change in the early-years service and I am pleased that many of our children are now benefiting as a result of the improvements that have been initiated. However, with the power to make such changes comes the inevitable responsibility to ensure that the appropriate structures are in place to recognise, absorb and implement those developments. I am therefore pleased to note that since my motion was lodged in February, the First Minister has agreed that those factors comprise a case for a national review and I welcome that the issues of "pay grading, career progression, conditions of service and the status that is given to that particular job" will form part of that review.

I am sorry that I do not have time; I am sure everyone will get to speak if we rush on. In order to ensure that nursery nurses receive a fair remuneration package that recognises factors such as the level of qualification that is required, national registration, national development within the curriculum for children aged zero to five, and a large number of national initiatives that impact upon the nursery service, any review must give due consideration to the establishment of a  standardised national scale for nursery-nurse grades. Throughout the country, the nursery service is subject to national guidelines, a national curriculum and national care standard—surely a national pay scale would represent positive progress. I hope that the review will also consider the creation of a career structure for nursery nurses, and the clarification and standardisation of the relevant qualifications in the sector. In short, I hope that there will be a review that will establish the early-years sector as a recognised profession that will deliver clear job roles that are linked to appropriate qualifications and identified career progression.

I do not have time. In initiating such a review, we must remember that those women have been undervalued for decades. They have been driven to jeopardising their financial security in an attempt to secure a package of pay and conditions that adequately reflects the job that they do. A review must not let them down. In the meantime, nursery nurses are still on all-out strike, and COSLA must meet Unison to agree a fair national settlement and an end to the disruption that the dispute is causing for the workers and for those who rely on the services, the majority of whom are also women. I understand that COSLA has—in an e-mail today—offered to have a meeting and that Unison has agreed to meet at the earliest opportunity. I am pleased to be able to welcome that announcement. The level of pay for nursery nurses is a national disgrace and has been for too long. If we value our children and their education and welfare, that must be reflected in the value that we place on nursery nurses: they must be paid what they deserve. I say to the minister that we must have a national review, it must be soon and it must be adequately resourced.

What success has there been in broadening the scope of the apprenticeship scheme? In particular, I mean improvement of uptake of the scheme by young women. To what extent are young women being attracted to apprenticeships in what might be called the less traditionally female sectors, such as the construction industry?

On a point of order. Is it in order for that member to cast aspersions on the integrity of Labour councillors in the way he has?

I obviously agree with Tommy Sheridan about free school meals and some of the council tax stuff. However, does he agree that the bill represents a change that is being imposed on a tier of government, which is why we should have a referendum? Tommy Sheridan mentioned what the Tories did to local government; they imposed their changes without paying heed to what local government thought.

Does Sarah Boyack recognise that research shows that PR does not, in and of itself, deliver diversity in representation, whereas the first-past-the-post system can do that, as long as political parties are so minded? For example, the Labour Party delivered gender balance in its first-past-the-posts seats in the Parliament, which is something that the Liberal Democrats did not do.

Will the member give way?

Given that the proposals represent such a huge change to local government, does the member think that it would have been more democratic to have held a referendum on local government voting reform?

Does Tommy Sheridan agree that a parliament is differentiated from an assembly by its ability to raise finance? Of course we could use the 3p tax-varying power to fund things such as free school meals, but that power is a blunt instrument. Income-based local taxation would ensure that there is progressive taxation and redistribution and it would allow the real problems of poverty and deprivation to be tackled. However, does he welcome the review that has been called for, to which we can all submit our comments?

I have concerns about the tagging of young people and, if I get a chance to speak in the debate, I will outline them. If members support that measure and the Executive goes ahead with it, will the minister consider putting a lower age limit on tagging, as is the case for ASBOs? There is no provision for a lower age limit at the moment.

I made reference to the amendment.

I welcome the minister's remarks today—in particular, I welcome the statement that Parliament values the positive contribution that is made by Scotland's young people, and the restated commitment to providing those young people with the opportunities and support that they need to develop their full potential. Investing in our young people is investing in the future of our nation. That investment is of paramount importance to Scotland's success. Many different issues arise, some of which my colleague Ken Macintosh mentioned, such as child care, early intervention, a good education, and career and voluntary opportunities. The issues cut across portfolios to include diet, nutrition and healthy lifestyles. Those issues start to affect a young person from birth. Promoting and encouraging breastfeeding, for example, is extremely important. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to Churchill. It may come as a surprise—not only to the Tories, but to the rest of the chamber—that I, too, can quote Churchill, who said: "There is no finer investment for any community than putting milk into babies." Offering a better deal for young people involves supporting children and young people who are in difficulty. I am thinking of family problems, addiction problems, relationship breakdowns, looked-after children, and the minority of young people who persistently offend. We should welcome recent initiatives such as the fast-track recruitment of social workers, the children's commissioner and today's announcement on reviewing the hearings system. We should consider the role of parents who, of course, must take responsibility, but who may need help. In the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, the proposals relating to parents focus very much on  providing help and assistance. The chamber should welcome that. I want to focus on antisocial behaviour and young people. I was pleased to hear in Peter Peacock's announcement that we are holding on to the fundamental principles of the hearings system, which, of course, is internationally renowned. However, reviewing and consulting on the system is an excellent move. Audit Scotland's report, "Dealing with offending by young people", says: "Most children (an estimated 75% of the total number) on statutory supervision for reasons which include offending appear to be receiving the required level of service from councils. But hundreds are not." The report goes on to say: "Social workers see some children very frequently, but around half the children on supervision do not see their social workers often. Children's Reporters aren't getting police referrals or social background reports quickly enough. The strategic youth justice teams often don't have the right information or the right members to do their jobs well." I want to consider the hearings system and the proposals in NCH Scotland's report, "Where's Kilbrandon now?" The report concludes that the children's hearings system still offers Scotland the most effective and humane response to children in trouble. It says that, if the hearings system is adequately resourced and imaginatively managed, it can be adapted to meet the needs of our time. The report describes the system as an economic and effective way for public agencies and professionals to work together in the best interests of the child. However, it also acknowledges some weaknesses—including a lack of public awareness, knowledge and support; recruitment difficulties; and the fact that the system has not been reviewed in its 30-year history. I am therefore sure that the minister's announcement will be welcomed. I turn to the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. Much in the bill is welcome, especially the acknowledgement of the requirement for support services. There is no doubt that there are problems in communities, but they are not all to do with young people. Much serious antisocial behaviour and criminal activity is perpetrated by adults. Most young people should be congratulated on their positive input to Scottish society.

That is an important point and I agree with it. The small minority of persistent offenders who present with challenging behaviour also need help. They need intensive support and intervention. Most people would agree on that; the differences of opinion arise when we consider whether we have to extend antisocial behaviour orders and introduce electronic tagging. I do not agree that we have to. In England and Wales, the dangers of the punitive approach can be seen. Barry Goldson, the editor of a publication on juvenile justice, said that such an approach has led to an 800 per cent increase over 10 years in the number of children aged 12 to 14 who are in custody in England and Wales. The dangers are also highlighted by the numbers of young people who try to harm themselves. I understand that, every day, four children in custody in England and Wales try to harm themselves or kill themselves. There is a high rate of reoffending in England and Wales, which is indicative of a system that is based on punishment rather than cure. Alternatives to ASBOs include acceptable behaviour contracts, which the City of Edinburgh Council piloted last year. The council said that, almost at once, the contracts delivered a real improvement in quality of life to the affected community. In evidence to the Communities Committee, Dr Sula Wolff said: "One must be terribly careful in relation to children ... Children are developing people—they have a future before them and are open to change."—[ Official Report, Communities Committee, 3 December 2003; c 254.] This debate and the Executive motion are to be welcomed. They give us the chance to celebrate young people's contribution and achievements. They are our future and we must invest in our future.

I declare my registered interest, which relates to my member's bill, the Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Bill. To ask the Scottish Executive how funding to support and promote breastfeeding in Scotland compares with such funding in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. (S2O-1208)

I thank the minister for his response and look forward to receiving those answers. I am sure that he will agree that considerable progress has been made in many areas of Scotland in relation to breastfeeding. However, does he agree that much of that progress has been due to the initiative and dedication shown by health sector workers? Does he also agree that, in order to ensure that that progress is consolidated and built on, we should increase direct funding for breastfeeding, whether by additional moneys or by ring fencing from existing budgets?

Does the First Minister have any plans to take action to increase public awareness of the importance of leaving a building quickly in response to a fire alarm? When a fire alarm went off in the early hours of this morning in the hotel in which I was staying, I was horrified at the length of time that some people took to leave the building. I understand that some people did not leave at all. Will the First Minister join me in commending the fire brigade for its quick response to the incident?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Under standing orders, should members, when they want to ask questions following a ministerial statement, wait until the minister has finished the statement and the Presiding Officer invites them to press their request-to-speak buttons, or should they press their request-to-speak buttons at any time during the statement?

Has any thought been given to targets for police response times, given the fact that part of the problem in Coatbridge was the police's response time? I have now received an answer from the police on that, but I wonder whether that is an issue that the bill might consider.

Having had a constituent inquiring about the matter today, I want to ask the First Minister what effect he envisages the bill having on Scottish citizens who wish to study at English universities.

The right to buy has been mentioned a lot. Does the member agree that it is a specific tool of housing policy and not a right?

I accept the member's point, but is he seriously saying that the Labour Government does not care about pensioners, given that it introduced the winter fuel allowance for pensioners?

I am not a member of the Finance Committee, so I thank the committee for the work that it has put into producing the report. I will talk about gender proofing and equality, and I will make a suggestion to the committee. I was pleased that Elaine Murray pointed out the importance of establishing how investment is used to achieve the desired outcomes. The report of the strategic group on women, "Improving the Position of Women in Scotland: An agenda for action", provides evidence that tackling gender inequality must remain a priority for the Executive. The report states: "Inequality between women and men is both a widespread and persistent feature of contemporary Scottish society." In general, women have less access than men to income, earnings, pensions and material resources such as cars or housing. They have less access to time that is their own and that is not spent on caring for other people or on paid or unpaid work. They have less access to political power or to decision making across a wide range of public bodies and they have a one in five chance of experiencing domestic abuse during their life. In 2002, 42 per cent of women in employment worked part time, compared with 9 per cent of men. Work is still split into women's work and men's work. For example, almost 70 per cent of managers and administrators are men, while 74 per cent of clerical and secretarial workers are women. The gender pay gap in 2003 was still 16 per cent for full-time workers, albeit that that figure was down from 19 per cent in 2002. Women's median weekly individual income in 2001-02 was 59 per cent of men's income. Members have been saying that they are new to the process. Members who are not new to the process will know that I have made some of those comments in different ways on many an occasion,  as have others. Those points have been made before, but I make no apology for repeating them because until the situation changes and we achieve equality, they must be repeated in the chamber at every opportunity. During the debate on mainstreaming equalities, it was emphasised that the equality perspective should inform every aspect of our work. Critical to that are the role of the budget and the role of committees in scrutinising spending proposals from an equality perspective. During the debate, I made the point that "The role of committees in scrutinising spending proposals with equality eyes is crucial."— [ Official Report , 1 October 2003; c 2209.]  I asked Margaret Curran what progress was being made on producing a gender-proofed budget. In reply, she stated: "In the first session, we thought that we had only to say, "Let's gender proof the budget," and the rest would follow. Having looked at other models, we now understand that policy has to be mainstreamed, and that we must create the means to obtain the necessary information to deliver a properly gender-proofed budget. Otherwise, we end up with a fairly superficial approach. We are committed to ensuring that a gender-proofed budget is achieved."— [ Official Report , 1 October 2003; c 2198]  "Exploring the Role of Gender Impact Assessment in the Scottish Budgetary Process", by McKay and Fitzgerald, was published in 2002. That research, which was commissioned by the Executive, recommends with regard to strengthening the committees' scrutiny role that the guidance that the Finance Committee issues to the subject area committees "could provide the other committees with advice on the kinds of questions to ask when examining the possible gender impact of a particular proposal and worked through examples on gender proofing in action". Unfortunately, the Finance Committee's guidance to the subject committees with regard to scrutinising the draft budget for 2004-05 makes only two references to equality that I can see. One of those references asks for comments on the sections covering the cross-cutting issues, which include equality. The other, which is directed only to the Equal Opportunities Committee, asks whether that committee wants to make any comments or recommendations about specific spending proposals to enhance equality. I thanked the Finance Committee for its hard work, but I suggest that, as a means to progress the gender proofing of the budget, the committee should in future direct guidance at every subject committee to remind them of their responsibility to scrutinise the budget with equality eyes and, in particular, to consider gender equality issues.

Will the First Minister tell us whether there will be anything in the proposed bill or in guidance to address police response times in answering urgent calls for assistance from another emergency service, given the length of time that was taken by the police to respond to the fire crew who faced a despicable criminal attack in Coatbridge last Sunday evening?

I welcome the fact that the Executive is holding this debate during the 16 days of activism against gender-based violence, and I draw Parliament's attention to a march on the subject that will take place next Thursday evening. The importance of having a critical mass of women in the Parliament should never be  underestimated. One of the most telling manifestations of the potential that that creates was in the swift and decisive approach that our young Parliament took in tackling domestic abuse in its early years. I join Marilyn Livingstone in recognising Margaret Curran's tenacity and personal commitment to the issue over the years. I doubt whether we would have seen the same level of action coupled with the same sense of urgency in a more male-dominated Parliament. Our Presiding Officer, George Reid, told me recently that, when he was a young Westminster MP, he forged an arduous campaign to have domestic abuse addressed only to see it fizzle out after 18 months on account of a lack of support. I was the gender reporter to the Equal Opportunities Committee during the previous parliamentary session and was able to make my own contribution to the Parliament's domestic violence agenda. One of the most significant pieces of work that I undertook for the committee was a report on the wider issues that are involved in violence against women and children, which sought to make lateral connections between violence and discrimination. That report can be found in the "Gender Reporter Bound Volume", if anyone wants to read it. The clear message that came from all the groups to which I spoke during that process was that many of the problems that women face—including violence—must be tackled head on, in a joined-up way. As Frances Curran said, the ultimate solution must lie in changing attitudes with the support and encouragement of social structures and cultural messages. Unfortunately, those structures and messages continue to portray women's needs and rights as less significant than those of men, and to propagate the imbalance of power, as Maureen Macmillan said. One way in which to challenge those structures and cultural messages undoubtedly lies in early intervention through the education system. Can the minister tell me what the current status of Zero Tolerance's respect project for schools is? What funding has the Executive provided, and is the project being rolled out? Zero Tolerance played a key role in informing and carrying out prevention work in Scotland, in particular through its considerable contribution to the prevention strategy. It is unfortunate that that contribution seems to have been omitted from the acknowledgements in the strategy document. Will the minister acknowledge that contribution and take steps to address that omission? Challenging those pervasive and subliminal cultural messages will undoubtedly prove difficult, and it is important that we do not forget the other challenges that remain. Structural inequality remains a reality in our society. In spite of reports  that women are breaking through the glass ceiling, the evidence shows that men still have the advantage when it comes to the workplace and the home. Men earn more, have better jobs, enjoy better chances of promotion and do less in the home. Most women in full-time jobs earn only 82 per cent of the salary that is paid to a man who is doing the same or similar work, and women's income from pensions, benefits and investments is just half that of men. In talking about discrimination, I commend the work of the close the gap initiative and the campaign for equality pay audits. Inequality at structural, cultural and political levels serves to privilege men over women and creates the conditions for violence. As we have heard, and as the minister has accepted, the continuum of male violence against women and children is not limited to domestic violence but includes actions such as rape, sexual assault, child sexual abuse, sexual harassment, human trafficking, prostitution, pornography and female genital mutilation. I was interested to note that the sexual health document that was recently launched by Malcolm Chisholm states that the extent of the problem of female genital mutilation in Scotland is currently unknown. The issue is of concern, given the fact that Amnesty International has noted that the practice appears to be continuing among some immigrants from countries where mutilation is practised, despite child protection laws in their country of residence. Only last week, "Newsnight Scotland" reported the case of a woman from Sierra Leone who is seeking asylum in this country and whose application has been refused. She suffered female genital mutilation and has considerable justification for thinking that her daughters will suffer the same fate, if indeed they are returned to her. I implore the minister to see whether she can intervene with the Home Office in that case, which represents a significant issue of violence against women and children. Given the Executive's impressive record on tackling abuse, I have little doubt that it takes the issue seriously. It is a cross-cutting issue, although it was in Malcolm Chisholm's brief last week. Evidence of harm to women who have experienced any or all of the aforementioned forms of male violence is well documented, but the underlying connection between all forms of male violence against women has rarely been recognised. Women will not achieve equality, and we will not tackle gender discrimination, while we continue to accept a society in which women are systematically undermined by the pervasiveness of all forms of male violence. Male violence against women is premised on women's inequality in society. It is a fundamental  violation of human rights and it is clearly unacceptable. I hope that my work as a gender reporter in the current session of Parliament will prove useful in informing debate and policy and in encouraging the Executive to continue to take a comprehensive view of the whole continuum of male violence against women. I was pleased with Margaret Curran's announcement this morning. I support the motion and commend the Executive for continuing to work to reduce progressively, and eventually eliminate, all forms of violence against women and children.

Has any further work been done on the issue of women in refuges who are working? Quite often, the cost can be prohibitive either to the women or to Women's Aid, if it is providing the service.

I apologise to Sandra White for the fact that I cannot stay for the whole debate. Does she share my concerns about reports suggesting that the hospital's breast-feeding support unit may be forced to close its life-saving breast milk bank if the Queen Mum's closes? Does she agree that  action must be taken to ensure that that vital service is not put in jeopardy?

To ask the First Minister what support is being provided for further education colleges attempting to meet the Scottish Further Education Funding Council's requirements for achieving financial security by July 2006. (S2F-357)

I very much welcome the increase in funding that the First Minister has outlined, but given the different factors that affect colleges throughout Scotland, does he agree that the July 2006 deadline could risk overstretching colleges such as Coatbridge College that are currently facing financial difficulties? Coatbridge College's recent decision to incorporate the closure of its leisure centre into its recovery plan will affect the health and well-being of students and the wider community. Does the First Minister agree that greater support is needed to ensure that such colleges are not forced to cut valuable services in order to meet the deadline?

I start by welcoming the honourable Esterina Kilasi MP from Tanzania who is in the gallery this evening. [ Applause. ] Tanzania has 20 per cent representation by women in its Parliament. I congratulate Cathy Peattie on securing a significant and poignant debate. The struggles and achievements of the suffragettes at the beginning of the 20 th century are well recorded and should not be underestimated. Debates such as this are important in that they serve to remind us of that fight. As time passes, there is a danger that the struggle will, in the eyes of some, lose its relevance and become a relic of a forgotten age when women had to fight for their right to participate in the democratic process, even at the most fundamental level. It is important that we try not to let that happen. Analysis of modern elections indicates that those who are familiar with the struggles of the suffrage movement—the older generation—continue in the face of falling voter turnout to see the importance of participating in the electoral process by using their vote. Older women are well aware of the sacrifices that were made by the suffragettes, but younger women are less familiar with that history, as Marlyn Glen pointed out. When I meet with the response "I never bother to vote" during election campaigns, I often find myself having to give a short history lesson and plead with people to use votes that were hard fought for and won. Voter apathy is a term that is much used to describe low turnouts at elections. However, that excuse is a bit too convenient and easy. We should ask why voters are apathetic. People can be motivated and turn out in large numbers when an issue is seen as important and they believe that their actions might help to achieve change. We can cast our minds back to February and the people who marched against the war. The concept of value remains essential to the voting process. In order to restore voter turnout, we have to work to restore the perceived value of the vote. Many people feel that they are disenfranchised from society because of poverty, deprivation and despair. In the case of women, many still feel that they are marginalised and excluded from political and public life because of structural inequalities. The introduction of easier  ways of voting will not on its own provide a solution that will increase voter turnout; it will not do much to increase women's representation in political and public life. That might be done by tackling the inequalities in society and by proving—by deeds, not words—that politics is relevant to ordinary people and that elected members of parliaments and councils are making a difference to everyday life. The first Scottish Parliament elections saw a huge intake of women, mainly in the Labour party, where a 50:50 balance was achieved.

I congratulate the SNP on the representation that it achieved. It took action by just having the debate, as Fiona Hyslop said. We now have almost 40 per cent representation by women in Parliament. In the current system of party politics, the parties are the gatekeepers and the action that they take, or do not take, directly influences levels of representation. Labour's 50:50 balance was no accident; rather, it was the result of many years of struggle by women in the Labour and trades union movement that produced the system whereby seats were twinned. The new Parliament was an ideal opportunity to do that because there were no incumbents or candidates who had fought seats for years—there was a clean slate. However, the women were not parachuted into their seats. They had to go through selection, a robust hustings process and a vote by the membership. That process created a level playing field on which women were selected in the same way as men. Women's representation is important not only because women make up over 50 per cent of the population, but because the critical mass of women is proven to make a difference to the policies and practices that the Government employs. I would have gone through a list of such differences but I do not have time. Perhaps Margaret Curran will mention some of them in her closing speech. It is not an exaggeration to say that women have to work harder to prove themselves. Esterina Kilasi tells me that she thinks that she has to work twice as hard as the male member who held the seat before her. We cannot change the situation overnight but, in the spirit of the suffragettes, we  must continue to try. Only then will true equality be achieved. My final point is that we, like the WSPU, need our male colleagues to engage with our aims for equality. Keir Hardie was almost an honorary suffragette—he helped their cause and he scarcely made a speech without calling for women's enfranchisement. When asked to write a motto, he chose: "Votes for women and socialism for all". I would like to update that to, "Equality for women and socialism for all".

The document says that it is not known how many young girls in Scotland have undergone female genital mutilation. Does the minister agree that female genital mutilation is clearly an issue of violence against women and children? Can the minister indicate at this stage whether he is committed to the recommendation that there be further research, training and education in this regard?

I, too, congratulate Karen Gillon on securing today's debate. Health and safety does not normally reach out and grab people as a subject that they want to discuss. It is seen as a bit of an anorak subject. However, the fact is that health and safety is, ultimately, an issue of life or death. Unsafe working conditions affect our quality of life in the workplace and beyond. I will say a bit more about trade unions. Trade unions, as we know them, grew from the need to improve pay and conditions, especially concerning issues of health and safety and the quality of workers' lives. To understand the issues that we face today, it is important that we remember the origins of the trade union movement and, in particular, the role that women played in that process. In 1888, Clementina Black gave a speech on female labour at a Fabian Society meeting in London. In the audience was Annie Besant, who was appalled to hear of the plight of the workers at the Bryant & May match factory. Their pay and conditions involved their working 14 hours a day for an absolute pittance and they did not necessarily get their full wages, as they were fined for heinous crimes such as dropping the matches or going to the toilet without permission. If they were late, they were docked half a day's pay. However, worse than that, they also suffered ill health and death through working with yellow phosphorous—a substance that was, at the time, banned in the United States and Sweden. Yellow phosphorous was not, however, banned by the British Government, as that would have created a restraint on free trade. Basically, it was an example of the familiar rule of putting profits before people, which Karen Gillon touched on. Annie Besant wrote an article entitled "White Slavery in London", which caused the management of Bryant & May to try to make their workers say that they were all happy and that everything was fine. When they did not, the organiser was sacked, a strike took place and the Matchgirls Union was formed. The Times said that the women had been egged on by "pests of the modern industrialised world".  It is just as well that those pests existed, as the match girls won improvements in their working conditions, although it was not until 1901—following a visit to the factory by MPs and journalists—that Bryant & May stopped using yellow phosphorous. The match girls are an early example of workers forming into organised labour to win improvements at work. We have to ask ourselves whether we still face such horrendous conditions and hazards to health. I think that we do. We face issues such as repetitive strain injury, sexual harassment, bullying and stress, which Donald Gorrie mentioned. Those are some of the modern health hazards at work, and they are faced particularly by women. Of course, the match girls are not the only workers who have been fined. For example, petrol station workers are fined if someone drives off without paying. Further, it is regarded as a heinous crime if workers in some factories and call centres go to the toilet without permission. Conditions can still be outrageous in many workplaces because the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 2002 may not always be adhered to. Modern issues such as stress must also be considered in the context of working conditions. I want to talk briefly about sexual harassment because it can really blight women's lives at work. Sexual harassment can involve verbal or physical advances, offensive, sexually explicit remarks and the display of pornographic and offensive literature and pictures. Sexual harassment can also interfere with performance and security, affect promotion opportunities and cause stress-related illness. Sexual harassment is not a modern phenomenon. I wanted to give a lovely quote by Isabella Ford from 1893. Sadly, I do not have time to do so because I have only one minute left. Many of 19 th century Britain's attitudes are still with us in the new millennium. Trade unions have historically been the workers' champions in fighting the profit-before-people rule, promoting health and safety and securing that as a sensible approach to industrial relations. I inform Phil Gallie that a happy, healthy, well-trained work force and team will yield more profit for employers than a sick, stressed set of individuals. However, the challenge is to persuade employers of that. In the new millennium we are fighting the same fight as in the previous one. Trade unions are battling for heath and safety standards and women are still striving for equality. We should commend the trade unions and the STUC for their work in the field of health and safety. We should also commend the STUC women's committee and Rozanne Foyer for the work that they do for women. We acknowledge that pests can win over profits and achieve decent standards of health and  safety for 21 st century workers—if we shout about it.

Does Kenneth Macintosh agree that educational development can also be affected by the impact on many children around the world of the widespread proliferation and misuse of arms that results in armed violence? Will he join me in welcoming today's launch of the control arms campaign, backed by Amnesty International, Oxfam and the International Action Network on Small Arms, and in urging the Scottish Executive to support the campaign where it can?

As we have heard, the report is the culmination of a process initiated by the Equal Opportunities Committee in 2000 to provide the Parliament with valuable guidance on the mainstreaming of equal opportunities in the work of our committees. I put Stewart Stevenson's mind at rest by telling him that the current Equal Opportunities Committee endorsed the recommendations on 23 September. The report signals the beginning of an important stage in the Parliament's development. We have been fortunate that devolution has allowed us to create a Parliament for Scotland that has equality of opportunity at the core of its founding principles. The report offers practical suggestions on how we can utilise the political will in the chamber to encourage a process whereby equal opportunities permeate every aspect of the Parliament's working. Although the Scottish Executive must be commended for its continual efforts over the past four years to mainstream equalities in its legislation development process, we cannot leave the responsibility for that process solely to the Executive. As members, we must be constantly aware of our responsibility to ensure that equal opportunities pervade the everyday working of the Parliament and, through the demands and scrutiny of our committees, inform the work of the Executive. Mainstreaming equality in the development of public policy and service delivery is one of the biggest operational challenges to face almost every modern democracy. However, as Sheffield Hallam University pointed out, the Scottish Parliament is at the leading edge in mainstreaming equality within a parliamentary setting. We should be proud of that, but we should also aim to build on it. Despite the progress that has been made, inequality remains a reality in this country, as we have heard from the minister and other members. I want to consider gender. Women in Scotland still make up a disproportionate number of the  poorest and most vulnerable in our society. The majority of single-parent households are headed by women. Positions of societal power and influence—for example in law, business, trade unions and public life—remain on the whole in the hands of men. In Scotland, only 23 per cent of local councillors are women, compared to a still inadequate 28 per cent average throughout the United Kingdom. To pick up on something that Nanette Milne said, when we consider such figures and how long those trends have persisted, it is clear that we need to take positive action. Women in my party were selected as candidates via a rigorous process involving application forms, interviews and twinning, which took advantage of the fact that there were no incumbents. That levelled the playing field between men and women. Does the gender balance among the Conservative members mean that Conservative women are not up to the job in some way? I very much doubt it. Positive action might produce a different result in the Parliament's Conservative group. In my work as the gender reporter on the Equal Opportunities Committee, I have been fortunate in the past few years to have met a wide range of women's organisations. The constant theme is the continuing battle for equality, whether at home, at work, in education, at leisure or in access to positions of influence. The exchanges that I have had highlight the fact that every decision that is made in the chamber impacts on women and should be considered in terms of what that impact will be. Women and men in Scotland have different needs and they frequently have different social and family responsibilities, different levels of access to education and public services, different employment patterns and different experiences, for example in health. The concept of gender equality is therefore not isolated to issues such as equal pay and child care—important and essential though those issues are, they do not solely represent women's experiences in Scotland. The equality perspective should inform every aspect of our work, from social justice to education, tourism, transport and the environment. Every facet of our devolved remit does and should have an equality dimension. Crucial to that is the role of the budget, an issue that I raised with the minister. The budget exercise is one way in which the mainstreaming of equality in the policy process can be linked to the distribution of resources to ensure that the required changes are properly funded and delivered. The role of committees in scrutinising spending proposals with equality eyes is crucial. By implementing a mainstreaming strategy in the work of all our committees, we can promote an equality perspective and help to ensure that it is  consistently applied throughout the legislative process. By ensuring that every piece of legislation before the Parliament is considered from an equality perspective, we can effectively shift the focus of the Parliament's work from reactive policy making to a more proactive approach. We have made important inroads; the issue is no longer merely about special initiatives, but about taking an holistic approach seriously to address equalities issues. I wanted to talk about education but I do not have time. However, I will say that members' offices—

Oh, I do have time. Members' offices are often the first point of contact when people want to access the Parliament, so it is hugely important that members' staff are included in the equal opportunities training—we have a responsibility to ensure that staff working at every level in the Parliament have adequate training. If we are going to take that responsibility seriously, we should ensure that the funding is available for that purpose. At the moment, it is left up to individual members to decide whether to fund training or what training their staff can access. That is not good enough. We must continue our equalities work by taking the next step, which is to persuade all members, on all committees, of the importance of scrutinising legislation from an equalities perspective. The Equal Opportunities Committee is an important and integral part of the Parliament. However, as I pointed out, the committee, like the Executive, does not have the sole responsibility for ensuring the promotion and delivery of equal opportunities in every aspect of our work. That aim can be progressed through a positive commitment to mainstreaming across all our committees. I have been a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee from the beginning of the first session of Parliament. I am pleased to commend to the Parliament the recommendations in the report. I urge fellow members to make a genuine commitment to addressing the issues that are raised in the report.

How does the minister view current progress on producing a gender-proofed budget?

I join other members in thanking Carolyn Leckie for bringing the issue to Parliament's  attention this evening. I was pleased and encouraged in July this year when, in an interview in the Sunday Herald , the Minister for Communities, Ms Margaret Curran, recommitted herself to ensuring that feminist issues and ideals would be at the core of the Scottish Executive's decision making and policy making during the second session of Parliament. The minister said: "Scottish feminism is still alive and well and in the Cabinet." She went on to say: "I think in this new parliament we need to reinforce our commitment by actually saying that women's rights, women's equality should be on our agenda. It's something that we really need to focus on now and make a key priority." That kind of pledge follows previous good work on equality initiatives, such as the "Close the Gap" initiative, which was referred to earlier and which was launched in March 2001. That initiative recently received a further £30,000 from the social justice budget for the current year. Therefore, I want to record my recognition of the Executive's clear commitment to the feminist agenda and to closing the pay gap. However, if there is anything to be learned from the situation that has arisen with regard to nursery nurses, it is that we have a considerable amount to do if we are to create a true culture of equality in the world of employment. A number of questions can be put. Is it acceptable that the job of nursery nurse has not been reviewed for 15 years? Is it acceptable that a nursery nurse with two years' training and more than 10 years' experience can expect to earn, at best, no more than £13,800 a year? Is it acceptable that the increase in professional responsibilities and in the work load of nursery nurses in recent years has not been reflected in their remuneration? Those are legitimate questions that need to be answered; I hope that the minister will address them. What is of more concern, however, is that those questions need to be posed at all. A slightly latent—if that is the right word—but equally significant question should be: why has our society allowed the job of the nursery nurse, which ensures the delivery of a valuable pre-five curriculum to our children, to be overlooked and undervalued for as long as it has been? As Johann Lamont and Carolyn Leckie did, I point out that the issue is not only about a pay dispute between employer and employee; it is about the wider issue of gender discrimination in pay. I hope that the minister will be able to address that wider issue. I do not think that it is a coincidence that we find low pay to be the experience of a profession whose membership,  according to Unison, comprises 99.5 per cent women. In response to recent increases in the gender pay gap, Julie Mellor, the chair of the Equal Opportunities Commission, said: "We, as a society, need to reassess the value we place on jobs traditionally done by women. How on earth can we justify, for example, the low pay received by people caring for children and older people - surely one of the most valuable roles in society?" Parliament should take that advice on board. We need to effect a change in cultural attitudes. That will take time, of course, but supporting women who work as nursery nurses, and those who work in similar professions, and giving them the professional recognition that they deserve is a way forward. It is something that we should do. Nursery nurses make an extremely valuable contribution to our society. The early-years education of our children has become increasingly significant in recent years and is set to become even more important. The professional responsibility of nursery nurses has undoubtedly increased in accordance with that trend and it is time that society, Government and employers recognised that and rewarded nursery nurses accordingly.

I congratulate the Executive on taking the opportunity to hold an open debate on this subject. I wish to highlight the issue of breast-feeding. In response to something that Kate Maclean said, I point out that breast-feeding received good media coverage last year, which was important in helping to raise awareness and encourage all the people who work so hard in that area. The importance of such media coverage cannot be underestimated. Despite its enormous potential in providing a wealth of protective health benefits for the population, breast-feeding is frequently neglected—and worse—by society and, regrettably, it is often marginalised in the NHS and, indeed, in health debates in the chamber. I am pleased that the Minister for Health and Community Care mentioned support for breast-feeding in his opening speech. I am sure that members are familiar with the extent of the evidence showing the short-term and long-term health benefits of breast-feeding and its fundamental role in public health. If they are not, I will happily speak to them later—I do not have the time to go into it in detail at the moment. The link between poverty and ill health has been raised in the debate. Given the direct correlation between areas of higher deprivation and poverty and lower rates of breast-feeding, coupled with the fact that the mothers who have most to gain with regard to their and their babies' health—namely, the young, the poor and the least educated—are the least likely to breast-feed, I suggest that breast-feeding has the potential to serve as a valuable tool in the struggle to reduce health inequalities. Breast-feeding uptake and continuation rates are increasing, and breast-feeding mothers are benefiting from improved practice and innovative forms of support. That is largely due to the dedication and commitment of health sector workers and the national breast-feeding adviser. Despite those advances, considerable work and investment are still needed to help health sector workers and mothers achieve the Scottish breast-feeding target of 50 per cent of mothers still breast-feeding their babies at six weeks of age by 2005. Thirteen of the 15 Scottish NHS boards now have breast-feeding strategies in place, but there is no targeted or direct additional funding to assist with their implementation locally. That could ultimately lead to the downsizing or sidelining of breast-feeding promotion in order to accommodate other issues—albeit important ones—and meet escalating costs. The health improvement fund is very welcome, but there are competing demands  on it, and breast-feeding often does not get its share. I would like the minister to comment on that. If, as a nation, we are to initiate the necessary step change in the rate of improvement of health, we must ensure that health promotion and preventive strategies are given the depth of focus and financial support that they deserve. We should identify and build on the exemplary and innovative work that is being carried out by health sector workers at various levels throughout the country. It is essential for the continuation and development of such best practice that health sector workers at the grass-roots level see their efforts being supported financially and built on by the Government. Although health care workers in my constituency welcome and recognise the potential benefits of the Executive's healthy living campaign, they have expressed regret that that campaign did not highlight the fact that healthy eating starts at the very beginning of life, which is an important point. I am pleased by the Executive's commitment to improve the health of Scottish people, but I share the concern of health professionals that potentially beneficial practices such as breast-feeding seem to be neglected in favour of solutions that are more orientated at achieving immediate results. The minister said in his opening speech that there was no quick fix or solution. Breast-feeding is not a quick fix. However, more attention and funding towards it could, over the years, result in a much-improved health record among Scots. Let me turn briefly to "Improving Health in Scotland—The Challenge". One of the actions that is proposed in the document is "increasing the proportion of mothers breastfeeding, focusing on disadvantaged groups". I welcome that, but how will it happen? A significant percentage of new mothers who do not breast-feed or who stop breast-feeding cite embarrassment as the reason for that. We need to shift social attitudes. I ask the Scottish Executive to use the second session of Parliament to take every appropriate opportunity to support the promotion of breast-feeding, to adopt the international code of marketing of breast-milk substitutes and to give favourable consideration to the breast-feeding etc (Scotland) bill when I introduce it.

Does the Conservative party now acknowledge the link between poverty and ill health? It failed to do so in its many years in government.

Will the minister comment on fast-food companies going into schools to promote competitions, which I find is increasing in my constituency?

I am pleased to open the debate on the motion in my name and I am grateful to colleagues who supported the motion and to those who are attending this evening. I also thank the Scottish Parliament information centre for the document that it produced, and my researcher Catherine Murphy for her work. It is a helpful debate to have ahead of next week's Executive debate on the challenge of improving Scottish health. Obesity is a condition that is defined as "an increase in body weight beyond the limitation of skeletal and physical requirements, as a result of excessive accumulation of body fat." It is a complex condition that has serious social and psychological dimensions that affect all ages and socioeconomic groups, predisposing them—often unwittingly—to a number of serious and frequently life-threatening medical conditions. The World Health Organisation now describes obesity as a global problem of epidemic proportions, with more than 1 billion adults overweight, at least 300 million of whom are clinically obese. Obesity is now considered to be one of the major contributors to the global burden of chronic disease and disability. In Scotland, we face a situation that is considerably worse than that of our European neighbours and one that could lead to a crisis of potentially endemic proportions. The legacy of Scotland's poor record on dietary health is well known and documented.  Based on the Scottish health survey of 1998, it is estimated that more than 19 per cent of Scottish men and more than 22 per cent of Scottish women are now obese. Given that the condition is implicated as a predisposing factor for a considerable number of other diseases—including type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, angina, heart attack, stroke, several types of cancer, osteoarthritis and gall bladder disease—obesity is now recognised as a disease that ranks second only to smoking as a burden upon society and the health service. In June 2003, Dr Andrew Walker of the Robertson centre for biostatistics published a report entitled "The Cost of Doing Nothing - the economics of obesity in Scotland". That report provides the first authoritative estimate of the costs of obesity and obesity-related illness in Scotland. From his analysis, Dr Walker—a senior lecturer in health economics at the University of Glasgow—estimates that the cost to the national health service in Scotland of treating obesity and its consequences is £171 million. It is important to mention, however, that Dr Walker's report considers only 13 of the numerous diseases to which obesity can be linked. The actual cost to the NHS could therefore be significantly higher than the figure that Dr Walker arrived at. Similarly, Dr Walker suggests that his report does not take significant societal costs into account. Additional factors such as days off work due to associated illness, increased morbidity and premature mortality are impacting on our society. In fact, the National Audit Office's report on obesity in England, which was published in 2001, estimated that health care costs make up only 18 per cent of the total societal costs of obesity and related diseases. Perhaps the part of the report that gives most concern is its claim that only 2 per cent of the cost that I mentioned is used to treat obesity, while 98 per cent is consumed by treatment of associated diseases. The NHS in Scotland has been constrained by the legacy of decades of poor nutrition and bad eating habits among the population and it appears to be unable to reverse the deficit of focus on direct or preventive treatment of obesity. Nevertheless, excellent examples of innovation and best practice are being developed. Indeed, in February, Coatbridge local health care co-operative's "Weigh in Without Women" initiative in my constituency received the National Obesity Forum award for excellence in weight management. The programme was conceived after attendees at a men's lifestyle clinic expressed a desire for a slimming clinic that was tailored to meet the needs of men in the area. If the minister has the time, perhaps he would like to  visit that LHCC or speak to people about the programme. The initiative's success makes clear the effectiveness of listening and responding to the needs and concerns of people within their communities. As "Weigh in Without Women" was developed, the LHCC sought consistently to foster an accessible and supportive environment in which men could enjoy losing weight. Indeed, recent research from Queen Margaret University College in Edinburgh that shows that Scottish men are just as unhappy with their weight as women are stands as testament to the sensitivity and initiative that has been shown by Coatbridge LHCC. I urge the Executive to consider how such examples of best practice can be identified and rolled out similarly throughout the country. However, it is not, of course, an absolute solution to the problem of obesity, the sheer extent of which necessitates a comprehensive multidisciplinary approach that would involve many agencies and the voluntary sector. I commend the Scottish Executive's significant emphasis on food and healthy eating during the first four years of the Parliament. Welcome measures, such as the establishment of the physical activity task force, the introduction of the healthy living campaign and the increase in breakfast service funding have been designed to tackle the problem nationally. However, I am equally encouraged by the emphasis that parliamentary parties and the back benches have placed on the issue. In that respect, I want briefly to mention the School Meals (Scotland) Bill. Although I realise that not every member agreed with the bill's purpose, I think that it merited consideration beyond stage 1; the introduction of pilot schemes might also be merited. Attention has continued to be drawn to the fact that in order to promote optimum dietary health we must focus on the very beginning of life. I would be expected to cite a study carried out in June 2002 by the University of Glasgow's department of human nutrition, which found that breastfeeding one's baby could reduce the risk of childhood obesity by almost a third. Moreover, scientists have suggested that such benefits could continue into adulthood. Given its potential as a useful component in any population-based strategy for obesity prevention, it is in everyone's interests to ensure that breastfeeding is encouraged, promoted and welcomed in this country. It is clear that there is no absolute solution to the problem. Many factors have conspired to create the health time bomb that faces us. However, we must continue to develop an effective local and national multidisciplinary approach that focuses on preventive measures and on how we empower  Scottish people and communities to make healthier lifestyle choices. Dr Ian Campbell, who is the chair of the National Obesity Forum, said recently that the obesity epidemic is already with us and that we need to meet it head on and quickly. I draw members' attention to the reception for the National Obesity Forum, which I will host in committee room 1 on 9 October, and which will feature a number of speakers including Dr Ian Campbell and Dr Andrew Walker. I urge all members and interested parties to come along and discuss this important issue.

Will the member give way?

No. Detention as a last resort is not what is happening at Dungavel. The report from Her Majesty's inspectorate of prisons says that "Dungavel was unique in the United Kingdom, as the only centre that held children for considerable periods, which could amount to many months in some cases. ... This had not been planned or anticipated when the centre was set up." The system is failing, and rather than acknowledge that it is failing and make changes, Her Majesty's Government continues to keep people in a prison when they should be let out after two or three weeks if they have not been deported. Much comment has been made about the education of the children. I agree with other members that what is happening is appalling. The points that are made in the HMIP report should be acted on by the Executive, and it should do so much more speedily than it has acted until now. However, we are talking about wider issues, such as the mental health, well-being and psychiatric future of the children that we are imprisoning in Dungavel. There has to be a better way. The churches, local authorities, voluntary sector and housing associations have all shown a willingness to work with the Executive and the Government on the issue. In a small number of cases, for a small number of days, people who have to leave the country may have to be detained, but 99.9 per cent of the time we do not have to detain children. I do not want to be part of a Parliament that agrees that we should detain children, and I do not want to be part of a country that does so.

The amendment clearly states: "seek to end the detention of children and their families at the centre". I hope that Mr Harvie will accept that that is what the amendment means.

I am pleased that we are having a debate on Dungavel, but it is unfortunate that, owing to its very existence, we have to have a debate about it. I commend the STUC for holding a rally on the issue last week and Michael Connarty MP for speaking out. I also commend Cathy Peattie, Sandra White, Rosie Kane and others for speaking out. If the BBC is correct in its reporting of the matter, people power has worked to a degree and there has been some movement on the issue, which I am happy to welcome. If we are serious about debating the issue of Dungavel, we have to be clear about what the issue is. The issue is not about constitutional wrangling by the SNP or between Westminster and Holyrood, nor is it about any party in Scottish politics using Dungavel to sling mud at another one. The issue is not what is reserved or devolved, or which minister said what in public. The issue is whether, in 21 st century Scotland, we should lock up children and their families, who are innocent of any crime, in a former prison. Each of us in the Parliament has a clear moral responsibility to answer that question today. I cannot accept the SNP motion. It does not recognise that the power to act on the issue lies with Westminster and that only Westminster can stop the imprisonment of children or close down Dungavel. Only Westminster has the power to ease the harsh asylum regime. The role of this Parliament is to take a position on the issue and to make that position clear to Westminster. The SNP motion does not do that.

I am sorry, but I do not think that I have time.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. That is helpful.

Yes.

I do not think that it is a crime to seek asylum in this country. The crime is in locking up children in Dungavel. Unfortunately, the SNP motion does not provide workable alternatives. Its alternative could mean the separation of children from their families. For that reason, I have lodged my amendment. The Executive cannot hide from its responsibilities by stating that the issue is reserved and that it will therefore have nothing to do with it. I am pleased that ministers are speaking to Westminster and that a move has been made to recognise the issue and speak out on it. The refugee children are here in Scotland and they are being imprisoned on our doorstep. Their right to health care, education and welfare are rights to public services for which this Parliament and the Executive are responsible. If the care commission, for example, has responsibilities in Dungavel, ministers who answer for the commission also have responsibilities. The Executive has a long and at times distinguished record of speaking out and lobbying Westminster on reserved areas. I will not go into that, because it is all on the record. If agencies such as the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations are prepared to engage with the issue and offer alternatives to imprisonment, ministers must engage with the issue in a similar manner. As citizens in a civilised and democratic country, none of us can turn our backs on the treatment of asylum seekers. We cannot ignore Dungavel, whether we are MPs, Scottish Executive ministers, MSPs, councillors, trade unionists, mothers, fathers, sons or daughters. We cannot accept that anyone in our country, in particular a child, is imprisoned when they have committed no crime. Dungavel is not a suitable place for any innocent person to be imprisoned for any length of time. It cannot be tolerated for any longer as a place where children are locked up, deprived of a proper education and deprived of the chance to play and socialise with other children. Those are rights that we take for granted for our own children in our civilised nation. The SNP motion does not address that, as it leaves the door open for Westminster to  assume that the Scottish Parliament would condone the separation of children from their parents or guardians. Of course, that would be unacceptable. There are fundamental problems with Robert Brown's amendment. It looks initially as if much of that amendment could be supported as being better than nothing. Unfortunately, the terms used in the clause that begins "to end a system" mean that children would still be imprisoned behind barbed wire, but might be bussed to the local school, with all the stigma that would attach to that. To say that decisions would "be made in the best interests of the child" also leaves a door open to separating children from their families.

I certainly do not accept that separation is in the child's best interests, but Robert Brown's amendment leaves that door wide open. His amendment proposes a restricted, short-term solution to some issues, but would not end the detention of children or their families at Dungavel. Instead, it uses semantics to disguise the fact that it still condones the imprisonment of children and their families at Dungavel, despite Robert Brown's fine words. Any member who supports his amendment condones that imprisonment. Everyone who opposes the imprisonment of children and their families must vote against that amendment and support mine. There is a clear choice. Dungavel is a fundamental issue of human rights. We are all responsible for the treatment that people receive in our country and we are all guilty of consenting to that treatment if we hide behind a shield of silence. Discussion of the conditions in the prison muddies the waters. The staff should not be brought into the debate—although the fact that it is run for profit by a private company certainly should, because that is morally disgraceful. If people are put behind barbed wire and their liberty is removed, they are simply imprisoned. Members must not be misled by the convenient descriptions of decent conditions that Dungavel's defenders give—that is the gilded-cage argument. Loss of liberty is imprisonment—it does not matter how comfortable the cage is. The real issue is clear: we must find a more humane and respectable way to treat asylum seekers, and the locking up of children in Dungavel must stop immediately. The treatment of our fellow human beings is every Scot's responsibility, no matter about the constitution. We  should hang our heads in shame for tolerating the existence of such an aberration in our country for so long. I move amendment S2M-329.3, to leave out from "calls for" to end and insert: "recognises that there are widespread concerns regarding the care and education of children detained in Dungavel House Immigration Removal Centre and calls on the Scottish Executive to engage in communications with Her Majesty's Government to seek to end the detention of children and their families at the centre and to develop a more humane alternative to this practice."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sorry that I did not give advance notice of this point of order. However, at question time, I was rather confused about a comment that the Presiding Officer made when he seemed to indicate that the First Minister should be careful of straying into reserved areas. As a Parliamentarian who speaks and writes on a range of issues, I would like that to be clarified. I understand that the Scotland Act 1998 and the Parliament's standing orders allow individual MSPs, the Scottish Parliament and the Executive to discuss, debate and take a position on reserved issues. We have had such debates in members' business and have taken positions in debates such as those on the act of settlement and the Iraq war. It is clearly the prerogative of the Executive to choose whether it takes a position on such issues, unless the Parliament votes and instruct the Executive to do so. We cannot change the law on reserved issues, but I understand that we can seek to influence it. It is important that we should know our rights as Parliamentarians in the interests of democracy in the Parliament. Will the Presiding Officer clarify standing orders with regard to reserved issues? I do not believe that they call for our silence on reserved issues.

The SNP talks about the Executive having power and control over tax. Does the member agree that the Parliament has some power—albeit a blunt instrument—to vary tax? What is the SNP's current position on whether the Parliament should use its current tax-varying powers before we go looking for additional powers?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether any action will be taken to improve public transport links between north and south Lanarkshire. (S2O-262)

Does the minister agree that the transport links between those areas of Lanarkshire are in particular need of improvement? Many of my constituents are faced with using at least two different buses—perhaps more—for a journey taking upwards of an hour in order to gain access to their nearest maternity and paediatric facilities. Does the minister agree that, if those facilities are to be of the utmost benefit to the people whom they serve, it is crucial that transport links to and from them improve?

Had I realised that there would be time, I would have spoken in this debate, but I will settle for making an intervention. I associate myself with the minister's earlier comments that commended the work of COSLA and the work of Tom Maginnis and the task force in particular. Can any further steps be taken by, for example, introducing a uniform recording system to improve the monitoring of firework-related complaints and incidents and perhaps assess the impact of the new measures?

COSLA's view is that the co-operation of the Crown Office and other relevant agencies of the judiciary must be obtained to support and reinforce the view that firework nuisance and abuse cannot be tolerated as acceptable behaviour. Does the minister have any ideas about how such co-operation can be  progressed?

The SNP members have talked about the possibility of a total ban. Will that apply not to organised firework displays, but to sales of fireworks to the general public? Will the member comment on illegal imports and the problem that people are able to buy fireworks on the internet?

Will the member give way?

Stewart Stevenson mentioned Sewel motions before. I am no great fan of Sewel motions and I express concern about the 46 that were passed in the previous session. However, it seems to me that Sewel motions are allowable for a good reason, and the Fireworks Bill is one that fits in with the ethos of Sewel motions. It is an enabling bill and the minister has said that there will be consultation on it, so it would be rather churlish of the SNP to abstain on the motion today. Does not Stewart Stevenson agree that the bill will help us to make a difference in Scotland and that the Sewel motion is sensible?

Will that help to stop fireworks shops that spring up and close down again in our communities?

Although I welcome any extension of the exemption system for NHS prescription charges, I am concerned about the apparent shortfall in prescription provision. Is the minister in a position to respond to last night's media reports that Greater Glasgow NHS Board is not prescribing beta interferon to multiple sclerosis sufferers because of financial constraints? That situation could adversely affect several of my constituents.

Will the minister give way?

The opening of Gartcosh railway station has been substantially delayed. Given that final confirmation of full Scottish Executive funding is critical to the project's progress and that a request for additional challenge funding has been sitting with the Scottish Executive for some time, will the minister assure me that the funding will be forthcoming to allow the station to open—I hope—early next year?

On the subject of conditions of service for nursery nurses, what consideration—if any—is the on-going review of initial teacher education giving to the development of a framework for part-time and distance learning teaching qualifications that will be accessible not only to graduates but to those with relevant experience, such as nursery nurses?

I believe that the programme for government that is being debated sets out many principles that, when subjected to robust scrutiny by our committees and back benchers, can only be improved on and which will undoubtedly lead to many policies that will deserve the Parliament's support. However, I am disappointed that the partnership agreement does not make tackling poverty, inequality and deprivation its top priority, although I acknowledge that much of the action that is proposed in it will work towards that aim. As I said yesterday, I hope that all policies will be proofed for their impact on poverty, deprivation and inequality as thoroughly as they will be for their environmental impact. Coalition government is never ideal and my own views on the subject have been well recorded over the past few weeks, but I think that it is now time to look forward to the job of governing Scotland. I am pleased that we have a comprehensive and strategic programme in front of us today that we can build on. Obviously, the debate makes it possible to focus on any part of the programme, although it is difficult to limit that within a short speech. I want to concentrate on higher and further education because the measures to be introduced will have a particular significance within my constituency. Student finance is a major issue, of course—I welcome the commitment to having no top-up fees—but it is not the only issue and I want to consider others. The partnership agreement focuses on various courses of action but primarily on increasing the higher and further education budget by 16 per cent  by 2006. I unequivocally welcome that measure, but I must say that in my constituency the local college has found itself in a situation whereby the revenue that is currently provided by the Scottish Further Education Funding Council does not stretch to cover staffing costs, which make up 75 per cent of the total costs. I ask the Executive to make it clear where the additional money is to be directed and to scrutinise carefully the levels of funding that individual institutions will receive. I welcome the Executive's proposals to merge the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council and the Scottish Further Education Funding Council, and to encourage acknowledgement by business and education providers of the Scottish credit and qualification framework.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. A recent study by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation found that students from disadvantaged backgrounds are more likely to follow complicated paths within higher education and often find that the transition between further and higher education is problematic. That can lead to their foregoing the opportunity to progress to more advanced courses. A relevant point is whether higher national certificate and higher national diploma courses should count towards university degrees. If we are to improve accessibility and effectiveness in further and higher education, we must identify the best practice that exists between some further and higher education institutions and make a concerted effort to foster a more holistic and cohesive solution to the problem of transition. The Rowntree report also found that students from disadvantaged backgrounds were more likely to reduce prematurely their level of participation in education. I ask the Executive to reconsider the current system of funding in Scotland, which supports the recruitment of students but does not give incentives to institutions to support, and increase the retention of, students from disadvantaged backgrounds. From a local perspective, I welcome the plans for greater transparency within the sector, particularly the application of the Nolan principles in the appointment of principals. I hope that the proposals will prevent situations arising such as that which arose in my constituency last year when, after a critical report by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, a college board was able to appoint a new principal without the position being advertised either internally or externally. Surely in any education institution in which public money is being spent it is essential that appointment processes are mindful of the need for  proper procedures to ensure openness, accountability and the observance of equal opportunities. That should apply also to the appointment of board members. The right to refer to an ombudsman will have a positive impact on levels of accountability. My dealings with constituents lead me to welcome that measure, as well as the fact that it will improve student rights. I am encouraged by many of the Executive's proposals. However, although the promise to merge the higher and further education funding councils makes sense in terms of cutting red tape, it will not, unfortunately, result in a bonfire of those particular quangos. Democratising FE by giving management back to councils or joint boards or by establishing a new executive agency would ensure application of the Nolan principles and would allow standardisation of salaries and conditions of service for staff. It would also deliver the more cohesive approach to further and higher education to which I alluded earlier. Such an approach could allow the Scottish further education service seriously to strive for excellence. Resources that are currently employed in supporting 42 separate infrastructures for 42 separate colleges could instead be invested in the delivery of high-quality education and training for our Scottish students. I ask the Executive seriously to consider that issue as part of the proposals for further and higher education that are included in the partnership document. I do not want to take anything away from those proposals, which are strong and are beginning to move us in the right direction. However, I wish that they moved us that bit further.

Will the First Minister give details about specific policies in the programme for tackling poverty, deprivation and inequality? For example, will policies be proofed for their impact on such matters, as they will proofed in respect of the environment? I am curious as to whether there is an inherent assumption that, given that economic growth is the top priority, it will lead automatically to the eradication of poverty, deprivation and inequality without direct Government intervention.

I wish to state that I believe in the sovereignty of the people of Scotland and hold firmly that my allegiance should be first and foremost to them. However, I recognise the legal requirement that I must meet in order to serve my constituents in this Parliament and therefore I will take the oath.  The following members took the oath:  Elaine Smith (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab) Mrs Margaret Smith (Edinburgh West) (LD) Nicol Stephen (Aberdeen South) (LD) Stewart Stevenson (Banff and Buchan) (SNP) Mr Jamie Stone (Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross) (LD)  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Iain Smith (North-East Fife) (LD)

Is the First Minister aware of the apparently unilateral decision that the chief officer of Strathclyde fire service recently took to reduce the minimum number of permitted riders on first-attendant appliances from five to four and to constrain recruitment levels? Does he agree that that action is less than helpful during an industrial dispute?

Does the First Minister accept that people who oppose what they believe to be an unnecessary and immoral war today can hardly be  expected to support it tomorrow? On Monday, Robin Cook said: "it is false to argue that only those who support war support our troops. It is entirely legitimate to support our troops while seeking an alternative to the conflict".— [ Official Report , House of Commons , 17 March 2003; Vol 401, c 727.]  Does the First Minister agree with his words? Does he agree that the best way in which to support our armed forces is to ensure their safety by bringing them home as soon as possible?

Although the matter in question is reserved  and the Parliament does not have responsibility for international affairs, we have the power to influence decisions. Whatever members believe, I respect those who have had the conviction to state their position and argue their case. The case for military action against Iraq has not been proven. If any member believes that it has been proven, they should, by all means, vote against John McAllion's amendment. Logically, a vote against the amendment would indicate support for an attack now. The issues change. If this is about weapons of mass destruction, why do members not suggest action against all nations that have such weapons, such as India, Pakistan, Israel and the USA? If getting rid of such weapons would win the war on terrorism, surely it would be logical to get rid of all of them. If the issue is about broken UN resolutions, what about Israel, Iran and Pakistan? If it is about regime change, what gives the USA and the UK the right to decide that regime change can be achieved only by war? Many campaigners for peace and organisations such as the STUC have detested Saddam Hussein's brutal and oppressive regime for many years. The chemical attack on Halabjah has been mentioned. At the time, the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and the peace movement tried to raise the issue, but it was hardly reported—Pauline McNeill mentioned that. The west supported Iraq at the time, so the evil dictator was our evil dictator. Of course, any country can abhor the regime of another country, but that does not give it the right to go to war, launch a pre-emptive attack or take unilateral military action. I want to address a legitimate point that John Home Robertson made. The six tests that were announced yesterday do not mention the suffering of the Iraqi people; they are all concerned with weapons of mass destruction. Presumably, therefore, if those six tests are met, the UK Government will allow Saddam Hussein and his regime to stay and carry on with their oppression. This war is not about the suffering of the Iraqi people. Can it really be a solution to Saddam Hussein's oppressive and brutal regime for the UK and the USA to blanket bomb Iraq and cause carnage among thousands of innocent Iraqi people? Can it be right to hold those people responsible for Saddam Hussein's actions? It is hard to believe that anyone can support an argument that says that we should bomb people to liberate them and which accuses those who do not feel inclined to be persuaded by that logic of having blood on their hands. That is breathtaking. Whatever this war is about, it is not about democracy, as Donald Gorrie said. The Iraqi people will not choose a new Government or  leader. The USA has already indicated that it will install a governor general. Like other members, I am horrified by the fact that the USA has already handed out contracts for the rebuilding of Iraq to US companies. Of course, a new regime will be more generous with oil rights and more sympathetic to global capitalism. Sanctions are killing innocent people in Iraq. One in five children are chronically malnourished and poor water quality is the main cause of child mortality. Sanctions, it could be argued, also serve to shore up the hideous regime by making the people of Iraq dependent on that regime. If we attack Iraq, the humanitarian consequences for innocent civilians in Iraq will be horrendous. I believe that decisions have already been influenced to some extent by the voices and actions of those who are opposed to the war. That opposition must continue. We must reject resignation and put the Government under pressure until the very last minute to stop the war. I am afraid that the Labour amendment today is anodyne. It says nothing and means nothing. Anyone who is anti-war in any way must support the amendment in John McAllion's name. For the sake of the Iraqi people and our armed forces—indeed, for all our sakes—the war must be stopped. I ask members to support the amendment in John McAllion's name and to add their voices and that of the Scottish Parliament to all the voices that are trying to stop the war.

I am curious about something Sandra White said and I ask her to clarify it. Why cannot we manage prostitution and at the same time help women to get out of it?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you clarify whether amendment 10, which relates to section 59A, and amendment 1 have been deemed competent in terms of the Scotland Act 1998? The amendments seem to deal with issues that fall under section L2 of schedule 5 to that act, which covers equal opportunities. I am curious to know whether the amendments have been deemed competent.

I, too, welcome the debate, because it gives us another opportunity to consider the implications of what a war would mean. Whether members believe that it is right or wrong to attack Iraq, they must recognise the consequences. Of course, as has been mentioned, there will be consequences for our armed services and for others who are drafted in, such as doctors and nurses, and there might be consequences for our civilians at home. However, the main casualties of a war against Iraq will be Iraqi civilians, nearly half of whom are children. I am not going to apologise for going over the point again, or for making it clear to Parliament what a war will be all about. Of the population of Iraq, 42 per cent are children under the age of 15—9.6 million children. We know that 90 per cent or thereabouts of those who are killed in modern wars are civilians. Those who are killed and maimed are often talked about as representing "collateral damage"—collateral damage that is caused by weapons such as cluster bombs, landmines, daisy cutters and other sorts of anti-personnel devices. Those weapons kill people indiscriminately and in large  numbers. The weapons might be smart, but they do not stop to inquire whether the victim is a civilian or, indeed, a child. Anti-personnel landmines are particularly dangerous because they can look like colourful toys. However, the curious children who touch such mines are unlikely to survive and, if they do, they will have been maimed. Innocent children will be slaughtered in a war against Iraq, and we need to acknowledge that fact. I was going to quote John Pilger from the article in The Mirror yesterday, but Tommy Sheridan did that in his opening speech. I urge everyone to read that article. In it, John Pilger talked about the deformed Vietnamese children he came upon who were victims of agent orange: "This terrible chemical weapon, which the cliche-mongers would now call a weapon of mass destruction, was dumped on almost half of South Vietnam ... the poison continues to move through water and soil and food, children continue to be born without palates and chins and scrotums or are stillborn. Many have leukaemia." He said that we do not see those images. If we attack Iraq, we will not see the images of what will happen to Iraqi children. I have to stop now, which is a shame, because I had so much more to say. A war on the underlying causes of conflict, such as poverty and lack of development, would be a war worth waging. A civilised nation would wish to deploy its resources in that way, not by spending them on weapons of mass destruction, which we will deploy in an unjustified and immoral war against a country where almost half the population are innocent children. We are all responsible for all the world's children, not just Scottish children. I went to see "Miss Saigon" last week, and I was touched by one of the songs, a lyric of which was: "they are all our children too". They are, and we should all attend the rally on 15 February.

Can the minister confirm that the dispute began prior to the publication of the Bain report? In yesterday's statement, John Prescott said that: "for the avoidance of doubt, the Government's position will not change. We will continue to implement the Government's part of the Bain agenda".— [ Official Report , House of Commons , 28 January 2003; Vol 398, c 721.]  Will he comment on that, and will he therefore tell the Parliament how on earth he thinks that a negotiated settlement can be reached between the employers and the Fire Brigades Union under those pre-imposed conditions? Can he further comment on the contradiction—

Given the changes to the comprehensive ethos elsewhere in the UK, does the minister believe that comprehensive education is the best way forward in Scotland? Will she give more details about the vocational training, as opposed to academic learning, that she mentioned?

What action is the Executive taking to address the wider issue of violence against women and children in our society?

Although the issue is ultimately a matter for Westminster, I welcome the opportunity to debate it, given that it has immense implications for the people of Scotland and for the Parliament. Like other members, I am disappointed that some members are suggesting that we are on "an inevitable path to war". I do not want to be so defeatist at this stage. Every person in Britain has a responsibility to continue to do everything that they can to ensure that all diplomatic and peaceful avenues are examined and exhausted before engagement in military action is even considered.

I am afraid that I must differ with the member on the semantics of the word "inevitable". I welcome the comments that the Prime Minister made on Monday. He said that no speculative or arbitrary time frames were to be placed on the work that was being carried out by the UN weapons inspectors. I also want to voice my support for the British Government's recent conference with Palestinian officials to discuss reform in Palestine. I encourage the Government to continue to engage in such proactive and autonomous actions in the pursuit of peace.

That was most regrettable, but the fact that the British Government held such a conference at all sent out an extremely strong message, which I welcome. The Palestinian issue is central to terrorism and the anti-western sentiments throughout the Arab world. I hope that the debate will assist in informing the Government of the feeling in Scotland and that it will encourage people to make known their views to their representatives at Westminster. People will be able to express their opinions at an anti-war conference on Saturday 18 January and at a  march and rally to stop war on Iraq on Saturday 15 February. If they feel strongly about the issue, people can take part in those events. I hope that all is not lost and that the potential war can be averted. However, I am not so naive as to have failed to notice the deployment of considerable military resources in the region, which indicates that conflict is a genuine possibility. Given that that is the case, I want to consider what such a war might mean for the Iraqi people. Previous atrocities have been mentioned, but let us assess what would be the implications for those people of a war now. Forty-two per cent of the population of Iraq is made up of children under the age of 15. That amounts to 9.6 million children. UNICEF's 1996 report on the state of the world's children states: "It is the singular characteristic of warfare in our time that children suffer most." It is also known that about 90 per cent of those who are killed in modern wars are civilians. Ordinary people are rarely made aware of that fact. In the past, those who have been killed and maimed have been given the dehumanising description of collateral damage. Of course there will be collateral damage when weapons include cluster bombs, land mines and daisy cutters, which kill people indiscriminately and in large numbers.

I thought that I had extra time for interventions. I apologise.

I do not have time to mention how malnourished the Iraqi children are and how they would suffer in the event of a new war. On its informative website, Operation Desert Rescue pointed out that, in 2002, the United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution entitled "A World Fit for Children", which pledged to "protect children from the horrors of armed conflict". Operation Desert Rescue asks the UN and all the Governments that are involved to announce how they intend to honour that pledge. I echo that call. As I am not comfortable with the motion or with the amendments to it, I am not sure how I intend to vote on the issue. I will listen to the summing-up speeches.

Like Cathy Peattie, I had not intended to contribute to this part of the proceedings, but having listened to the debate I wish to make a short speech.  The main issue is not whether the repeal of section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947 is right or wrong; the issue is the need to debate and scrutinise that repeal. I dispute one of Donald Gorrie's points: the issue is not parity with Westminster. I understand that Westminster yesterday held its second reading of the Local Government Bill, so the repeal was considered at that stage. At least the opportunity to debate the issue is available at Westminster. From speaking to Labour members, I think that there is slight confusion. Will the minister clarify in his summing-up whether the Local Government Committee scrutinised the repeal of section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947 at stage 2 or whether wider fire service and modernisation issues were discussed? If that committee did not scrutinise the repeal at stage 2, we must ask why not, given that the consultation document was published early last year.

I thank the member for that comment. I hope that that clarifies the situation for any Labour members who think that the repeal was scrutinised. Just before the recess, we had a good members' business debate on the firefighters' dispute. During that debate, some members asked—rightly—that we be careful with language, actions and other matters, so that the negotiations were not adversely affected by anything that was said in the chamber. This last-minute amendment—amendment 59—does not help the process of reaching agreement in that dispute. Whether the repeal of section 19 is right or wrong is not the issue. In the middle of an industrial dispute, amendment 59 is, to say the least, inflammatory.

I, too, congratulate Alex Neil on securing the debate. As Patricia Marwick said, the Scotland Act 1998 gives the Scottish Parliament legislative competence for all fire service matters in which central Government has a locus. It is appropriate that the Parliament should be given the opportunity to debate the issue. Any young recruit to the fire service can expect an annual salary of £17,727 after his or her initial six months' training. That is an hourly rate of just over £8. More disturbing is the fact that, after 15 years of service, the same firefighter can expect his or her salary to have risen by only £4,764, which is an hourly increase of just £2.18. Firefighters' pay is determined in accordance with a pay link that was established 25 years ago. Although a firefighter's job has since then changed  dramatically in respect of the required skill level, training and the incidents that new recruits attend, wages continue to fall in real terms. Firefighters' pay continues to be linked to that of manual workers. I will make a point that others have made, but I will put it slightly differently. After commissioning two independent research studies into the pay formula for firefighters and fire control operators, the FBU was told that the substantial research that those studies provided as evidence for the its pay claim was inadmissible because it was not objective. If the Labour Research Department's findings were deemed to be biased because the FBU commissioned them, surely we should ask whether the findings of the Review Body on Senior Salaries—which recommended MSPs' salary increase last year—are any more objective; they were requested by senior representatives of the Parliament. It continues to disappoint me that one of the most consistently high-performing services in local government, which our Deputy First Minister described as having an "enviable reputation for delivery", has been forced to take industrial action to secure a valid and long overdue pay adjustment. In the same document, the Deputy First Minister talked about not leaving "this policy paper ... on a shelf". Will the Deputy Minister for Justice tell members in his summing up what the status of that policy paper is at the moment? During my recent visit to Coatbridge fire station, I was struck by the anxiety and regret that firefighters and staff clearly felt as a result of having to engage in a second period of industrial action. No firefighter wants to have to strike; other members made that point. We live in a modern society in which we are increasingly reliant on the emergency services' capacity to provide comprehensive and highly effective services. Surely it is crucial that we take the action that is necessary to correct a situation that has seen the fire service and its employees suffer from years of underfunding? The reality of daily working life for firefighters dictates that they might at any moment be called upon to risk their lives on behalf of others. Surely that exceptional dedication to public service deserves levels of pay that are at least commensurate with that dedication? I fully associate myself with the motion.

Will the member give way?

Will Cathie Craigie take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you confirm that amendment S1M-3202.1, in the name of Alex Fergusson, is a personal amendment and was not lodged on behalf of the Rural Development Committee? Will you also confirm whether it is in order for Alex Fergusson to promote that amendment when he and his Conservative colleague failed to support motion S1M-3621 at the Rural Development Committee on Tuesday morning, which means that the designation order was approved by nine votes to two? Is that political posturing by Alex Fergusson?

Have steps been taken to encourage businesses, particularly those that operate premises in which considerable recyclable waste is generated, such as business centres and serviced office accommodation, to employ the recycling services that many waste management providers are making available?

I, too, congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate, which is on an issue that holds great significance for many mothers and families throughout Scotland and, obviously, for Bill Butler's constituent. As members have said, it is regrettable that we allow the serious issue of post-natal depression to fall victim to trivialisation all too often. In allowing PND to be perceived as simply the baby blues or dismissing it as an overly emotional or illogical reaction to the demands of motherhood, we assist in fostering a society that marginalises many mums who suffer from the condition and we compound the fears of stigmatisation and shame. The SIGN report draws attention to that. I will not read from the report because we do not have time for that, but it talks about the stigma and shame felt by sufferers, who might be reluctant to confess their feelings. As feelings of embarrassment and failure are symptoms that are often synonymous with post-natal depression, it is essential that any debate on the issue recognises the potentially protracted and detrimental effects that such a depressive illness, if untreated, can have on the mental well-being of not only mothers, but families, and the consequential damage to family relationships. There is little doubt that ensuring that appropriate support systems that incorporate a wide range of medical, social and voluntary  services are in place is central to the treatment and possible prevention of the disorder. Mothers must be assured during the ante-natal and post-natal stages that support exists and can be readily accessed. The need to establish specialist units in the NHS that provide an option for mothers and babies to be admitted together must be addressed. Other members have raised that and I hope that the minister will comment on the matter when he responds to the debate. I draw attention to a further recommendation in the SIGN report, which stresses the importance of psychosocial interventions as treatment options for mothers and in support for families. During my extensive contact with breastfeeding mothers, I have come across peer support groups and I have been made aware of research that shows that they play a valuable role in assisting all women during the post-natal period. I congratulate the Executive on its announcement today that it will provide £60,000 to Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board for the establishment of such a peer support group service in Cumnock. I hope that more money will be provided for other areas. I commend local health care co-operatives for their work throughout Scotland in helping to establish peer support groups, particularly for PND. I urge the Executive to ensure continued funding for such ventures. I congratulate Bill Butler again and I agree with his motion.

Will the member clarify the final recommendation of the committee? It reads: "We recommend that the Executive continues to utilise all appropriate sources and mechanisms to secure capital investment"— from the private sector— "in public services". Does that mean that the committee is indicating its support for PFI/PPP projects?

It is disturbing to look round this chamber and see an absence of black and ethnic minority members. The picture was different about a year ago when the Equal Opportunities Committee event, to which Kate Maclean referred, was held in the chamber. I congratulate the Executive on the launch of its campaign to tackle racism in Scotland through raising public awareness. It is essential that we recognise the importance of the campaign, in particular because it might serve as one of the  ways in which to challenge people's preconceptions. Given some of the comments that have been made this afternoon, that is important. In a country where around only 1.3 per cent of the population of 5 million comprises people from minority ethnic backgrounds, and where many people lack personal experience of different cultures, it is all too easy for misunderstandings and preconceptions to prevail. On the issue of race, we all have a duty—a personal accountability and responsibility—to examine our own preconceptions and assumptions. Margaret Curran has stated: "Through this advertising campaign we are stating clearly and loudly that there is no place for racism in Scotland." Of course, that message is welcome, but it is also important that rhetoric is turned into reality. We should use the spotlight that the Scottish Executive's campaign provides to convert such positive statements and pledges into action that will lead to a change in Scottish society. We all know that children are not born racist. By actively reinforcing anti-racism messages throughout children's education, and by promoting understanding of the potentially profound consequences of prejudice, we can move closer to eradicating racism in 21 st century Scotland. Education plays a fundamental role in the prevention of racism, as does the provision of other key services. Given that such services are the responsibility of local authorities, we must ensure that local authorities are fully involved in the development and implementation of Scotland's anti-racist policies. It is disturbing to reflect on the fact that around only 0.5 per cent of our councillors in Scotland are from ethnic minorities. We must also accept that the Executive's awareness-raising campaign, race equality policies and new duties will lead to more demands being made of local authorities. For example, they will have to set targets and monitor; provide training in race awareness, not only for teachers, but for housing and social work staff; provide translating and interpreting services and mainstream and promote race equality. It is therefore important that local authorities are provided with the necessary resources and adequate funding, as well as with continually revised and updated guidelines, to ensure that there is an impact at grass-roots level and genuinely inclusive engagement between the wider community and excluded groups. We need people to examine their own positions and prejudices. They should imagine what it must be like to come from a minority ethnic background, to be ridiculed, to be spat on, to be physically attacked, to have one's self-confidence damaged, to be denied the chance to achieve one's potential  and, as is the case in some instances, to be born in Scotland and speak with a Scottish accent but be treated like a second-class citizen. We have heard examples of that kind of treatment throughout this week since the campaign was launched. Perhaps it is difficult for some people to put themselves in another person's shoes, but everyone must at some time have had the experience of feeling lonely, picked on and isolated. That is part of life. However, to have those feelings and to experience negative attitudes from those around you day in and day out is something that few people can imagine if they have not experienced it. We must do more than pay lip service to the aims of the campaign. Through political action, we must turn our condemnation of racism into reality. The message is clear: racism in any form is unacceptable in a modern, 21 st century Scotland. I associate myself with the Executive motion.

I am not a member of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, although I am a member of the cross-party group on children and young people. Like other members, I congratulate the Education, Culture and Sport Committee on its report, and I pay tribute to the hard work that has been carried out on this issue. I single out the committee's reporters in that regard. I am delighted—as are, I am sure, all the organisations, cross-party groups and individual MSPs who have championed the issue—that the Parliament is now taking what I would view as clear, decisive steps towards establishing the office of commissioner for children and young people. In my members' business debate on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which took place in February 2000—the motion for which was supported by the cross-party group on children and young people—the potential benefits of and the need for a commissioner for children and young people in Scotland were raised by me and by a number of other members. It was indicated by the then convener of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, Mary Mulligan, that the committee intended to undertake an inquiry into the issue. At the time, it was not just back-bench MSPs  who were unconvinced about the proposal to establish the post of commissioner. The then Deputy Minister for Children and Education, Peter Peacock, outlined the Executive's position. He said: "The proposition is superficially attractive, but the Executive wants to be sure that the attractions are more than superficial ... We must ensure that if we have a commissioner, everybody is on board about what that commissioner ought to do ... The commissioners that are referred to in other countries do different things. Other countries do not have the same support systems as we have for children's services. We must be clear that the commissioner—if we are to have a commissioner—will add something to the present situation and design of services. The Executive wants to be clear that a commissioner would not replicate, usurp, or conflict with, existing arrangements." The minister went on to say: "However, I want to make clear that we do not have a closed mind. If a commissioner can genuinely add something positive to the existing range of provision, we are prepared to consider it."— [ Official Report , 3 February 2000; Vol 4, c 838-9.]  Today it is important that we cast our minds back to that and acknowledge that the Executive has listened carefully to the debate on the issue. I am delighted that, with the publication of the report of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, we seem to be moving closer to the objective of having a children's commissioner in Scotland. A children's commissioner would be an invaluable tool in helping Scotland to meet the international directives outlined in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. By functioning as a children's champion and by providing a collective voice for children and young people throughout Scotland, a children's commissioner would play a crucial role in the promotion and empowerment of children and young people. A commissioner would help us to meet the requirements of article 42 of the convention, which states: "States Parties undertake to make the principles and provisions of the Convention widely known, by appropriate and active means, to adults and children alike." By facilitating a more co-ordinated approach to children's issues, we will take a major step forward in ensuring that the interests of children and young people are addressed fully. The co-ordinated perspective that a children's commissioner would provide is necessary because every law or policy decision that Government makes has an impact on our children and young people. A commissioner would help to ensure that service providers and policy makers viewed children's rights and interests as a priority. Is the deputy convener, who will sum up the debate, or the minister able to clarify the position in those cases that do not fall neatly into either  devolved or reserved areas? I am particularly concerned about the situation of refugee or asylum-seeking children who live in Scotland. I hope that that issue can be addressed either today or at some point in the future. I would be grateful if, in her closing speech, the minister would comment on Save the Children's suggestion—which Karen Gillon supported in her speech—that the legislative framework for the children's commissioner should at the very least allow for the commissioner to comment on reserved issues. If the minister has already addressed the matter, that is fine.

I did not realise that the minister would not be making a closing speech. Today, many issues have been raised on which the commissioner could be expected to make a difference. The minister mentioned tackling child poverty. Other such issues are the need to protect children from abuse and violence, and the need to promote the interests of children from black and ethnic minority groups, including Gypsy Traveller children. During its inquiry last year into travelling people, the Equal Opportunities Committee heard some heartbreaking stories. Some children felt that society treated animals better than it treated them. The commissioner could also promote issues such as access to free drinking water in schools, the child's right to play and the child's right to be breast-fed by his or her mother without her being harassed or sent off to unsuitable places. MSPs can raise such issues and advocate children's rights, but they cannot devote themselves solely to that task. As Brian Monteith knows, a children's commissioner would be a champion of children's and young people's rights, and would be in a position to concentrate on co-ordinating, monitoring and promoting issues that affect children's rights and interests. According to the committee's report, the Parliament would receive an annual report and reports on investigations, to enable an exchange of views to take place. Policy and law would be made in the chamber. I welcome the report and pay tribute to the committee for its hard work, which has brought us to this stage. I urge Parliament to agree to the proposal.

Will the minister join me in congratulating North Lanarkshire Council and the south Coatbridge social inclusion partnership on their pilot schemes to provide free accessible drinking water in four Coatbridge primary schools? What steps does he intend to take to ensure that all Scotland's children have access to free drinking water throughout the school day?

I, too, congratulate Trish Godman on securing the debate, which is on an important subject. I also congratulate the Daily Record on its campaign. I do not imagine that many members have experienced the entrapment, desperation and fear of being in debt to a loan shark, but they might be aware from constituents' experiences of the horror of such situations. Having borrowed money, people soon realise that they will never pay off debt because of the high rate of interest that the lender has imposed. That is when despair sets in. Many people in Scotland might seem to have no other choice. They cannot access the financial services that many of us take for granted and, as other members said, many of those people do not have bank accounts. A parent might feel forced to borrow money to buy Christmas presents or to take their kids on a wee holiday, or to buy shoes and trainers that have an accepted recognisable label, so that their kids do not stand out from their pals as being different and suffer the stigma that can accompany that. Another reason why people borrow money from loan sharks is to join pyramid schemes, which are promoted as an easy way of getting rich quick; they, too, have recently been highlighted by the Daily Record . Women who live in poverty can be particularly vulnerable to the promotion of such scams, which thrive on deceit and false promises. A recent rather scary scheme, which the Daily Record highlighted, was aimed at women. Why do people fall for such scams? People who live in poverty, just like people who do not live in poverty, have dreams. Their dreams might involve a nice house, a car, holidays, clothes and toys for  their children. Their dream might be just to escape from poverty and deprivation and from prejudice and discrimination. Such schemes prey on people's dreams and aspirations. Of course, not only loan sharks cause debt problems. Other kinds of money lending, such as hire purchase, doorstep lending and some debt-management company schemes penalise the poor. That has been mentioned and highlighted with examples from citizens advice bureaux. It is obvious that action needs to be taken to deal with the problems that are associated with such lending, although I understand that much of that is reserved to Westminster. As Trish Godman said, an alternative method of borrowing is supplied by credit unions, which provide affordable and manageable credit for many individuals and families. Like other members, I congratulate the credit unions and the volunteers who work for them on their commitment to the movement and to their local communities. At present, only a small number of the population are members of credit unions, but the Scottish Executive's recent welcome investment in credit unions should make a difference to that figure, by raising the profile of credit unions and encouraging more people to volunteer in their communities. I commend the Executive for its commitment to credit unions. A couple of weeks ago, during volunteers week, I visited Kirklands Credit Union Ltd in my constituency. I experienced at first hand the work that it does and the invaluable contribution that a credit union makes to its community. As Trish Godman implies in her motion, we should name and shame loan sharks, as the Daily Record does, and we should try to drive them out of the communities where they peddle their evil trade. As part of our commitment to fighting poverty and deprivation, we should also ensure that people know about alternative sources from which they can borrow money, if they must borrow money. Those sources provide realistic methods and times for repayment and do not lead to the fear and desperation that loan sharks create.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for Mary Scanlon to say that Glasgow City Council did not support the bill, when I have its minutes here, which outline what I said earlier on?

We are debating a co-sponsored member's bill that has cross-party support. The ownership of it and responsibility for its future now lie with every MSP. The proposal to provide universal free nutritious school meals has attracted immense support throughout civic Scotland and from the wider Labour and trade union movement. Just this week, it has been supported in a report by Dr David Player. Unfortunately, the lead committee failed to recommend that the bill proceed to stage 2. Some of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's conclusions are questionable, for a number of reasons. One is that the Health and Community Care Committee, which fed in evidence to the process, concluded in its report that it "would welcome a pilot scheme". However, the Education, Culture and Sport Committee did not take that up in its recommendations. Neither the Health and Community Care Committee nor the Education, Culture and Sport Committee took formal oral evidence from children and young people. I think that natural justice should dictate that the bill must proceed to stage 2 to ensure that our children are heard on an issue that directly affects their rights as individual, valued members of our society. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report also contains contradictions, although I do not have time to go into those. Of the witnesses who did not support the bill, two withdrew statements and one was supposedly representing Glasgow City Council. However, the council took a view on the matter only on 6 June. The council said that it was open to debate on the principle of free school meals. Its evidence could be crucial, given that it operates universal free breakfast clubs and the universal free provision of fruit. Unfortunately, if the bill is voted down today, the council will not be able to engage in the debate. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee stated that there was no consensus as to whether the general principles of the bill should be supported, so how on earth could it recommend against it? The arguments in favour of the bill are decisive. The arguments against are centred around resources and an underlying move away from the socialist principle of universality to the new terminology of "targeting", which is designed to disguise what it really is: means testing.  Even if members believe that means testing is fundamentally right, they are only benefiting the poorest of the poor. Universal benefits that have been introduced in the Parliament include free nursery places and free personal care for the elderly. Why is giving universal free nursery places to better-off families and free personal care to better-off pensioners—which is paid for from taxation—okay, whereas investing in the future health and well-being of children via universal free school meals is not? The universal provision of free school meals would take less than 1 per cent of the budget. We heard a statement today about the purchase of the Health Care International hospital, which is to be paid for out of end-year flexibility. I think that we can afford the bill. As a society, we should be collectively investing in our future, which is our children. I finish with a quote from Dr David Player. He stated: "We can afford to fund free school meals for every child. Millions of pounds could be saved every year by a healthier working population, which has benefited from healthy free school meals in the formative years. Universal benefits such as school meals for all are cost effective to administer. The cost in sickness and early death through bad diet is too high."

Prison sentences for fine default impact particularly on women and their children and are in effect a punishment for poverty. What measures is the Executive taking to reduce substantially the number of women who are received into, for example, Cornton Vale prison and to ensure that no one is imprisoned for fine default?

The Executive has set out another substantial programme for government, which builds on the achievements of the past three years. I welcome the proposals for protecting our children and for seriously tackling homelessness to ensure that a decent, secure home is a right for everyone. I also welcome the improvements for those who suffer from mental health problems and the commitment to improving educational provision for children with additional support needs. I welcome in particular the commitment to tackling the pervasiveness of pornography in our society, which, I believe, underpins gender discrimination. I congratulate the Executive on its continuing commitment to equal opportunities and on its mainstreaming policy, which ensures that equality is at the heart of the Scottish Parliament's policy making, legislation, budgets and delivery of service, as the First Minister highlighted in his statement.  Examples of the Executive's commitment to engaging with women and to tackling gender discrimination include the women in Scotland consultative forum, which is a twice-yearly focal point for consultation between the Scottish Executive and women's groups, and Engender women's budget group, which consists of a wide range of partners and is a member of the Scottish Executive's advisory group on equality and budgets. Some Executive policies that impact on women have already been introduced. They include the child care strategy, the domestic abuse prevention strategy, one-stop breast cancer clinics, the national information technology cervical screening programme, a commitment to rolling out Zero Tolerance's respect education programme across Scotland and better protection and dignity for victims of sexual crime. I am pleased by the Executive's commitment to ensure that equality remains at the heart of government and is developed through the mainstreaming strategy. Our equal opportunities mainstreaming policy is something that we should shout about. Too often, we fail to get across to people what the Parliament is achieving. We need to be positive about our achievements. I am also pleased that, here in Aberdeen, the Equal Opportunities Committee yesterday held a lunch and civic participation event on mainstreaming. The committee is currently undertaking a gender inquiry into best value in local government, the results of which, when they are published, I hope the Executive will welcome. However, everything in the garden is not rosy. Scotland is still the sick man—or woman—of Europe. There are still problems of poverty, homelessness and alienation among sections of Scottish society. The Executive must continue to prioritise the inclusion of all our people so that everyone feels that they have a contribution to make. People must feel that participating in society and exercising their democratic rights are worth while. Although I welcome the Executive's commitment to transforming local government, I point out that we still have a long way to go before we achieve gender equality in public service. In particular, we need to tackle the under-representation of women among councillors. Although the Executive has made huge inroads in overcoming years of underfunding of local government, there is still a need for better resourcing. If we really want equal opportunities to be mainstreamed at local government level as well as at national Government level, we must be willing to provide the extra resources that are required. I make a plea to the Executive and to the  Parliament to ensure that, before any of their contracts are decided on and awarded, those contracts include equality requirements. I hope that the Executive will encourage local authorities to do the same. Finally, I have a long wish list of bills that I would like the Scottish Parliament to pass. In particular, I want to see a bill to ensure that, no matter where she might be, a woman has the right to breast-feed her baby. That would tie in with the strategy to tackle child poverty and improve children's health as part of a whole package. Since the members' debate that I secured last year, I have been working on a proposal for a bill that would make it illegal for anyone to stop a woman breast-feeding her baby. If we are to take children's health and the rights of children and mothers seriously, we should support such a bill. I hope that the Executive will welcome my outline proposal just as I have welcomed the programme for government that the Executive has outlined today.

I would like to make a brief speech as vice-convener of the cross-party group on autistic spectrum disorder. I congratulate Lloyd Quinan on securing the debate, albeit at very short notice and rather unexpectedly. I also congratulate him on his commitment to the cross-party group. I recognise, as did Lloyd Quinan, the individuals and organisations who are members of the cross-party group. They faithfully come in some numbers from throughout Scotland to attend the group's meetings. It would be good if some more MSPs joined the group and came along to the meetings, given the commitment that has been shown by individuals and organisations. As the constituency member for Coatbridge and Chryston, my mailbag and my surgeries continue to include approaches from parents of children with ASD. As I have mentioned before, those approaches tend to focus on problems with service provision. It is fair to say that it is known that an increasing number of children are being recognised as having ASD, including Asperger's syndrome, but it is not known whether that is due to better diagnosis or an increase in the incidence of ASD. It is recognised that not enough is known about the causes of autism. Malcolm Chisholm acknowledged that when he responded to the report by the measles, mumps and rubella expert group last month. There is an urgent need for much more research on the causes of autism. Malcolm Chisholm recognised that, too. Perhaps Frank McAveety may want to update the chamber on what is happening to address that need, as Malcolm Chisholm acknowledged that it was an issue. When the diagnosis is made, many parents feel that they should be able to access assistance to understand the issues and challenges for them and their child and to access the appropriate services to allow their child to reach his or her full potential. However, as Lloyd Quinan said, assistance is not available for many parents, who report that after the diagnosis is made they are left feeling as if they are in a kind of vacuum and that they do not know where to turn next. They do not experience joined-up working and continuity between services. While they are coming to terms with the diagnosis, they are left wondering what the future will hold for their child and their family. Nursery and school provision are still major issues for many of my constituents. I will not go into the details of those issues, as I have done so in previous debates on this subject. The nature of  ASD means that each child's case is unique. Although some children will be able and will want to attend a mainstream school or nursery, others will thrive and develop their potential better at a school specifically designed for children with autism, such as Struan House. For more than 20 years, Struan House has provided excellent education and care for many of Scotland's children with autism. However, because of the increasing number of children who are diagnosed and because of the increasing number of parents who want to exercise their choice and have their child educated at a school such as Struan House, demand is exceeding supply. As Lloyd Quinan said, there is a proposal to establish a new Struan House, which would be not only a school, but a centre of excellence. Some funding support for that visionary project has been secured. I hope that the Scottish Executive will assist in ensuring that the dream of having such a centre in Scotland will become a reality in the near future. Although I am sure that the organisations that will receive assistance through the £500,000 of new investment that was announced last month by Malcolm Chisholm will welcome that money, the specific issue of training for service providers has still to be addressed—people such as teachers, health service staff, social services staff and educationists. In particular, we need to increase the number of psychiatrists who have a knowledge of and expertise in ASD. Services that are appropriate to specific needs also have to be provided, as one-size-fits-all approaches are not acceptable. I agree with Lloyd Quinan that there is a need for continuity and person-centred planning throughout a person's life. On a positive note, I am pleased by the attention the Executive is giving ASD. It has been pushed, in part, by the work of the cross-party group—that is what the cross-party group is for—but complacency is not an option. Today's debate will help to keep the issue firmly on the agenda and I again congratulate Lloyd Quinan on securing it.

I also congratulate Cathy Peattie on securing this evening's debate. I am a member of the Transport and General Workers Union and have declared that interest in the Register of Members' Interests, just to keep myself right. I want to concentrate on health and safety at work and how that impacts on women. In June 1888, Annie Besant, who became leader of the Matchgirls Union, heard a speech on female labour at a Fabian Society meeting in London. She was absolutely appalled to learn of the plight of women working at the Bryant & May match factory. The pay and conditions involved working a 14-hour day for a wage of less than 5 shillings a week. The workers did not even necessarily get their full wages because fines were levied by management for such heinous crimes as talking, dropping matches and daring to go to the toilet without permission. If the girls were late, they were fined half a day's pay. Annie Besant went along and interviewed some  of the women and discovered that their appalling working conditions had also affected their health. The use of yellow phosphorous caused yellowing of the skin, loss of hair and phossy jaw, a particularly horrible form of bone cancer. At that time, yellow phosphorous was banned in the United States and Sweden, but the British Government refused to ban it on the grounds that it would restrain free trade. Annie wrote an article entitled "White Slavery in London" in her newspaper, The Link , in which she said: "Born in slums, driven to work while still children, undersized because under-fed, oppressed because helpless, flung aside as soon as worked out, who cares if they die or go on to the streets provided only that Bryant & May shareholders get their 23 per cent and Mr. Theodore Bryant can erect statues and buy parks?" Strangely enough, that caused management to try to force their workers to sign a statement saying that all was well and that they were happy at work. A group of women refused, the organiser was sacked and that resulted in a strike by 1,400 women at Bryant & May and the subsequent formation of the Matchgirls Union. That month, The Times reported: "The pity is that the match girls have not been suffered to take their own course but have been egged on to strike by irresponsible advisors. No effort has been spared by those pests of the modern industrialised world to bring this quarrel to a head." Thank goodness for pests. Within a few weeks, the match girls won improvements in working conditions, and their example encouraged a new wave of unionisation of general and unskilled workers across the country. The match girls are an early example of unorganised workers becoming organised labour and thus winning improvements at work. I turn now to 21 st century Scotland. In many factories and call centres today, going to the toilet without first seeking permission is still a heinous crime, some workers in garages are fined out of their wages when people drive off without paying, conditions are unacceptable in many workplaces, particularly those that are not unionised, and substances hazardous to health are still used unsafely despite the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations. Repetitive strain injury, sexual harassment, bullying and stress are just some of the modern-day hazards that are particularly relevant to women. Safety for workers is not just about accidents. Sexual harassment can blight the lives of women at work and cause great distress. Bullying at work is becoming an increasingly prominent issue, which causes stress and illness and sometimes results in loss of employment.  I take this opportunity to commend the trade unions, which have historically been the champions of the workers in fighting to secure health and safety as a sensible approach to industrial relations. I say sensible, because a healthy, happy and well-trained work team will perform more effectively than a sick, stressed set of individuals. While we commemorate those who have died, have been injured or have suffered ill health as a result of work, we must also take steps to ensure that the incidence of work-related accidents and ill health is minimised in future. Health and safety at work must not just be paid lip service by employers, some of whom seem to care more about their profits than they do about people. Good health and safety practices must be an integral part of the culture of workplaces in 21 st century Scotland. I am pleased to associate myself with Cathy Peattie's motion.

I congratulate Fiona McLeod on securing the debate. I understand why it had to be put off the last time.  Like most other MSPs in the chamber, I meet children from schools in my constituency when they come to the Scottish Parliament. Last week, I was particularly pleased about a visit that was made to the Parliament by children from St Kevin's Primary School in Bargeddie. They were the first children from a primary school who have visited me at the Parliament. Tomorrow, I will meet a group from St Ambrose High School in Coatbridge. The problem with the visits of those two groups is that I have had to arrange them. That is because, until the end of the year, the Parliament's education service is oversubscribed. I will return later to that problem. The children and the young people who visit the Parliament seem to enjoy their visits. They have loads of questions about how the Parliament works, what I do as an MSP and how much everything costs. When they are asked for suggestions, they always have ideas about the issues that they would like to see the Parliament address and prioritise. The children from St Kevin's wanted play parks to be made a priority issue. That is interesting, because play parks was one of the issues that I raised a couple of years ago when I secured a debate on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. The children from St Kevin's thought that universal free school meals was an incredibly good idea. It is worth listening to what children have to say. It is excellent that so many children and young people visit the Parliament. It is important that all children, from babies right through to teenagers, should be made welcome when they do so. I want to make that point strongly. Their visits should be a positive experience. It was excellent to see well-behaved babies in the Parliament during the debate on breast-feeding last year. A welcoming atmosphere may help to influence positively young peoples' views of politics and politicians. I suspect that, when those young people are adults, it will make them keener to participate in the political process. Benjamin Disraeli said: "The Youth of a Nation are the Trustees of Posterity". It is important for children and young people to feel that they belong. They should feel that they are part of a family, a community and of society. They should feel that their individual participation in the democratic process is not simply their right, but their responsibility. We live in a democracy, but one in which unfortunately a large number of people, who feel alienated from society for whatever reason, do not participate. That issue is of particular importance when it comes to national and local elections. This week, we have seen the dangers of alienation in what happened in France.  Parents, relatives, friends and teachers are all an influence in the development of a child's sense of morality and responsibility. That is of particular importance in the interaction between older people and young people. The gradual demise of the extended family has affected that interaction. It has resulted in little opportunity for children and young people to meet and have positive relationships with adults other than their parents and teachers, which can result in alienation between the generations. Worryingly, it can also mean that older people fear and distrust young people to the extent that they sometimes do not want to leave their homes. There is an excellent project in Coatbridge in which young and older people meet to address that problem and build mutual respect. I do not have time to go into that project in detail. It is important that young people feel part of society and have a sense of ownership and responsibility, not only for themselves but for the whole of society. Children and young people must feel included in democratic structures and be confident that their individual contribution matters. I mentioned the education service. Perhaps we should ask the service to do some outreach work to our schools. We should also consider funding schools and children to come to the Parliament. One of the most important points that Fiona McLeod made was that we have to listen to young people, and I very much support her proposal to hold a children and young people's summit.

Has any consideration been given to exploring the idea of state-run hotels, along the lines of the Spanish paradors? That would allow itineraries to include non-traditional tourist facilities such as the excellent Summerlee heritage park in Coatbridge where can be found, among other things, the only working trams in Scotland.

I want to pursue the issue of repairs and maintenance. The problems of people who have used the right to buy were mentioned—specifically by Cathie Craigie. I would like the minister to comment on tenants who experience problems because of those who have exercised the right to buy. I note the key conclusion on page 34 of the report, which states: "The main distinctive features of the right to buy situation are that owners can in some cases frustrate repair and improvement programmes intended for the benefit of tenants of social landlords." Such problems, along with issues such as the ones with which I am dealing in my constituency about maintenance of common landscaping areas, can cause friction in communities. I trust that the next report will include recommendations to help to address such problems. I would be grateful if the minister would comment on that particular point.

There is now a perception that the world is a more dangerous place than at any time since the Cuban crisis of the 1960s. As we have heard, we face the unpredictability of post-September 11, with terrorists using hitherto unbelievable weapons against civilians. As ever, the minnows of the terrorist world leap on to the bandwagon of fear. We have also heard that, in Scotland, caustic substances were sent to some of our MSP colleagues and staff, and threatening e-mails were sent to some members. That despicable behaviour means that we all have to be more vigilant. The need for updated civil contingency planning has now reached a new high, not only as the result of potential terrorist outrages. Global warming might change weather patterns to an extent that we can only guess at. As others have mentioned, flood warnings, which were formerly comparatively rare, are now commonplace. Places in Scotland that never suffered floods are now looking to the authorities to make sandbags readily available. In Coatbridge, there have been increasingly disruptive incidents of flooding. So far, the emergency services have responded well to whatever crisis has arisen. National major emergencies are handled through the Scottish Executive emergencies room—SEER—in Edinburgh. Depending upon the scale of the situation affecting Scotland, Executive ministers meet under the chairmanship of the First Minister. Although SEER is regularly open for planning exercises—obviously with new concerns since September 11—the facility was last used in earnest for handling the fuel crisis in September 2000. Before that, it was used in the anticipation—happily unrealised—of problems arising from the 2000 date change, or the millennium bug. It is a nice touch of irony that "Scottish Executive emergencies room" produces the acronym  "SEER", because it is never possible to foretell and plan in detail for every contingency. What can be done is to consider known potential dangers and plan for the possible effects of different scenarios. The causes of any given event can be investigated at a later stage, but the priority must be to tackle a situation as it arises, in line with earlier contingency planning. There is a linked structure of emergency planners throughout the UK: from the London Cabinet Office civil contingency secretariat down to the emergency planning officers of each of Scotland's local authorities. North Lanarkshire Council has an emergency planning unit, with two dedicated staff. The unit takes its duties seriously, and continuously tests and evaluates its methods and practices in consultation with all partners. Training and exercise events covering a range of scenarios and issues are tackled all year round. The council tells me that each year it responds to approximately a dozen incidents that require a co-ordinated and integrated approach. I take the opportunity to congratulate North Lanarkshire Council on the work that it does in contingency planning. Throughout Scotland, planning sessions entail liaison with police, fire and health authorities, as well as, on occasion, water boards, the nuclear and chemical industries, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, the power and gas industries, the telecommunications industry, railway companies and the military. They might also entail co-ordination with major local industries, most of which have disaster recovery plans. We can be satisfied that such an approach is taken by all emergency planning authorities in Scotland, whether the event is a nuclear accident, a terrorist attack or a local flooding problem. Since spring of last year, at the request of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, funding for civil defence expenditure, although it has been maintained at £2.7 million, has been mainstreamed into the general grant arrangements for local government. Local authorities can decide how that allocation is spent and use it to provide emergency planning resources that are in excess of the previous grant provided under regulations. I hope that that level of expenditure will continue and perhaps increase, and I would welcome the minister's comments on that. As a general precept, "be prepared" has much to recommend it. I am sure that everyone who has some responsibility for the safety and well-being of the people of Scotland appreciates the continuing work and would take the opportunity to congratulate the people who are specifically charged with planning for and coping with the unthinkable.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to take into account the opinions of pupils, parents, teachers and employers in developing future education policy. (S1O-4933)

I thank the minister for her response. It shows that the Parliament has at its heart real engagement with the people of Scotland and, in particular, with our children and young people. Will the minister reassure concerned parents in my constituency who want to educate their children in Catholic schools that they will be able to continue to choose to do so?

On the eve of world day for water, which has the pertinent theme of water and health, will the minister join me in congratulating North Lanarkshire Council and the south Coatbridge social inclusion partnership on initiating pilot schemes in four Coatbridge primary schools to provide free accessible drinking water to pupils? Could the minister comment on that kind of provision for all Scotland's schoolchildren, given the obvious benefits to health and well-being?

Like others, I congratulate Ken Macintosh on securing the debate. In Scotland, 1999 was a year of celebration with the establishment of our Parliament. It was a year of new hopes and aspirations for Scotland's future. However, for one family in my constituency, it was a year of grief and tragedy: 1999 was the year that Marie and James McGivern lost their daughter, Donna Marie, who was one of the youngest victims of variant CJD. The family want me to mention Donna Marie and some of their experiences in the debate. Before she became ill, Donna Marie was a bright, caring young girl who loved music. She had won a number of medals for athletics and for Irish dancing. In the summer of 1996, at the age of just 14, Donna Marie began to experience health problems. She complained first of double vision, followed a few months later by pains in her legs and headaches. Her family also noticed that she seemed to be undergoing a personality change, with, for example, uncharacteristic violent  outbursts. As Donna Marie's health deteriorated, her parents gave up their jobs and dedicated their time to caring for her. Looking after a young person whose condition will not improve, but will in fact deteriorate, is heartbreaking for any parent. It is also physically and emotionally straining on carers. It is crucial that support services exist to help people in such circumstances. The BSE inquiry noted that standards of care and support for sufferers of CJD and their carers varied widely and that improvements were needed in diagnosis and in advice and assistance for carers, including a co-ordinated care package. In the hope of responding more quickly to the needs of people with CJD, the Government provided a much welcomed sum of money to help improve care. I understand that that package is accessed via the national care co-ordinator for CJD and health authorities, but much more emphasis needs to be placed on partnership working and opening up the channels of communication between the health service, social services and the CJD care package. I hope that the Government's measures prevent anyone else having to go through the frustration experienced by the McGivern family when, for example, they tried to access a wheelchair for Donna Marie. They went to their general practitioner, who told them that there was a waiting list, which they could join. The Red Cross supplied a wheelchair but, unfortunately, it was too small. A local special-needs school then gave Donna Marie a wheelchair, but it fell apart because it was simply not suitable for anyone suffering from sporadic limb movements. Eventually, a suitable wheelchair was found, but by that time Donna Marie was far too ill to use it. CJD is a devastating disease, not only for those who suffer from it but for their relatives and carers. Research into its cause, diagnosis and treatment goes on, but people continue to suffer from it, as we have heard from other members. According to an article in the "British Medical Journal" of September last year, the rate of contracting variant CJD has been found to be twice as high in Scotland and the north of England as elsewhere in Britain. It is vital that a high quality of care is provided for all the people who are affected by this fatal and debilitating disease so that some of the burden placed on their families and carers can be relieved. A co-ordinated care package is fundamental to ensuring that other families do not have to go through the experiences of my constituents, the McGivern family. I am very pleased to associate myself with Ken Macintosh's motion.

Does the minister agree that tackling youth crime is not only about the justice system? It should also be about working with young people in our communities to help them to understand their  rights and responsibilities as citizens as well as providing them with the opportunities to realise their potential. A lot of the funding that the minister mentioned goes to local authorities. How can local authorities best use the funding from the Executive to assist in achieving those aims?

Having worked as a homeless persons' officer and, indeed, for Women's Aid, I have been a long-term advocate of the removal of the priority need category, so I am pleased to see that the report recommends that. However, I am particularly concerned about women who are not in priority need and who are fleeing domestic abuse. Paragraph 26 of the task force's report says: "Women suffering, or in fear of, violence may be vulnerable even if they have no children." Will the minister highlight that vulnerability to local authorities to ensure that they do not simply dismiss such women as not being in priority need and therefore fail to assist them?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Do not the standing orders provide that the Presiding Officer selects the questions to the First Minister's whereas questions to other ministers go  into the system and there is a lucky draw?

I congratulate Johann Lamont on securing the debate. I will take the opportunity to do some advertising. As the gender reporter to the Equal Opportunities Committee, I draw attention to the gender reporter bound volume, which was produced at the tail end of last year and which contains the work that the gender reporter has done since the Parliament began. Johann Lamont was the first gender reporter and I became the reporter after she left the committee. The report is online, which might be useful, given the online coverage of the debate. I would be grateful for feedback on the report from interested parties. I will concentrate on violence against women and children in its widest sense. The Executive has taken domestic abuse seriously and has made increased resources available to tackle the issues that surround it, particularly on refuge provision. The Executive is attempting to raise awareness on the unacceptability of domestic abuse in modern  Scotland and to change attitudes to ensure that blame lies with perpetrators and not in any way with victims. I commend the publicity campaigns that have been undertaken, such as the "Behind Closed Doors" television advert, and the national helpline. I commend the Executive's work overall, but a more comprehensive view of the continuation of male violence against women and children, rather than a piecemeal approach that focuses on domestic violence in isolation is long overdue. We could also consider that in terms of structural inequality in society. According to the Executive's study "Men and Women in Scotland: A Statistical Profile" from last year, women are still disadvantaged in many areas of their lives. Johann Lamont and Pauline McNeill touched on that. Men earn more, have better jobs with more chance of promotion and do less housework. That is despite the facts that girls are doing better than boys at school and that more girls are going to university. Perhaps the minister will comment on this year's publication "Social Focus on Women and Men in Scotland", which is to be published on 15 March. The Executive's evidence is backed by research that has been conducted by the Equal Opportunities Commission that shows that most women in full-time jobs earn only about 82 per cent of the salary that is paid to a man doing the same or similar work. Women's income from pensions, benefits and investments is just half that of men. As members have said, women are still greatly under-represented in politics and business and in the higher echelons of law, education, trade unions and public bodies. I commend the Scottish Women's Co-ordination Group on relaunching the 50/50 campaign for gender equality in decision-making bodies. That group's leaflet "Equal Voices Equal Scotland" says: "The Scottish Parliament is a world leader in respect of the proportion of women members, but there is a need to maintain and improve upon its record. The passage of the Sex Discrimination (Election of Candidates) Act gives the opportunity for positive measures to be taken to maintain and improve Scotland's record. International evidence suggests significant progress is unlikely to be achieved without positive action measures." The message is that complacency is dangerous. I believe that social, cultural and political structural inequality serves to offer privilege to men over women. That, in turn, creates conditions for violence. The continuation of male violence against women and children includes domestic abuse, rape, sexual assault, child sexual abuse, sexual harassment, prostitution and pornography. It is premised on women's inequality and  subordination in society. The harm that is caused by some forms of male violence has been recognised and attempts have been made to tackle it. Other forms, such as prostitution and pornography, have not been addressed and they seem to be somehow more publicly accepted. Next Tuesday, the Public Petitions Committee will consider a petition from Scottish Women Against Pornography. I had a lot more to say, but I see that the Presiding Officer is having a wee squint at me. I will finish by saying that male violence against women is a widespread manifestation of gender discrimination, which I argue is the most prevalent and the most insidious form of discrimination in our society. I have no doubt about the Executive's commitment to tackling the issue and I am sure that Margaret Curran will reply to the points that have been raised in the debate. We must recognise and tackle women's under-representation in public life. Women's rights are human rights and it is that context that they must be demanded. Women will not achieve equality and we cannot effectively tackle gender discrimination while we continue to accept a society within which women are systematically undermined by the pervasiveness of all forms of male violence. I am happy to associate myself with Johann Lamont's motion.

I join others in congratulating Dorothy-Grace Elder on securing the debate on this important subject. I know that she has been trying for some time to have the plight of chronic pain patients debated in the chamber. The most common type of severe pain, which is experienced by nearly everyone at some time, is toothache, which is "the hell o' a' diseases". Strong painkillers might alleviate the suffering, but as the effects wear off, the pain returns. We should imagine suffering that pain every day with no prospect of relief. In Scotland, as we have heard, about 550,000 people experience long-term pain. John McAllion described it as a hidden epidemic. Chronic pain can result in job loss, family relationship breakdown, despair and even suicide. In terms of numbers, chronic pain is one of the country's biggest health and social welfare issues, but it tends to be seen as a symptom rather than a condition. That point must be made this evening. As we have heard, there is considerable variation in the health service in the provision of services for the treatment and management of chronic pain. For example, many general practitioners are unaware of the existence of chronic pain services in some of our hospitals. Many health professionals are committed to the principle of effective pain management and treatment, but some medical practitioners do not provide patients with information on the varied range of medication and other treatments, such as alternative therapies and hydrotherapy, which was  mentioned by Dorothy-Grace Elder; nor do they give information on self-help or support groups. In my area, there was until recently a Monklands group of Pain Association Scotland, but unfortunately the group has temporarily disbanded, primarily as a result of accommodation problems. The individuals involved are still members of Pain Association Scotland, and I hope that the group will soon be operational again. Monklands hospital has kindly offered to make a room available, but we are having access difficulties for those people who have mobility problems, which we have to overcome. There is no doubt that more funding and better support mechanisms are needed for such groups and other voluntary organisations that work in this field. We should recognise and congratulate people such as my constituent Joan Woods, who is with us in the gallery this evening, who suffer themselves but who are motivated to help others by undertaking invaluable voluntary work in their communities. It should be remembered that children also suffer from chronic pain, and their families can experience the social and emotional consequences of their child's suffering. Pain in childhood, if untreated, can develop into adult chronic pain. The American Pain Society suggests that education of the public would increase community awareness of, and encourage support for, children who are suffering from chronic pain, alongside helping to influence public policy. The society recommends that chronic pain in children should be highlighted in the media. The Executive has funded for one year a children's pain clinic at the Royal hospital for sick children at Yorkhill, with on-going funding to be provided by the national health service. However, will the minister comment on the possibility of establishing a Scottish child pain centre, which could network with communities throughout Scotland? Public awareness is vital in pushing the issue of chronic pain up the health agenda. The use of the media is logical in raising awareness about all chronic pain sufferers. Pain management and appropriate and effective prescribing could help to reduce the prescription bill; that point has not been touched on this evening so far. For example, in Lanarkshire in 1999-2000, about £7.3 million was spent on analgesics. The minister might wish to comment on the possibility of having a high-profile awareness-raising media campaign, similar to other campaigns that have been run by the Scottish Executive. She may also wish to consider organising a citizens jury on this matter. Chronic pain is a hidden epidemic, so let us expose it. Let the public know of its prevalence.  Let them see those who until now have suffered in silence, and let them know the cost of this condition in monetary and human terms. Chronic pain should be a high-priority area for the Scottish Executive and the health service. I am pleased to associate myself with Dorothy-Grace Elder's motion this evening.

I want to make a brief point that I would have made had the Minister for Environment and Rural Development felt inclined to accept my intervention during his speech. The bill's policy memorandum, under the heading "Equal opportunities", states: "The provisions in this Bill have no implications for equal opportunities. They do not inherently provide for discriminatory effects on the basis of gender, race, disability, marital status, religion or sexual orientation." That may be true for the bill, but I want to make a point about the process. Having been through local government reorganisation, as a member of staff and as a union representative, I think that it is important to recognise that, during any transfer of staff, the principles of equal opportunities are vital and have to be adhered to. I ask the minister to comment on whether an equal opportunities policy will be in place prior to any transfer, because that was a problem at the time of local government reorganisation.

rose—

The words "or a dog" are not so much a loophole as an outer-space black hole that would send this bill up into orbit and, indeed, into oblivion. When the Rural Development Committee debated these issues, Mike Watson warned the committee about the impact of the proposed amendments. It will be obvious to anyone who reads the transcripts of those debates that the committee was voting to allow loopholes. The insertion of the words "or a dog" in this section is one of several ways in which I believe that the committee's amendments to the bill would permit hunting. When the issues were debated, the loophole was clear. Mike Watson warned the committee, Rhoda Grant warned the committee and I warned the committee. I said that Fergus Ewing's amendment, to introduce this loophole, should not have been on the marshalled list in the first place. I took the view—and it certainly seems to have been confirmed—that amendment 53K would allow foxes to be flushed out and killed by dogs. At this point, it was obvious to Mike Watson, to Rhoda Grant and to me that it was a loophole. So why did the loophole not reveal itself to Alex Fergusson, the Rural Development Committee's convener, until his recent interview with The Daily Telegraph ? Unfortunately, five members of the committee were so determined to allow this activity that our warnings came to nothing. The committee was tasked with upholding the democratic decision of Parliament at stage 1 and with working with Mike Watson to include helpful amendments to allow the bill to proceed. The stage 2 amendment to include the words "or a dog" was unhelpful to say the least. In my view, it tried to wreck the aims and principles of the bill, despite what Fergus Ewing says. I urge the Parliament to support amendment 41. It is vital to do so. We must remove a glaring loophole that should never have been allowed.

Will the member give way?

To say that the issue of the innocent dog walker has been overplayed would be an understatement. The issue has been spun in the press and to the Parliament, but the fact is that innocent dog walkers have never been under threat from the bill. I was a member of the Rural Development Committee during the entire debate on dog walking and I heard some bizarre scenarios being suggested. The committee was advised by Rhona Brankin, who was representing the Executive, that if a dog killed a mammal while being walked, "the Crown would have to prove that the dog was being used to hunt a wild mammal." Mike Rumbles asked: "Is the minister confirming that anyone who was out walking their dog and whose animal went off and hunted while it was out being walked could face prosecution?" Rhona Brankin replied: "In our view, it could not. That would be our advice."—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee , 20 November 2001; c 2434-35.] To make things even clearer, the bill contains the phrase "deliberately hunts". That allows for accidental killing. Moreover, an amendment was passed to insert section 1A(1B) into the bill, which makes it crystal clear that, if the intention is to flush from cover with a dog and the dog accidentally kills the mammal, the dog handler is not liable for prosecution. Amendment 4 adds nothing to the bill except a loophole. It would allow coursing in the name of exercising dogs. The amendment is totally unacceptable and I urge the Parliament to reject it.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve the provision of out-of-school care. (S1O-4643)

An increasing number of parents now take up—or want to take up—employment opportunities provided by breakfast clubs and after-school clubs, such as those in the excellent Coatbridge community education centre, which is run by North Lanarkshire Council and is one of three such clubs in my constituency. Does the minister agree that such clubs are extremely important in that respect? What are the possibilities of using new opportunities funding to help to expand out-of-school provision, particularly breakfast clubs?

It is clear that most members in the chamber, along with more than 70 per cent of the Scottish electorate, want a ban on fur farming in this country. Most of the evidence that the Rural Development Committee received supported the prohibition of fur farming.

As usual, the Tories try to muddy the waters. Today, we are talking about fur farming. Polls consistently show that 76 per cent of the population say that they want a ban on fur farming. As far as we can tell, there does not seem to be any fur farming activity in Scotland. That is a fair point to make. However, there are three main reasons why the bill is important—it is not only the moral argument. First, the bill closes the loophole in the UK's overall position on fur farming. Secondly, the bill helps to safeguard the environment. Thirdly, the bill is grounded in the moral objection against the raising and killing of animals to meet the fickle needs of fashion and garment industries. In England and Wales, the Labour party's manifesto commitment to end fur farming has been met by the passage through both Houses of Parliament of the required legislation which, I believe, takes effect from 1 January 2003. As has been explained, we know of no fur farms in Scotland, but those who are engaged in the  activity south of the border must be tempted to consider moving to Scotland to continue their activities. The bill will prevent that happening and will bring us into line not only with legislation in England and Wales but with similar legislation in Germany, Austria, the Netherlands and Sweden. Let me return to the point that Ben Wallace made to Rhoda Grant. During our committee deliberations, I asked Robert Morgan of the Fur Trade Association about the impact that a ban would have on his members. He said: "If the Parliament continues to allow fur farming in Scotland, it is possible that you could re-establish fur farming in Scotland. That is our interest."—[ Official Report , Rural Development Committee, 27 November 2001; c 2472.] That answers Ben Wallace's question. Environmental aspects are addressed by the proposed prohibition. In the Western Isles, escaped mink have caused havoc among the local fauna and extreme efforts have been made to exterminate them. In the south of England, where misguided animal liberation activists have intentionally and illegally freed captive mink, the predators have decimated local wildlife. I do not condone that activity but, if the farms from which the mink were freed were not there, the mink would not be roaming about. I will quote from SNH: "As introduced species are one of the most serious threats to biodiversity worldwide, SNH could not endorse the keeping of large concentrations of such non-native species for commercial purposes." RSPB Scotland says: "In the experience of RSPB Scotland, mink have regularly escaped from fur farms in the past, and have then become a considerable problem once in the wild, where they predate on biodiversity which has not evolved to deal with this alien predator. In the light of this experience, RSPB Scotland welcomes measures to prohibit the keeping of mink at fur farms in Scotland." Finally, I turn to the moral ground. Animals farmed for their fur are seldom raised in the lap of luxury. They are kept confined in small cages. According to the SSPCA, it is unlikely that, over the 80 years during which mink have been farmed, they have adapted to the restrictions on their normal, far-ranging natural lifestyle. The same can be said of foxes. The SSPCA says: "In evidence to the Rural Development Committee, the British Fur Trade Association suggested that good physical condition (or at least sufficiently good condition to produce a saleable pelt) was an indicator of good welfare. However, many animals are productive despite living in farm conditions that are inimical to their welfare, battery hens being a prime example." Their confinement has been observed to produce  many cases of self-mutilation and killing of young. The slaughter of animals, which is usually by gas or electrocution, is done in such as way as frequently to cause unnecessary distress. I could again quote the SSPCA. No, I could not, Presiding Officer, because I seem to have lost that particular quote. I am trying to pad this out a bit and I have notes all over the place. I apologise for that. However, the SSPCA describes the way that animals are killed so that the pelts are saleable. We are not talking about the raising and slaughtering of food animals, where the benefits outweigh the problem of the need to kill. Primarily, fur farming provides the raw materials, literally, for the fashion and garment industries. At the Rural Development Committee, pictures of minced mink on a plate were passed round, to make the point that it might become part of our staple diet. However, at the committee, I asked Mark Glover: "How do you feel about the suggestion that was made earlier about eating mink? Will that happen in Britain?" His answer was: "No. In the 15 or so years that I have been involved in this issue, I have seen some publicity attempts by the fur trade, but that one takes the biscuit—although that is probably the wrong thing to say.—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee, 27 November 2001; c 2470-71.] I really do not think that it will catch on in Britain. No one will lose financially because of this bill. A compensation clause will not be needed as the industry does not exist in Scotland at the moment. As far as we know, the British Fur Trade Association has only one member in Scotland. A representative of the association was invited to the Rural Development Committee and I asked him how many members there were. He said that there were 45 in Britain, but when pushed, Robert Morgan said: "I think that there is one member in Scotland. I cannot think of any more than that. Our members are not fur farmers, they are fur traders and retailers."—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee, 27 November 2001; c 2471.] There will not be a huge financial loss to anyone as a result of this bill. The bill is necessary. The prohibition makes perfect sense. It will close the loophole created by Westminster legislation whereby fur farms could relocate to Scotland. That is a real possibility. The prohibition is based on the moral objection to the keeping or breeding of animals to exploit them solely or primarily for the value of their fur. As I have said, polls across the UK have shown that 76 per cent of the British population agree with a ban on fur farming. Escaped mink can cause considerable damage to indigenous wildlife, so the prohibition of fur farming is likely to have environmental benefits. Lastly, but perhaps most  important, this bill fulfils a Labour pledge in the 1997 manifesto to ban fur farming. It is another example of Labour delivering on Labour's promises.

Does the member agree that one of the reasons for passing the bill is to close a loophole that might allow the activity to take place in Scotland in the future?

I congratulate Ken Macintosh on securing tonight's debate. I particularly support the motion, because I am the vice-convener of the cross-party group on autistic spectrum disorder. By the way, that group has a huge attendance at meetings. It has the biggest attendance that I have seen at a cross-party group, with representatives of many agencies and voluntary organisations as well as individuals. It is worth saying that at the outset. As the constituency MSP for Coatbridge and Chryston, I continue to be approached by concerned parents who ask for advice and assistance with difficulties and challenges that they experience around ASD. Those approaches bring specific issues to my attention. The issues that are raised include the triple vaccine, which Lloyd Quinan mentioned, as well as problems about diagnosis, education and the criminal justice system. The main common issues are the lack of adequate support provision and the need for professionals from different agencies to work together. It sometimes seems that professionals lack knowledge and understanding of ASD and appear unable to work together effectively to support children, adults or carers. We know that it is essential that an early and accurate diagnosis is made if children are to be given the right support and education to achieve their full potential. The current provision is not adequate in that regard. Ken Macintosh's motion says that the Parliament "recognises the everyday challenges faced by children and adults on the autistic spectrum, and their families, in gaining appropriate support from the statutory services". Today, I want to consider educational provision for young children. I am concerned that a number of parents have had to ask me, as their MSP, to intervene with their local authority to try to secure educational provision that they think is appropriate for their children. Last year, I spoke about the matter in the members' business debate that Lloyd Quinan secured, but I will make no apology for doing so again because I am still approached about the subject. We refer to the disorder as autistic spectrum disorder. There are many different elements and complexities in that spectrum. It follows that each child's case is unique and each child must be treated as an individual. There may be excellent  schools that suit the majority of children with ASD, but that does not mean that those schools meet the educational needs of every child with ASD. We must take into consideration the distress of parents who know their children's capabilities and needs, but are unsuccessful in persuading their local education authorities that their children should be allowed to attend the school of their choice. Parents whose request for a particular school has been turned down have a right of appeal, but that can be a long and daunting process and can result in costly legal proceedings. Recently, after a long battle that included a court case, a family in my constituency eventually got to send their child to a school of their choice. I saw the distress and upset that the family experienced as a result of the process and I do not want anyone else to go through it. Eighteen months ago, I asked the Scottish Executive to agree that the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill should set the tone for parents—specifically those who have children with special educational needs—to have a greater say in educational provision for their children. I also said that there should an end to parents' feeling that they have no alternative other than to take legal action against their local authority so that their child can be educated at the school of their choice. One of the recommendations in the Scottish Executive's document, "The same as you?" was that "The Scottish Society for Autism by working with the National Autistic Society and health boards and local authorities should develop a national network for people with autistic spectrum disorder." I am happy that those two societies are co-ordinating the establishment of that network. That should help to improve the awareness and understanding of the needs of people with ASD and will help to provide access to specialist knowledge. The Deputy Presiding Officer is tapping, so I will finish. Ken Macintosh said that the initial service mapping exercise is nearing completion, but I understand that it is complete. I would pleased if the minister would confirm that it is complete and if he would comment on the success and monitoring of the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000, with special regard to ASD. I am delighted that a debate on the motion has been secured. With the members' business debate that Lloyd Quinan secured last year, it will help to raise the profile of the issues and help the public to understand them better.

I wonder whether the member agrees with the point that I made earlier that mobile library provision to Gypsy Traveller sites is important and should be explored by far more local authorities than are currently exploring it.

Does Michael McMahon agree that much more training must be done on site management? Does he also agree that we should not necessarily assume that the best site managers are those with a housing background and that people from many different backgrounds could be better placed to be site managers?

I join Kate MacLean in thanking the clerks, Delia Lomax, everyone who gave evidence to the committee and Michael McMahon, who originally raised the issue in his role as race reporter. During the inquiry, the committee took a great deal of evidence on the many issues that impact on Gypsy Travellers in Scotland across many services. One of the most important and fundamental facts to be established was the current status of Gypsy Travellers as an ethnic group. In response to a question of mine, the then Minister for Social Justice, Jackie Baillie, confirmed that a change in law was not necessary to establish that status but that a test case would be required to determine the issue. Nadia Foy, a young Gypsy Traveller who gave evidence to the committee, highlighted the importance of that when she said: "To start any kind of change, we need to be classed as an ethnic minority group. We need to have rights and stature." —[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 1 May 2001; c 1202.] Recommendation 2 of the committee's report says: "All legislation and policies should be framed on the understanding that Gypsy Travellers have distinct ethnic characteristics and should therefore be regarded as an ethnic group, until such time as a court decision is made on recognition as a racial group under the Race Relations Act 1976." That is, to my mind, the most important recommendation in the report—the rest of the report flows from that premise. I agree with the remarks that Kate MacLean made on that issue at the beginning of the debate. The inquiry proved that Gypsy Travellers are subject to endemic institutional racism. We heard many appalling and heart-rending examples of that, which, to be frank, I could not have begun to imagine existed. Again, the words of another of the young people who gave evidence, Sharon McPhee, sum up the situation. She said: "We are not animals; we are people."—[ Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee , 1 May 2001; c 1189.] Members of the Equal Opportunities Committee agreed that we would each consider different aspects of the report today. I could happily have addressed any of the issues on which we took  evidence. However, I will focus on education for Gypsy Traveller children. The current arrangements are clearly failing. Only 20 per cent of those children receive secondary school education, according to the recent report by Save the Children, to which Kate MacLean referred. That figure is totally unacceptable. It contravenes a number of international frameworks, including the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Equal Opportunities Committee's report makes a number of recommendations to tackle the problem. It addresses a number of issues, including pre-school education, transport, the relevance of the curriculum and alternative provision to school-based education. It also addresses adult education and lifelong learning. We need to ensure that, as far as possible, Gypsy Traveller children are offered an education that is compatible with their culture and ethnicity. That does not have to be any one kind of education, to refer back to Kenny Gibson's remarks. Different choices and different ways of delivering can be provided in different circumstances. What is for sure is that the authorities must remove barriers to ensure that a learning environment is provided that addresses the needs of those children and allows them to reach their full potential. If we look at the evidence, we can see that bullying is rife. From the evidence, we know that, when a child who has been physically attacked fights back in self-defence, the authority figure often blames them for the troublemaking rather than addressing and stopping the bullying. We have also heard of incidents in which the teaching that is given to Gypsy Traveller children consists of getting them to sit quietly at the back of the class with a comic or segregating them into a different room. I make no apology for quoting Sharon McPhee, one of the young people from whom we heard, as it is important that we hear the young people's words. She said: "The children are treated like idiots. I would like that to change. I would like to see bullying of Traveller children at school stop. I would like a better response from teachers. They should be trained to deal with Traveller children; they are not."—[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 1 May 2001; c 1186.]

I thank Winnie Ewing for her intervention; I agree with what she said. Members will see from the evidence that we took that some of the young people have been going around schools and talking about their experiences. Perhaps we need a bit more of that in our schools. I see the Minister for Education and Young People nodding, which is a good sign. There is an argument that a degree of self-exclusion exists among Gypsy Traveller families. Kenny Gibson touched on that to some extent. It is a complex issue and I do not have time to explore it fully, but it seems perfectly understandable for a parent to be reluctant to send their children to school if they or their other children were bullied and traumatised at school. If my child had had experiences such as those in the examples that the committee heard, I would not wish to send him into such an environment. Given that he is not a Gypsy Traveller, he will not face that kind of discrimination. I return to Sharon McPhee's words, which sum up the issue. She said: "People treat us perfectly and everything is great until they find out that we are Travellers, when their attitude changes completely, and we become rubbish."—[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 1 May 2001; c 1190.] The Equal Opportunities Committee set out at length straightforward proposals to tackle the problems that I have mentioned, so it was disappointing to read the Executive's response on many of the issues, particularly education. The Save the Children submission said that much of the Executive's response can be summarised as either, "It is a matter for local authorities, to be addressed at local level", or, "The issue raised is/will be covered by this or that policy." Nearly all the submissions to the committee on nearly all the issues of service provision—including education—spoke about the need for national co-ordination to iron out the discrepancies between local authorities and to ensure consistency of good standards wherever Gypsy Travellers are staying. The Executive seems to have ignored those proposals. I contend that that paternalistic attitude could be viewed as an example of institutional racism. To provide an education that fits the needs and aspirations of the children of Gypsy Travellers, we need input and action from the people and representatives of the Gypsy Traveller community and from the settled community and we need interaction between the two communities. It will not be acceptable to either grouping to agree with the Executive's view that everything is covered by existing or planned provision or is up to local authorities or other bodies. The Executive can address some issues. This  morning, I discovered an example of people on a Gypsy Traveller site who have asked for a mobile library to visit them. Most authorities have not considered providing that service. Inverness Library, however, thought that it was a way forward and is making great strides with it. Local authorities can make different provisions, but are they doing so? I do not think so. They need guidance on such issues. I say to the Executive that a better deal is needed, to use its own terms. The Equal Opportunities Committee's report can form the basis for that. I urge an Executive rethink and I look forward to the minister's response. I finish with the words of Nadia Foy: "We are looking for respect and for the same rights as anybody else."—[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 1 May 2001; c 1185.] Is that too much to ask for in a multicultural and supposedly tolerant Scotland that is striving to achieve social justice? I think not.

First, I ask the Parliament to welcome members of the Edinburgh branch of the United Nations Development Fund for Women—UNIFEM.

I thought that there was precedent for that, but I apologise.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to raise nutritional standards. (S1O-4205)

I thank the minister for his response and congratulate him on his appointment. Does he agree that it is important to promote good nutritional habits early through initiatives such as breakfast clubs? I do not expect him to agree that universal nutritional free school meals are the way forward, but does he agree that we cannot wait for the outcome of that debate before taking steps to tackle nutritional inequalities, especially as a clear link exists between health and educational achievement and therefore equality of opportunity? Will he supply the details of the recently announced breakfast  club initiative, which I hope will apply in Coatbridge and Chryston?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. [Interruption.]

Is it in order for you to allow two men to preface their questions with a welcome but to cut me off when I tried to welcome a women's group, which was particularly relevant during the 16 days of protest against violence against women?

I also congratulate Mary Mulligan and the Linlithgow Oxfam group. Although Oxfam's name is synonymous with addressing the issues of poverty in developing countries, its newest development programme is the UK poverty programme, which focuses on poverty at home. I want to consider that programme this evening. In 1999, the UN human development report ranked the UK as the third worst of 17 industrialised countries for its record on poverty and its combinations of high levels of poverty and inequality. Oxfam's programme and expertise can play a large part in the process of stamping out poverty in this country and can help with the Executive's aims and commitment in that regard. The UK poverty programme was set up in the mid-1990s and was established in Scotland in 1997. The programme is aimed at developing ways of working that empower people who face poverty to find solutions and change the policies that have created poverty. The aim in Scotland is to establish working relationships and partnerships with organisations that are interested in tapping into Oxfam's vast international experience. A key objective of the work is to introduce international development practice and perspectives into anti-poverty work in Scotland. I shall mention two areas of practice that are used overseas but not  often applied here. The first area of concern is what is called voice poverty, which is defined as the denial of people's rights to influence the decisions that affect their lives. The UK Coalition Against Poverty's commission on poverty, power and participation has identified many barriers to engaging in the decision-making process for people who are experiencing poverty. In addition to basic logistical barriers, those included a lack of respect for poor people, a lack of understanding of how participation should work and a lack of will to hand over any power for effective change. Oxfam's programme is working to increase the participation of people who are experiencing poverty in the decision-making processes that affect their lives, which is something that this inclusive people's Parliament should take a great interest in. It also has gender implications. The second area of concern is that of gender poverty. Women constitute the majority in the poorest groups in Scotland. They still constitute 70 per cent of low earners and when they work part-time they earn 30 to 40 per cent less than men who are in similar part-time jobs. I have other data on the situation, but I think that we have heard them before and we do not have time to hear them again. To be effective, anti-poverty initiatives must be grounded in a deeper understanding of gender differences, household relations and other cross-cutting elements of discrimination. The Oxfam programme is working to increase awareness and understanding of how poverty impacts differently on men and women. Although it is right to recognise and debate Oxfam's work abroad, and to congratulate the Linlithgow group, it is also right that we should recognise the work that is being done to tackle poverty in this country. Oxfam should be congratulated on that also.

rose—

The Transport and General Workers Union made a submission to the Executive, which I hope the minister will note and which I have in front of me. The submission was made on 20 August, so clearly it relates to the Executive's forward strategy for agriculture. In its submission the union states: "Those working in the industry must have their voice heard, as it will be they whom that policy will ultimately effect." Will the minister assure me that the trade unions will have a part to play?

I start by saying that I am a member of the Transport and General Workers Union and I have  a declared interest. I welcome the forward strategy for agriculture. Agriculture is not the only issue for rural Scotland, but it is fair to say that it is at the heart of rural Scotland. As we have heard, around three quarters of our land area is farmland. Agricultural employment is vital to many rural areas and remote ones in particular. It is right that the Labour-led Executive is conducting a radical reappraisal of how our citizens live and work in the countryside. I will focus on three issues—the role of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, gender discrimination, and health and safety—relating to the forward strategy and make what I hope will be seen as constructive suggestions from the back benches to the ministers. In considering the Executive's document, I was disappointed to note that there was no trade union representation on the steering group. At its meeting on 26 June, I requested that the Rural Development Committee consider taking evidence from the STUC. The STUC made a written submission, but, for some reason, was unfortunately not asked to give oral evidence. At the end of its submission, the STUC said: "We believe that by working together on a shared agenda, the key stakeholders can secure a better future for Scottish agriculture and those whose jobs depend upon it." It went on to say that the fact that "the Executive appears, on this occasion, to have failed to recognise that Scotland's trade unions have a role to play in this respect is an oversight that we hope will be rectified at the earliest opportunity."

I thank the minister for his intervention. That is a question that the STUC and the TGWU would have to answer. I will pose a question in return. How extensively was it known that the document existed? When the committee asked for input from the STUC, it was forthcoming. I asked the minister on 18 September about trade union representation, but I did not receive a definite response. We can put that behind us, but I hope that I can have an assurance today that there will be trade union representation on the cross-sector group that will continue to meet to advise on the implementation of the strategy, as detailed in action point 54. At the meeting on 18 September, I also raised the issue of equality and gender balance, particularly in relation to the steering group. As  part of his response, the minister said: "It is right that Elaine Smith should pursue the questions of equality and gender balance, but because of the history of the agriculture industry, the agricultural community is sadly wanting in that regard. I do not for a moment suggest that that may be anything other than entirely wrong."—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee , 18 September 2001; c 2166-2167.] We could talk about the history of discrimination and under-representation of women in many fields, not least in public bodies. Indeed, I could talk about that all day, but we do not have time. I am glad that the minister recognises that it is wrong, but I would like an indication of how the issue of gender imbalance could be addressed through the forward strategy, including the make-up of the cross-sector group. In considering the future of agriculture in Scotland, I would like the Parliament to take a few minutes to remember the forgotten cost of that essential enterprise, which is too important to be left solely to food producers, retailers and landowners. The forgotten cost that I want to talk about is noticeable by its absence from the forward strategy statement. It is the cost, not in pounds and pence, but in lives that are blighted by accident and injury in the workplace. As I said, it is regrettable that no invitation to give oral evidence to the Rural Development Committee was tendered to the STUC, because the STUC has long campaigned on safety for agricultural workers. Evidence from the STUC might, at the very least, have allowed some recognition of the need for improved safety measures—through training for safety, for example. Unfortunately, in the training section of the document, as elsewhere, there is no mention of the need for increased efforts to tackle the continuing scourge of unnecessary death and injury, particularly on farms. The Transport and General Workers Union, which represents the bulk of farm workers, has continually highlighted the rising rate of injury and death, which indicates that agricultural workers risk greater hazards than those in any other industry, including construction. Some of those accidents are truly horrific. I would have gone into more detail about farm safety but, having taken an intervention, I am a bit short of time. However, I particularly want to raise the issue of safety for children on farms. As part of a total package for the future of Scottish agriculture, along with the many important economic and environmental suggestions, the Scottish Executive places greater stress on keeping the country safe. It is not enough to say that the importance of safety is recognised and inherent. The need to follow safe practices must be regularly and clearly spelled out as one of our main aims in the on-going evolution and development of our agriculture industry.  I also wanted to talk about organophosphate pesticides, but I do not have time. I hope that, when the strategy is acted on, it will be amended to reflect health and safety practices and the other issues that I have raised.

Will the minister comment on the success of methadone programmes, including the programme that is run in Coatbridge, Lanarkshire? That programme supports users and the wider society. Will he comment on how more general practitioners can be persuaded to sign up to offer methadone programmes?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order that a member should be allowed to speak twice against the bill, when members such as me, whose name has been mentioned during the debate, are not allowed to speak?

Will the member take an intervention?

I would like to clarify a point. Alex Fergusson said that the amendment was agreed to by the majority of the committee. Will he confirm that the vote was decided yesterday on the casting vote of the convener?

Will Helen Eadie join me in remembering the mining disaster at Auchengeich, which happened in September 1959? Can we send our thoughts to the community, which will be holding its annual memorial service later this month?

Does Mary Scanlon agree that it is unacceptable that some health boards will help with fertility treatment and that others will not? Strangely, women who live in the Highland Health Board area are often able to receive treatment in another health board area, whereas women in those areas cannot.

I start, of course, by congratulating Annabel Goldie on securing this important debate. This is a subject that receives very little recognition and I believe that it is an issue of discrimination against women in the health service. I do not want to dispute Annabel's figures, but a figure provided by Women's Health estimates that as many as 10 per cent of women suffer from the condition. Given the lack of diagnosis by GPs and the lack of knowledge about the condition among women, I suspect that the figure could be substantially higher. I was aware of the condition before, but became even more aware of it because I have two friends who are suffering from it. What is the condition? It is thought to be the second most common gynaecological condition, and it is one of the most complex. It is a painful, chronic disease that affects many women during their reproductive years. The endometrium is the tissue lining the uterus. In response to hormonal commands, it builds up, breaks down and is shed every month, during menstruation. With endometriosis, the tissue is found outside the uterus, in different locations. It still develops and continues to respond to the same hormonal commands, but, unlike with periods, the blood and tissue has nowhere to go. That can cause internal bleeding, inflammation, the formation of scar tissue and adhesions. That in turn can cause extreme pain, bladder and bowel problems and infertility. Some women experience no pain or symptoms and their problems can be recognised only because of infertility investigations or during other surgery. However, for many women, the pain is absolutely intolerable. There are a number of symptoms, but endometriosis can be conclusively diagnosed only by a laparoscopy, as Annabel Goldie pointed out. Its causes are unknown and there is no known cure. Various types of treatment are available, ranging from hormone treatment to surgery, but, unfortunately, hormone treatment  can cause side effects, including temporary infertility. Some women have found alternative therapies helpful, but unfortunately there has been very little research to demonstrate their effectiveness. Various theories have been advanced about the causes of endometriosis. Suggested causes include genetic predisposition and retrograde menstruation. One very disturbing theory is that environmental toxins may be involved. Studies have shown that certain environmental toxins, such as dioxin and petrochemicals, can exacerbate endometriosis. More work needs to be done on that theory. We do not know the cause of endometriosis, there is no cure and diagnosis often takes years—years of pain, suffering and mental anguish for some women. I mentioned my two friends who are suffering from this condition. Both are young women in their early 30s. One of them, May, was fobbed off for years by her GP, who told her that she probably had irritable bowel syndrome. After suffering unbelievable pain and discomfort, she moved to England and signed on with a female GP, who immediately diagnosed endometriosis. Within six months she had the surgery to which Annabel Goldie referred—a laparotomy—and her condition is now much improved. She told me that the relief of knowing what was wrong was unbelievable, as she had been convinced that there was something terminally wrong with her. In retrospect, it is easy to think that May could have been more assertive with her original GP, but it is hard for women to tell GPs how to do their job. Women know their bodies; they know when something is far wrong, but they are at the mercy of their GPs. Too many GPs—particularly male ones—fob women off by saying that they are just experiencing what women have to go through every month. Worse, they consider them to be hysterical females with a low pain threshold. In Scotland, the average time for diagnosis of endometriosis is seven years, which is absolutely shocking. The minister must consider ways of changing that. We must reduce delays in diagnosis by ensuring that GPs are better informed about this condition and able to recognise it. Like Annabel Goldie, I ask the minister to commit himself to a publicity campaign to raise awareness of endometriosis among GPs and among women. He should use his influence to ensure that endometriosis is included in GP training. He could also commit himself to encouraging GP specialists in this area. A national strategy could include a campaign to publicise the disease, better and quicker diagnosis, research into the causes of endometriosis, development of better ways of managing it and, ultimately, a cure. There must be resourcing of services to provide  support to women and their families. Physical pain and suffering is not the only way in which endometriosis affects women's lives. It can also mean infertility. There is a postcode lottery not only when it comes to diagnosis and treatment of endometriosis—the same applies to assistance with infertility treatment. That is another issue we need to address. We must put an end to the shocking treatment of many women with endometriosis. We need recognition, diagnosis, research and sympathetic treatment of women by the health service. We need resources to ensure that those things are available and to support the societies and groups that help the women affected. Given that the Minister for Finance and Local Government has announced extra money today, this may be a good day to highlight the needs of women with endometriosis. Perhaps the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care can press for some of that money to be used to tackle this horrendous disease.

The Executive should be congratulated on bringing forward the white paper in line with the commitment in the programme for government and on accepting all the main recommendations in the MacLean report. As the minister said, serious violent and sexual offenders are a small but very high-risk group of offenders. They pose a risk to public safety and that risk must be assessed and managed. However, it is important that the public debate on this issue is not conducted with an underlying hang-them-and-flog-them mentality. Individual human and civil rights must be considered. A careful balance must be struck between the rights of individuals and those of the community. The issue must be approached with the premise that ensuring public safety and providing protection to our communities are paramount. On the whole, the MacLean report takes that approach. If we do not protect our communities, we run the risk that individuals will become involved in vigilante action. Although such action may stem from real concerns, individuals cannot take on the responsibility for community protection. The law and public agencies have the legitimate responsibility for community safety, although they must work with communities to discharge that responsibility in appropriate and effective ways. To put the white paper into perspective, it is helpful to reflect on the role of custodial sentences. First, there is the punishment role—society and victims expect retribution for crimes. The second role is community safety—the perpetrator must be removed from society so as not to pose further risk to others. The third role is rehabilitation—the offender can reflect on their actions and assistance can be provided to allow them to return to the community. That must be dependent on an assessment of the offender's attitude to the crime and the extent to which they take responsibility for it and feel genuine remorse. The report's recommendations on risk management assessment will greatly assist in decisions about whether someone can be safely rehabilitated, without further risk to the public. I welcome most of the recommendations, but I want to focus on specific issues in more detail. In paragraph 21 of chapter 2, the white paper states that "unproven allegations of criminal behaviour will be taken into account, as will the fact that the offender had been prosecuted for and acquitted of offences in the past". I am concerned about that, as our legal system is based on the principle that a person is innocent until proven guilty. I hope that, when the minister  sums up, he will tell us why that is necessary and whether it conflicts with the underlying principles of our justice system. Is it a vital part of risk assessment and management? Will it contravene human rights conventions at United Nations or European level? Like Dr Simpson, I am concerned about the approach to those with mental disorders. I am uncomfortable with the fact that mental illness, learning disability and personality disorders are put together in the term "mental disorder". However, I note that the Executive says that it is not insensitive to the different needs of those different groups. I would like to hear from the minister what further action is to be taken to treat those groups differently. Like Gordon Jackson, I expect that some of the proposals will have funding implications for the health service and the Scottish Prison Service. Will the minister indicate whether that has been recognised? I caution that being tough on crime and its causes should not mean putting people in prison and keeping them there merely to appease the public. However, if offenders are judged to pose a risk, they must be detained for life if that is appropriate. We all know of horrendous cases in which, after being released, someone committed a similar heinous crime, that has brought suffering and misery to more families and communities. Overall, the white paper is to be welcomed for its aim of providing public protection. I would be grateful for a response from the minister to the points that I have raised.

Sadly, I have had personal experience of oral cancer in my family recently. A surgeon at Monklands hospital told me that the incidence of oral cancer is increasing, particularly among young men. Has funding been earmarked for research into the causes of that increase?

To ask the Scottish Executive when its action plan on the prevention of violence against women will be published. (S1O-3542)

We all look forward to reading the action plan, which will cover all forms of violence against women. Although we all welcome the allocation of £18.4 million to address the problem of domestic violence, does the minister agree that it is important also to acknowledge links between all forms of violence against women, including rape and sexual assault, and to set aside appropriate funding to tackle them? What plans are there for a funding strategy to tackle those other forms of violence against women and are time scales attached to them?

I congratulate Kay Ullrich on securing this evening's debate. As someone who learned to swim as a child through swimming lessons provided by the local authority, and as someone who has carried on that interest into my adult life, I welcome the motion. Swimming is my main sporting activity and, time permitting, I try to swim at least once a week. Teaching children to swim is really important. As well as the safety aspects that Kay Ullrich mentioned and the health implications for children, being able to swim means that children and adults can participate in using and enjoying the water facilities that are provided at leisure centres across the country, such as the excellent Time Capsule in Coatbridge. When Kay Ullrich raised the issue, I was interested to find out about the two local authorities in my constituency. In North Lanarkshire Council, funding is vired so that all children in primary 6 and primary 7 get free swimming lessons, and in East Dunbartonshire Council, all primary 5 children get free swimming lessons. I congratulate both authorities on their commitment to giving pupils the opportunity at some stage in their primary education to learn to swim. As Kay Ullrich said, the children may not take up that opportunity, but it is there if they want  to. As a parliamentarian, however, I am clearly concerned about the figures that Kay Ullrich quoted for the rest of Scotland. Like Kay Ullrich, I commend the excellent policy that Glasgow City Council has adopted in providing free admission to public swimming pools for children and young people. I understand that the council intends to introduce kids' cards and young Scots cards, which will enable children and young people to continue to get free admission to public pools when the present scheme ends in the middle of the summer. I have a personal interest in swimming lessons, because I have a very young son and it is vital that he learns to swim as soon as possible. Being in a position to pay for lessons, I tried three times to get him on to a course, but unfortunately they were all oversubscribed. Luckily for me and my son, however, my mum is a first-class swimmer. She was billed in her youth as Moira McGill, the nine-year-old diving wonder, and we still have the posters to prove it. Indeed, one of my proudest possessions is her Olympic training badge. Sadly, she did not get to the Olympics, because it boiled down to a choice between her education and her swimming career, and her parents chose her education. Nevertheless, I am lucky that she is teaching my son to swim. She could not teach me, as she was working and bringing up four children, so I was pleased that I had the opportunity to learn to swim at school. It is a pity that, when education budgets are tight, subjects such as physical education and sport are top of the list to be cut. That has health implications. Swimming is often regarded as one of the frilly subjects, which can be one of the first to go. What Kay Ullrich said about safety should be of great concern to us all. Parents who can afford it can often arrange for their children to have paid swimming lessons, depending on availability, but that is not an option for those on low incomes. Every child should have the right to learn to swim. I support Kay Ullrich's motion, asking the Scottish Executive "to encourage local authorities to ensure that every pupil has access to at least one publicly funded course of swimming lessons prior to leaving primary school." After all, their lives may depend on it.

The Parliament has not debated breastfeeding before, so I am especially pleased that we can debate the subject during national breastfeeding awareness week. I hope that the debate will help to raise awareness of the importance of breastfeeding not only for mothers and babies, but for society. I thank all members who signed the motion, everyone who attended the event at lunch time today, which was kindly sponsored by Unison, and all the mothers, children and health professionals, including Jenny Warren OBE, who have remained for the debate. How times change. In 1943, a Ministry of Health report on breastfeeding expressed concern that only 80 per cent of hospital-born babies were breastfed, compared with 95 per cent of home-born babies. More than half a century later, and despite copious research on the health benefits of breastfeeding for mother and baby, only about 55 per cent of Scottish infants are breastfed at birth, falling off to about 45 per cent at six weeks old. I will focus on three of the issues mentioned in the motion: the nutritional and health benefits of breastfeeding for children and their mothers, the low rate of breastfeeding in Scotland and public attitudes. I make it clear that this is all about choice. No one should feel forced into breastfeeding if they do not want to do it. An unhappy and distressed  mother will not have a positive breastfeeding experience, and neither will her baby. A small percentage of mothers will also, for medical reasons, be unable to breastfeed. Great care must be taken to ensure that they do not feel guilty about that. However, the prevailing social attitude in Scotland means that mothers who wish to breastfeed are considered to be behaving outwith the norm. That attitude must urgently be changed. It is every woman's and baby's right that an informed choice can be made. If that choice is to breastfeed, it is also their right to be supported and encouraged, not only by medical staff, but by society. There is no doubt and plenty of evidence that breast is best. It is the natural way of feeding babies and has major health benefits for mother and baby. It also confers health advantages beyond infancy, into childhood and possibly adult life. In infancy, breastfeeding has a protective effect against ear infections, diahorreal illness, colds, flu and sore throat. It lessens the chance of eczema and other allergies and prolongs natural immunity to mumps, measles, polio and other diseases. It also assists in better mental development. For mothers, it cuts the risk of breast and ovarian cancer and helps them to get quickly back into better shape. Important research is being carried out by a team based at Ninewells hospital, Dundee into whether breastfeeding improves the health of Scottish children beyond infancy. The study began in 1983 and early results showed that breastfed children had markedly less diahorrea, vomiting and respiratory illness in their first year when compared to formula-fed children. The children were seen again at the age of seven. Those who had been exclusively breastfed during their first four months had significantly fewer respiratory illnesses, less body fat and lower blood pressure than those that had been formula fed. The children were seen again at the age of 15. Twenty per cent of all the children had above-average levels of cholesterol and blood sugar, with abnormalities of the blood vessels. However, the study also showed that breast milk protected children against high cholesterol and high blood sugar levels. One of the study team, Dr Jill Belch, commented "to find out what you ate in the first year of life is affecting your heart and blood vessels by the time you are a teenager is quite remarkable." That most recent information is particularly relevant to Scotland, where the incidence of heart disease, stroke and diabetes is high. Obesity and high blood pressure are recognised risk factors for those conditions. There is considerable worldwide interest in the Dundee study, since it has clearly demonstrated that the health benefits of breastfeeding extend beyond infancy and into later  childhood. Current and future studies will explore the possibility of breastfeeding influencing health during later adult life. Based on current measurement data, the prevalence of breastfeeding in Scotland is the second lowest in Europe. I am particularly concerned about the statistics for my constituency of Coatbridge and Chryston. In June 2000, Coatbridge had the lowest levels of breastfeeding in Scotland. At the first health visitor visit, the figure was 19.8 per cent, compared to the Scottish average of 55 per cent. At six weeks, the figure fell to 11 per cent. Coatbridge also has amongst the highest incidence of heart disease and strokes in Scotland. Government targets, set in 1994 and adopted by the Executive, aim for more than 50 per cent of Scottish mothers to be breastfeeding their babies at six weeks of life by the year 2005. I would be interested to hear the minister say whether that target can be met over the next four years. If it will be a challenge for Scotland to meet the target, it will be a mammoth challenge for Coatbridge. Perhaps the minister would like to lend his personal support to the recently established community mother's group in my constituency, by visiting the mothers and hearing at first hand of the challenges that they face. A study reported in the British Medical Journal on 11 November 2000 showed that breastfeeding is represented in the media as problematic. It is identified with negative situations, whereas bottle-feeding is represented as normal. This week, the press showed that popular TV soaps had a part to play. At present they do not promote breastfeeding as the norm. We also know that women are publicly harassed—members may remember the woman who was threatened with being put off a bus in Edinburgh for breastfeeding. Susan Deacon called on the Minister for Transport to look into that. Perhaps Malcolm Chisholm could comment on it, if he knows the outcome of the case. The question of support for returning to work must be addressed, as there is blatant discrimination against women in employment who breastfeed. Health service staff are central to supporting mothers who want to breastfeed. I am glad to say that there are good news stories. More than 90 percent of our hospitals are participating in the UNICEF UK baby friendly initiative. Peer support groups are important: they help women to continue breastfeeding and they challenge negative public attitudes. In 1993, there were only four peer support groups in Scotland; there are now 150. Those groups give social support and they share knowledge and experience. A survey carried out by Jenny Warren in 1997  found that such groups were helpful, boosted women's confidence and helped resolve difficulties. There can be no doubt that breast is best. Our challenge is to ensure that mums, dads and grandparents know that. Excellent information and support before and after birth are needed and must include a commitment to allow babies to be breastfed immediately following birth if that is possible. There should be no unsolicited offers of formula milk in hospital, however well-meaning those may be. Since 1981, Britain has claimed to support the international code of marketing of breast milk substitutes. The UK has also signed the Innocenti declaration, but the commitment to put in place appropriate standards on the marketing and distribution of breast milk substitutes has not been fulfilled. Will things be different in Scotland? Will the minister tonight commit himself to taking that forward? One of the most important challenges is to change public attitudes to breastfeeding and to breastfeeding in public places. I find it abhorrent that society accepts page 3 girls, but takes exception to breastfeeding mothers. I congratulate breastfeeding mothers throughout Scotland, and those who are here tonight, for making the choice—despite negative attitudes—to give their children the best start in life. I also congratulate the health staff who are here today and all others who are working to support breastfeeding mothers. My contribution is merely to open the debate and I look forward to hearing from colleagues throughout the chamber. The important word in the debate is choice. It should be as easy and as socially acceptable for a mother to choose to feed her baby herself as it is for her to produce a bottle and give it to her baby.

One of the first actions of the Labour Government was to recognise the importance of health inequality and to commission an independent inquiry into the subject. Interestingly, but perhaps not unexpectedly, a number of the areas that were identified in that inquiry were not medical. "Our National Health" states: "Poverty, poor housing, homelessness and economic opportunity are the root causes of major inequalities in health in Scotland. We must fight the causes of illness as well as the illness itself." Unacceptable inequalities between rich and poor remain. The NHS report recognises that. It points out: "The Scottish Executive's commitment to tackling health inequalities is part of our wider commitment to tackling poverty and creating social justice across the whole range of our work". We live in a wealthy country. It is therefore to our shame that one in three of our children live in poverty. Many studies have shown that health and wealth are closely linked. We must tackle the root causes of avoidable ill health and not simply concentrate on equipping the NHS to deal with the symptoms. As the Barnardos publication that was referred to points out, there is no vaccine against poverty. That report makes it clear that the best way to reduce inequalities in mental and physical health is to pay greater attention to parents, particularly present and future mothers, and to children. The Barnardos publication also states that approximately a quarter of all children are born to mothers under 25 years old, so the supposition that under-25s require lower benefit rates than over-25s needs to be re-examined urgently. Unfortunately, it is still the case that mothers are an easy target for adverse comment and pointing the finger of blame. At times, it would seem that it is not that well-designed, well-run services and well-planned social and fiscal policies are needed to tackle child health issues and inequalities, but that the required change lies with mothers. In the vast majority of cases, that is nonsense. We all recognise the gist of the criticism aimed at  mothers. The arguments run along the lines of children suffering if mothers go out to work—or indeed, if they do not—or of children's diet not being sensible. Such dangerous spin continues, despite the fact that evidence shows that most mothers who live in poverty rear their children successfully and do their utmost to protect and promote their health, sometimes to the detriment of their own health and despite difficult conditions. The thought, "It's like teaching your children to swim in a pool full of alligators" in relation to the conditions that many families face rings only too true. The Executive is addressing many of the areas in which action is required to tackle child health inequalities. Although I do not have time to go into much of that, the early years of development are particularly important. Breastfeeding, nutrition, dental health and accident prevention are major focuses for health improvement. Encouraging mothers to choose breastfeeding is vital for our children's future health. Sadly, Scotland—Lanarkshire in particular—has the lowest number of breast-fed babies in the UK. Breast feeding has not yet been debated in the Parliament; I take this opportunity to urge members to sign my motion on the subject. The most effective time to intervene is in early life. The Barnardos report states: "Inequalities in health can only be fundamentally tackled by policies that reduce poverty and income inequality. This means poor people getting more money". I would have liked to mention mental health and young people, but perhaps the deputy minister will address that in winding up the debate. To reduce child health inequalities effectively, the Executive must work in conjunction with Westminster and Europe to shift resources to the less well-off and to stop the trend of the rich getting richer at the expense of the poor getting poorer. If we fail to do that, we will ultimately fail to protect the most vulnerable members of our society—our children.

rose—

I also congratulate Johann Lamont on securing the debate. Having listened to some of the speeches, I must make it clear at the beginning of my speech that rape is not about  sex—it is an act of violence. As other members said, the decision that was taken by Lord Abernethy could have serious repercussions for many women in Scotland. As Elaine Thomson suggested, their willingness to participate in the legal system could be further undermined if women know that the outcome could be prejudiced by the perverse conclusions of a male-oriented justice system. We know that the number of rapes that are reported is only the tip of the iceberg and that, of those that are reported, only 16 per cent get to court and 9 per cent result in a conviction. From those figures, we must conclude that Scotland's legal system is failing to protect women and that it is failing to deliver justice. Having gone through the trauma not only of rape, but of being examined medically and being questioned by the police, a woman whose case eventually goes to court expects justice. Instead, she might find that she, not the rapist, seems to be the person who is on trial—it is no wonder that so few rapes are reported. If a rape case goes to court, the woman is the main witness for the prosecution and, as a witness, she has no right to legal representation or information about the case, and she has no control over the proceedings. She will have to describe her experience in detail, face to face with the accused and in a public and intimidating environment. She may also be subjected to aggressive and degrading questioning. We know that lawyers and judges must operate within the broad framework of the law, but an informed and sensitive interpretation is essential. The experience of women who give evidence in rape trials shows that such an approach is the exception rather than the rule, which raises issues about training, accountability and representation for members of the legal profession, including judges, as Johann Lamont mentioned. The figures on women's representation in the legal profession make disturbing reading. There are 27 male and two female permanent judges, seven male, but no female, temporary judges, 103 male and 17 female full-time sheriffs, 316 male and 81 female advocates and 80 male and 6 female Queen's counsels. The Scottish Executive's justice department must take a more proactive approach in order to tackle the problem of under-representation of women at all levels of the legal profession. The current situation is nothing less than absolutely scandalous. Training for criminal justice agencies is promised in the Scottish Executive's strategy for victims. I support the necessity of training for all criminal justice agencies, including judges. Perhaps when the minister sums up the debate, he will let  members know whether that training scheme has started and, if not, when it will start. Responsibility for ensuring that rape is recognised as a totally unacceptable crime is located at every level of society. However, we must remember that the specific responsibility for recognising and dealing with the crime of rape rests with those who are responsible for, and who can influence, the personnel, the processes, the procedures and the framework of the criminal justice system—politicians. Male violence against women is unacceptable—saying "No" always means no. Our legal system must recognise that simple fact, or injustice will continue to prevail.

Like other members, I am pleased that Karen Whitefield has secured this debate. In my short speech, I will reiterate some of the points that I made 18 months ago in my submission to Sarah Boyack's consultation paper, "Tackling Congestion". At that time, I pointed out the benefits for my constituents of reopening the Bathgate to Airdrie line. If someone has to travel to Edinburgh from the main town of Coatbridge in my constituency by the existing public transport, it is an extremely difficult and time-consuming exercise. It can take between an hour and an hour and a half. As Karen Whitefield said, it is necessary first to travel in the opposite direction, to Glasgow. If the railway line between Drumgelloch and Bathgate were to be reopened, I am sure that many people would use rail as their favoured mode of transport. It would open up employment opportunities for my constituents and, as Bristow Muldoon mentioned, social opportunities. Edinburgh and West Lothian have two of the fastest-growing economies in Scotland and an increasing number of people in North Lanarkshire are looking to the east for employment. They may choose to work in the east but, as Mary Mulligan said, because of high house prices, or for personal or family reasons, they may want to continue living in the west. A preliminary study by the Railway Development Society on the feasibility of reopening the line stated that the proposal was practical. The only apparent problem is the relocation of the cycle route. The RDS estimate of the capital cost is  about £19 million although, as we have heard, Railtrack says that it could possibly cost up to £30 million. Even if the cost were to reach £30 million, that would be a modest amount, as Mary Mulligan said, compared with the cost of many motorway projects. We should remember that motorised transport is the single greatest contributor to air pollution in urban areas. Traffic growth, and the resulting increase in pollution, cannot continue. Too much traffic damages the environment, people's health and the quality of their lives. Problems of congestion and high levels of pollution are especially bad at certain peak times during the day. Ways of cutting down road traffic should be examined. We should encourage employers to adopt flexitime regimes, staggered hours and working from home via the use of new technology. In considering the challenge of getting traffic off the roads, we must examine the re-establishment of former rail links and even consider constructing new ones. The reopening of the Bathgate to Airdrie line would provide a cost-effective, speedy and environmentally friendly mode of transport, which would be welcomed and used by many people in my constituency.

As gender reporter for the Equal  Opportunities Committee, I have worked on issues relating to women and the justice system. That work was started by Johann Lamont and the committee's sub-group. I take issue with one thing that Lyndsay McIntosh said: I think that the issue is a women's issue. However, with others, I congratulate Pauline McNeill on securing the debate. As we know from research, the vast majority of women who are raped or sexually assaulted know their abusers. That is also the case with drug-assisted rapes. DCI Sturman's report on drug-assisted sexual assault was produced after interviews with 109 female and 14 male drug-rape victims. The report informs us that 70 per cent of victims knew their attackers and that 27 per cent of victims cited them as friends. Fifteen per cent cited attackers as fellow students. The report states that up to 25 different drugs—mostly types of tranquillisers, sleeping tablets and anaesthetics—are used. After drug-assisted rape, most women are left with little or no clear memory of what has happened. They can therefore be reluctant to report the crime. Like other victims, they have a fear of being medically examined, of not being believed and of being questioned. The last is made worse by the possibility of the obscene spectacle of their attacker cross-examining them. Until recently, proof of having been drugged was difficult to establish because the substance remained in the blood for only a few hours. However, I understand that new tests have been developed that can trace such drugs for up to 18 months after the attack. I feel that that needs to be highlighted. If charges are made and the case goes to court, victims have to relive the whole horrific experience. They can end up feeling that they are the one in the dock. It is often implied that a woman has asked for it because of her dress, make-up, behaviour or sexual history. Two thirds of the drugged victims interviewed for the study that I mentioned said that they decided not to report the attack to the police because they were too ashamed or because they blamed themselves. Of those who reported what happened to the authorities, more than half felt that their treatment by the police was poor. Perhaps the police could learn lessons from their current approach to domestic abuse. If the woman has had previous contact with the perpetrator, she can be made to feel that she is somehow to blame. If a woman has not resisted, it now seems that that can become evidence of consent. As mentioned, we saw an example of that in the rape case in Aberdeen, when Lord Abernethy, in an absolutely outrageous decision, told the jury that there was no case to answer. He  ruled that sex without a woman's consent is not rape unless the attacker uses force or the threat of force. Does Lord Abernethy not realise that in such a situation a woman can be so frightened and so fearful of violence, and even of the loss of her life, that she will not put up a struggle? In the case of drug rape, she may not even have been conscious. The Scottish judge, Lord Cockburn, stated 150 years ago that the essence of rape is that sexual intercourse is obtained without the woman's consent. Sir Gerald Gordon QC, the respected author of a standard textbook on criminal law, believes: "It is simpler to discard the concept of force altogether and to define rape in terms of overpowering or overcoming the will of the victim." Both men seem more enlightened than Lord Abernethy. Fortunately, the Lord Advocate has requested a report on the Aberdeen case and may ask the Court of Appeal to rule on the judge's interpretation of the law. We know that the number of rapes reported remains the tip of the iceberg and that, of those reported, only 16 per cent get to court and only 9 per cent result in conviction. Women who have their drinks spiked and are subsequently raped are reluctant to report the crime. Women who are raped when not drugged are reluctant to report the crime. Women are told to be wary of strange men lurking in bars, but their attacker is most likely to be someone whom they already know. Women are told to avoid badly lit streets, to train in self-defence and to moderate their appearance. Why should women have to modify their behaviour? Women are not the rapists. It is the men who must change their behaviour and it is society that must change its attitudes. We do not tell pedestrians to take high-jump lessons so that they can leap out of the way of drunk or reckless drivers; we try to change the behaviour of the offenders. We should be sending out and reinforcing the clear message that male violence against women is unacceptable and that no always means no. The Sturman report calls for a nationwide network of 24-hour sexual assault treatment centres, where victims can, under one roof, receive medical attention and counselling and make a statement to the police. We should seriously consider that proposal, which would make the ordeal of reporting rape and receiving treatment less traumatic for victims. We must create an environment where women can come forward in confidence, where women will be believed and where women will tell us what multi-agency services there should be.

On that point, does the member think that such a review commission should focus on gender issues? Has she come across gender issues in relation to harsh sentencing?

I start by congratulating Cathy Jamieson on her announcement. I also welcome the joint statement made by Jackie Baillie and Helen Liddell on the £1.5 million action plan to expand the credit union movement in Scotland. From the debate so far, it is clear that everyone recognises the excellent work done by credit unions. As Jackie Baillie mentioned, Government ministers, at Westminster and here, see credit unions as a significant element of their strategy for addressing the injustices of social and financial exclusion. Community-based credit unions provide affordable, manageable credit for many families and communities. Credit unions depend on the work of volunteers who are committed to the movement and to their communities. They must also be able to secure affordable local premises, which is an issue that has been raised with me. Many people in Scotland cannot access the financial services that others take for granted. Many do not have bank accounts. The unemployed and people on low incomes often have to turn to companies such as the Provident or, worse, find themselves caught up with unscrupulous loan sharks. It is worth pointing out that there are currently a number of adverts for companies that offer to consolidate debt and reduce monthly payments—I am sure that we have all seen them. Such arrangements, although they may seem attractive in the short term, can often cost a lot more in the long term. Also, the better-off can access discounts by paying cash for consumer goods.  People living in poverty, who are on the margins, often end up paying more for such goods. Credit unions are sometimes seen as the poor man's bank, but although they are particularly helpful for those on low incomes and in tackling exclusion, they can benefit many people and have members from a wide range of income brackets. As Jackie Baillie said, at present only 1 per cent of the population are members, but the investment by the Government should make a difference, by helping to raise the profile of credit unions and, I hope, encouraging more people to volunteer in their communities. Kirklands Credit Union in my constituency has a number of committed volunteers who care about their community and have different skills and experience. They are concerned about some of the proposals in the consultation paper on the regulatory framework: the approved persons regime, the liquidity requirements and the capital requirements. They are also concerned that the FSA might be appointed to supervise credit unions. Many credit unions support the need for monitoring, early intervention and, if required, provision of support systems, especially in the early stages of establishment. Many also accept that there are problems in the movement that need to be addressed. However, it is felt that such problems cannot be solved by an organisation that, by its very nature, can never fully comprehend the fundamental ethos of the credit union movement. The gulf in culture between those in the FSA, who are trained to deal with profit-driven companies and international finance, and the volunteers and members of small, friendly credit unions is evident from the document on regulation. Of particular concern to Kirklands are the liquidity requirements, which seem to mean that all credit unions will have to maintain a minimum level of liquid assets of 15 to 20 per cent of shares. That does not take into account monthly, weekly or daily fluctuations, which should surely be taken into consideration. Perhaps the credit union movement could follow the Northern Ireland model of supervision. There, I understand, the monitoring of credit unions is done by the local Registry of Friendly Societies, which has a history of providing support and of examining and helping to resolve any problems that small friendly societies and mutual organisations may have. I will finish on a question, similar to that which Fiona Hyslop asked. Is the consultation paper a reserved matter? If it is, what input can the Executive have to ensure that the fears of Kirklands and the credit union movement can be addressed?

On a point in order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order that, prior to the commencement of the stage 1 debate on the Housing (Scotland) Bill, so many points of order were taken that the debate was cut down? Seven members, including me, did not get to speak. Will you clarify for how long, under standing orders, points of order can go on?

Will Mr Harding give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what benefits are anticipated from the proposed Scottish secure tenancy. (S1O-3062)

Under the local authority secure tenancy, the courts can take reasonableness into account when considering eviction for rent arrears. That means considering the personal circumstances of the individual concerned. Can the minister assure us that that will continue to be  the case under the Scottish secure tenancy?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have a point of clarification.

It is an important point. The cross-party group is on survivors of childhood sexual abuse rather than adult survivors.

I also congratulate Marilyn Livingstone on securing the debate and on setting up the cross-party group, which will be launched this evening. A year ago, I was pleased to be asked to  address the launch of the Moira Anderson Foundation as a keynote speaker. The idea for forming the foundation came from a very brave and determined woman, Sandra Brown, who used the proceeds of her book, "Where There Is Evil", to start it up. Moira Anderson, a young girl from Coatbridge, disappeared in 1957. The fact that she was never seen again and the mystery never solved has hung like a shadow over my home town ever since. The foundation was set up in Moira's memory. Its main aim is to tackle child abuse and to promote Moira's legacy—to break the silence, demolish the myths and, in doing so, to create a safer climate in which children can reveal the truth. Other aims of the foundation are to protect children from abuse, to prevent children from vanishing from our communities without trace, to support victims of abuse, and to assist families through the legal process. Sandra Brown tells me that, in its short existence, the foundation has helped almost 40 families. I think that that indicates that there is a clear need. Until relatively recently, child abuse—in particular, sexual abuse—was not a subject that society was comfortable about admitting to, never mind addressing. As Kenny Gibson said, many myths surround the abuse of children. One of the most common is that abusers are psychopathic strangers who carry out unplanned attacks. In reality, very few sex offenders are diagnosed as having a mental disorder; most sexual offences are committed by people who are known to their victims and random attacks by strangers are rare. Most of those who offend against children are in positions of responsibility, authority and trust in relation to their victims. Many are family members. When cases are reported and acted on, victims and their families must face the harrowing criminal justice system—a system that has become increasingly bureaucratised and professionalised. The result of that is a two-way information deficit. Victims and their families are often not told what, if anything, is happening in their cases. They are not asked what they would like to happen and they are not asked for full information about the crime and its effects on them. Support services are vital for those who are negotiating the legal process—especially for young children and their families. Many people feel lost in the system and can become further traumatised. Many cases never reach court. Cases of child abuse have implications for child welfare, criminal justice and for many other agencies. We must ensure that all those who are involved work together, use their arrangements for responding to and sharing information about allegations of abuse, and access specialist advice or expertise.  All children have the right to expect society to protect them from abuse. That right is enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Children (Scotland) Act 1995 enshrined key rights in statute. The need to safeguard our children from harm and abuse is of the utmost importance. Dealing with child abuse is not the preserve of any one public or voluntary service. If we are to protect our children effectively, all agencies must collaborate closely and wider society must take ownership of the issue. Mindsets need to be changed and the mainstreaming of children's issues must become second nature. There is no room for complacency. Like others—especially Cathy Jamieson—I have been promoting the establishment of the post of children's commissioner. Like Margaret Smith, I feel that that would help the process. I am sure that the Moira Anderson Foundation will play a major part in breaking down the myths and barriers that surround child abuse. I also commend the Kingdom Abuse Survivors Project for the work that it does. I am confident that the cross-party group will work with both those organisations and others to ensure that the issues that surround childhood sexual abuse are firmly on the agenda in the Parliament.

I am pleased that the Executive, working in partnership with Westminster, has declared war on fuel poverty. All our citizens must be given the right to live in affordable, warm homes. It is a national disgrace that people in this country are still living in cold, damp houses without hot water. Not only are such conditions unacceptable, they are directly responsible for deaths. Avoidable winter deaths are primarily suffered by the elderly and are caused by the cold, which aggravates circulatory diseases, leading to strokes, heart attacks and respiratory diseases such as pneumonia and bronchitis. Vulnerable groups include the young and, as we have heard,  many people are forced to choose between eating and heating. A report from the Help the Aged-British Gas partnership shows the connection between falling temperatures and deaths and indicates that for every 1 deg C drop in temperature below 20 deg C, mortality increases by about 2 per cent. That correlation highlights the need for action to end such avoidable deaths. The 18 years of Conservative Government attacks on the welfare state, local government and public sector housing increased the levels of poverty and deprivation. The Tories ravaged our society. They would not then—and will not now—admit the existence of fuel poverty in Britain. The Labour party will bring an end to the blight of fuel poverty among vulnerable households throughout Britain by 2010. The warm deal, the central heating programme, the £200 winter fuel allowance and the reduction of VAT on fuel are just a few of the ways in which Labour has begun to tackle the issue. I deliberately use the word "begun", as I know that there is a long way to go before, in the words of the minister, "everyone in Scotland has a warm, dry home." However, as a back-bench member and the constituency member for Coatbridge and Chryston, I seek clarification on several points that relate specifically to the innovative central heating initiative. First, I would be grateful for a specific interpretation of what is meant when we are told that the scheme will apply only to those "who do not have any central heating." If that refers to households that rely solely on a focal-point fire for heating, sadly the scheme will exclude most of the public sector houses and a number of private sector houses in Coatbridge and Chryston, although many of my constituents are suffering from fuel poverty. Many are living in houses that have obsolete or malfunctioning systems, such as storage heaters and under-floor heating, and many houses have deficient systems with a limited number of radiators. Pensioners and other vulnerable groups who have deficient, defective or expensive cost-in-use systems will also be among those who will have to choose between heating and eating. As all our citizens are to live free from fuel poverty by 2010, I would be grateful if the minister could assure us that, having tackled those in priority need, other groups, such as those that I have outlined, will be addressed. The minister mentioned that, but I would like clarification of the matter in the summing up. A recent Scottish Executive news release mentioned the installation of cold alarms. I would like further information on that initiative. One of my  constituents, Geraldine Dillon, raised the issue with me some weeks ago. Geraldine had seen an advert for such alarms, which cost about £20 each, and felt that the potentially life-saving devices should be provided to vulnerable groups by the Government. I have written to North Lanarkshire Council on the matter, but I would be delighted to hear whether that initiative is being considered by the Executive. Finally, I am a bit confused about why a delay is proposed in the installation of central heating in the homes that are being considered for stock transfer in the seven authorities. As I understand it, if transfer proceeds, the Executive will meet the cost of installing central heating through reduced receipts or, failing that, the local authorities concerned will be included in the programme. One way or another, the costs will be met by the Executive. The Scottish Executive says that those tenants will not be disadvantaged; however, I think that they will. Statistics prove that a lack of central heating causes unnecessary suffering and deaths. I would therefore be grateful for an explanation of the reasons for the proposed postponement. I commend the commitments that have been made by the minister, which show that fuel poverty has been recognised and will be tackled. I know, and the people of Scotland know, that only Labour can deliver an end to the scourge of fuel poverty throughout the UK.

I want to highlight the need for a children's commissioner for Scotland and the promotion of young people's participation in decision making. In my members' business debate on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which took place just over a year ago and which was supported by the cross-party group on  children's issues, the need for a children's commissioner was raised by me and by others. I am pleased that the minister has welcomed consideration of the proposal to have a commissioner. The role and remit of such a post has to be the subject of wide consultation. A commissioner represents the logical way to progress full implementation of the UN convention. In the response to the debate last year, Peter Peacock, the then Deputy Minister for Children and Education, said: "If a commissioner can genuinely add something positive to the existing range of provision, we are prepared to consider it . . . we have asked the Education, Culture and Sport Committee to consider the issue". The minister added that the committee was "prepared to consider it".— [ Official Report , 3 February 2000; Vol 4, c 839.]  One year later, and that has still not been done—but I understand the pressures that were on that committee last year. I would like an assurance that the committee has identified time for consideration and conclusion on that issue. I now refer to the issue of engaging young people in decision making, which could form part of the role of a children's commissioner, as Irene McGugan noted in her speech. I welcome the publication of "Taking the Initiative", which is the first step in a three-year programme that has been undertaken by Children in Scotland and funded by the Carnegie UK Trust. Its aim is to promote the participation of young people in decision making, policy and planning. It disturbs me that that work has been commissioned because of growing evidence of young people's disillusionment with local and national organisations that serve their needs. Many young people feel that their views and ideas are seen as irrelevant and are not considered, and that politicians are out of touch with the issues that affect them. We can see that disenchantment in trends among young voters. I will not quote all the statistics, as they can be found in "Taking the Initiative". Although there appears to be a general lack of interest in politics—or perhaps in the political system—young people are interested in particular issues, such as education, employment, the environment and human rights. However, barriers that exclude young people from the political process include the limited number of opportunities for participation, lack of knowledge about how to engage in politics, and the view of politics as a strange subject that is difficult to understand. It is vital that the Parliament break down those barriers.  We must also recognise that participation should take account of diverse needs, circumstances and aspirations. As Scott Barrie pointed out, young people cannot be viewed as a uniform group. The voices of children who are excluded because of homelessness, poverty or disability are least likely to be heard. For the good of society as a whole, active citizenship must be encouraged from a young age. It is ridiculous to expect young people suddenly to become responsible, empowered citizens at the age at which they can legally exercise their voting rights. I will pose some specific questions to the minister. Can the children's change fund be used to support local initiatives that are undertaken by children? With regard to the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000, what are the implementation plans for listening to young voices? For example, what guidance, training and best practice is there? Will the minister comment on the details of ensuring meaningful consultation, such as providing information in ways that are relevant and providing regular feedback? Participation is a process. By exercising their rights, young people can appreciate the rights of others. By expressing their views and having them listened to and respected, they can learn to appreciate the views of others and the merit of a tolerant society. Only through active participation can young people grow in confidence and self-esteem and contribute to their lives and communities as responsible, empowered citizens.

Can the minister give some detail on the programme for drugs education for school pupils and assure the Parliament that all schools will provide drugs education to every pupil by the target date of 2002, as indicated in the programme for government?

I too congratulate Lloyd Quinan on securing the debate tonight and recognise his sincere  commitment to trying to raise awareness about autistic spectrum disorders and to secure a much-increased level of service provision for children, their parents and their carers in Scotland. As vice-convener of the cross-party group on ASD, I want to make a contribution to the debate tonight and add my support to Lloyd Quinan's motion. As a constituency MSP for Coatbridge and Chryston, I have a large case load of wide and varying issues. However, an increasing number of parents have been seeking my assistance with the difficulties and challenges that they face on issues surrounding ASD, which range from worries over the triple vaccine, diagnostic difficulties and education issues through to problems with the criminal justice system. The main common issues are the lack of suitable support provision and the need for professionals across various agencies to work together to see the whole picture. Too often, professionals seem to have a lack of knowledge about ASD and an inability to work together to assemble all the pieces of the jigsaw and provide the best support for the individual child or adult. I am sure that my colleagues will raise the issues that I would like the minister and the Scottish Executive to address. Lloyd Quinan has already raised some of them. I want to concentrate on a specific issue involving educational opportunities for young children. I am becoming increasingly disturbed by the number of parents approaching me to ask for my intervention with their local authority in a desperate attempt to secure the education that they feel is appropriate for their child. Obviously, I hear only from the parents who are unhappy at the provision that is being offered; there are no doubt many who are satisfied with the school that has been allocated for their child. The nature of this disorder is such that it is referred to as a spectrum. Accordingly, there are different complexities in the spectrum and each child must be considered as an individual. Just because an excellent school exists that suits the majority of youngsters with ASD does not mean that it is appropriate for every child. I was going to intervene on Lloyd Quinan, but he was winding up. I must point out that local authorities provide some excellent schools that do good work in this area. One in Cathie Craigie's constituency of Cumbernauld, St Lucy's primary school, springs to mind. I want the minister, in his summing-up, to pay some attention to the plight of parents who know their child's needs and abilities but fail to convince the education authority to enable their child to attend the school of their choice. Such parents face the prospect of going through the authority's appeal procedure and, if that fails, the long, arduous, daunting and often costly route of legal  proceedings. In June last year, I asked the Executive to agree that the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill should set the tone to enable parents—specifically those whose children have special educational needs—to have a greater say in the education of their child. I further raised the point that that should see an end to circumstances under which parents feel that they have no choice but to take legal action against the local authority to have their child educated in the school of their choice. I will quote briefly from the response. Peter Peacock said: "It will always be regrettable if the relationship between parents and the local authority breaks down to the extent that parents feel that they must take court action. I would always seek to avoid that."— [ Official Report , 15 June 2000; Vol 7, c 397.]  Perhaps the minister could comment on how he intends to address that issue, which I am being confronted with by an increasing number of my constituents.  In the spirit of the members' business debate, I will conclude on a positive note and commend the Executive on its decision to implement a key recommendation from its document "The same as you?" and develop a national network for people with an autistic spectrum disorder. Clearly, that is a positive start to recognising and, I hope, addressing the issues of lack of provision and the need for joined-up working by well-trained professionals.

Given that the bill as introduced proposes that local authorities retain statutory duties to homeless persons and that, through the stock transfer agenda, they are likely to have a diminishing landlord role and will therefore rely more on other social landlords to house the homeless, will the minister indicate what constitutes a good reason for such landlords to refuse a council's request to provide a tenancy as outlined in section 4 of part 1 of the bill?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, question 12 is in my name.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to support disadvantaged children in their early years. (S1O-2571)

The minister mentioned child care. I ask again: will the plight of shift workers, many of whom work in vital public services and who have difficulty accessing child care, be considered? Will the minister expand further on exactly how the £70 million children's change fund will have an impact in Coatbridge and Chryston? How can that funding be accessed?

Will Mr Harding give way?

Will Mr Harding give way?

I am delighted to hear the minister announce the action that he will take, which will have a positive impact on low-income households. It is sad but not surprising that the nationalists cannot bring themselves to welcome—

I will turn to my question, to afford others the chance to welcome the minister's statement and to comment on it. The minister announced the consultation process. Can he say when that process is likely to finish and how it will be carried out, and will he ensure that the consultation is conducted in an inclusive way, along the lines of the consultation that was carried out for the equality strategy?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to assist women who are returning to work after career breaks. (S1O-2488)

I thank the minister for that response, but I wish to pursue an issue on which I have had representations from constituents. Will the minister outline the plans that are in place in the public sector to ensure that those who return to work from maternity leave or career breaks in services that operate non-traditional shift patterns—such as the police and postal services—are afforded the opportunity to access child care that suits their child-care requirements?

I, too, congratulate Jackie Baillie on her elevation to a cabinet post and Margaret Curran on her appointment as a deputy minister. I am pleased that the first debate they have secured is on equalities and the launch of the first strategy for equalities in Scotland. There is no doubt that a great many of our citizens are subjected to discrimination, and that many experience poverty, abuse and violence. An equality strategy is not some peripheral issue that is expounded by extremists. Inequality contributes to social exclusion and has a direct affect on women, disabled people, minority ethnic groups, children and others in our society. It is unacceptable and must be addressed as a mainstream issue by any Government with social justice at the heart of its agenda. As a member of the Equal Opportunities  Committee, I have an interest in all aspects of equality. Today, however, I will concentrate primarily on women's issues. Women make up 52 per cent of the population but are under-represented in public life. I am pleased to note from the strategy that proposals on public appointments will be published by the end of this year, and that statistics comparing the position of men and women will be available by spring next year. That will demonstrate the differentials factually and objectively. In 1918, the suffragettes won votes for women. Eighty years later, 82 per cent of MPs were men. That picture is reflected across society. For the whole of the past century, women have battled for equality. We achieved good representation in this chamber only through positive initiatives such as the Labour party's twinning exercise. I will address some important issues that are primarily, although not exclusively, women's issues: violence against women and rape. The figures on violence against women do not appear to be decreasing. It is estimated that one in four Scottish women will suffer abuse at some point in their life; it is also likely that that is an underestimate. Domestic violence is an on-going and widespread problem that crosses age, class and race. I commend the Executive's commitment to tackling the issue.

Absolutely. I said that the issues that I wanted to talk about were primarily, not exclusively, women's issues. Particularly alarming are the statistics produced by Zero Tolerance that show that, of the 14 to 21-year-olds surveyed, half of the boys and a third of the girls thought that there were some circumstances in which it was acceptable to hit a woman or force her to have sex. Forced sex was more acceptable than hitting. We need to ask where those attitudes are coming from. Unless we can address them, what hope do we have of tackling violence against women in the next generation? Recent reports have indicated that the number of rapes reported to the police in Edinburgh has almost doubled in the past six months. One explanation for that could be that women are beginning to feel more confident about reporting rape. However, the likelihood of conviction does not appear to have increased—only about 7 per cent of reported cases end in convictions. It seems that our legal system is failing the victims of rape. The forthcoming legislation to prevent the accused from cross-examining the alleged victim in rape  cases is a step in the right direction. I want to raise a final and extremely controversial issue: the pervasiveness of pornography in our society. Last week, I took evidence on that issue from Linda Watson-Brown, a lecturer and journalist. I had hoped to hear from Scottish Women Against Pornography, but short notice and limited resources meant that the group could not send a representative. The issue is not a comfortable subject for most of us. Anyone who raises concerns runs the risk of being branded a Mary Whitehouse, a right-wing anti-libertarian or worse. The argument usually comes down to a debate on censorship, but I believe that pornography is a sex discrimination and equality issue. It is also a vast income-making industry that exploits women's sexual and economic inequality for huge profits. Some evidence exists to suggest that pornography helps to create attitudes and behaviour of contempt and aggression towards women. I contend that women have a right not to be targeted by a medium that could cause them harm. However, lack of research means that it would be difficult to ascertain the facts. We must ask what pornography does to women's status in society, how it influences society's image of women, and the kind of barriers it poses to women's equality rights. I would like the minister to consider funding research into this taboo subject—let us open up the issue to real debate. We cannot continue to tackle the symptoms of discrimination and the abuse of power against women without at least beginning to scratch below the surface and examine areas that just might have a causal effect on inequalities. I welcome the historic equalities strategy, which will be welcome across Scotland, and fully support the motion.

I am pleased that this debate is taking place, as our appalling dental health record is a major cause for concern. I commend the Executive on its action plan, although I will return to the fluoridation part of it. One of the most worrying aspects of this debate is that an estimated 25 per cent of Scotland's children, and 37 per cent of adults, are not receiving on-going dental care. As we have heard, part of the problem lies in the way in which dental services are operated. Most family dentists are independent contractors who provide a mix of NHS and private services. A number of them have a reducing commitment to NHS work. Many, in fact, are encouraging patients to join dental insurance schemes. In the short time that is given to back benchers, I cannot go further into that important issue. Suffice it to say that I urge the Executive to put the brakes on the increasing privatisation of dental services and to concentrate additional resources on increasing community dental services. It should also consider ways of encouraging family dentists to recommit to NHS provision. I assume that most members would support such action. I certainly hope that my comrades on the Labour benches will join me in calling for an end to the shocking state of affairs in which many people are forced to choose between dental health and the other necessities of daily life. I will concentrate on two key areas—children and fluoridation, neither of which I will have time to do justice to. As the minister said, poor dental health is clearly linked to poverty, with the poorest 10 per cent of children in Scotland having 50 per cent of the tooth decay. A key Labour party principle is tackling inequality, and there is no doubt that serious inequalities exist in dental health. In Lanarkshire, our five-year-olds have the second highest incidence in Scotland of decayed, missing or filled teeth. The situation gets worse in older children. Lanarkshire Health Board is working to a five-year strategy, which was devised in 1996 and is about to be reviewed. The health board's strategy document states: "The most prevalent oral disease is dental decay, which affects the majority of the population in Lanarkshire. It is related to social factors and the incidence is worse in areas of deprivation."  I wanted to go into specific courses of action, priority groups to be targeted, and a number of local priorities, but I will not have time to do so. Many initiatives are already under way in Lanarkshire. Health visitors are already giving toothbrushes and toothpaste to parents whose babies are about eight months old, and they are encouraging parents to register their children with a dentist. A nursery school toothbrushing programme is under way. One of my colleagues mentioned GPs; health visitors are also encouraging GPs to get people to register. Nurseries and schools are promoting healthy eating initiatives. I commend Lanarkshire Health Board for recognising the problem and taking positive action. Over the past two years, the registration of children aged from zero to two has risen from about 10 per cent to 22 per cent. Many of the initiatives will make a significant difference. Diet is the key. I have a small child and despite my best efforts, and those of my husband, my child has a small amount of decay in one of his baby teeth. I see the pressures on parents to give sweet treats and sugary drinks to children as an act of kindness or a reward for good behaviour. I know that the older generation needs to be educated on what such treats do to little teeth. I have two questions for the minister. First, can the tobacco revenue fund be used to provide free fruit and milk in nurseries and schools? Secondly, can money be committed to funding innovative healthy eating projects, such as the campaign by the Airdrie & Coatbridge Advertiser , in conjunction with North Lanarkshire Council and the health board, to provide fruit for nursery and primary schools? A local business is providing the fruit for the four weeks of the project, but funding needs to be provided to sustain the project thereafter. I do not have time to go into fluoridation, except to say that it is taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut and could be detrimental to the health of the wider population. I urge the precautionary principle. Furthermore, fluoridation is a convenient way of disguising the underlying issues. It is poverty and inequality that must be addressed—those are the real causes of poor oral hygiene. I agree with other members that we need to have a separate debate on fluoridation.

Where does the funding for those dentists come from? Do health boards have to find the funding?

I congratulate Sylvia Jackson on initiating this debate and recognise Margaret Ewing's involvement in highlighting this matter of public concern. I signed the motion some time ago. More recently, I picked up a magazine in my dentist's waiting room and happened to read an article on the subject that we are discussing. It certainly took my mind off my teeth. Realising the implications for individuals and for public health in general, I decided to examine the issues further. As we have heard, body piercing is becoming increasingly popular and is a fashion statement, particularly for young people. For many teenagers, image and peer-group pressure become all important. Often, the body piercing can be done on a whim without any knowledge of the possible dangers or after-effects. It is worrying that it appears that a child of any age can have piercing carried out without parental consent. I am sure that many parents have been horrified when their child has appeared home with their ears, nose, navel or whatever pierced. They will be even more horrified to learn that the people doing the piercing are not subject to formal regulation or licensing and that anyone can set up a business that enables them to stab holes in the population and insert pieces of metal in our children. I imagine that, as I did, the general public believe such practices to be regulated. Too late, many will realise that that is not the case and will be left to deal with the consequences. There are many horrific stories of piercing gone wrong—we have heard about blood poisoning, scarring and paralysed tongues. More common problems involve infections, allergies and rejected jewellery. In some cases, the metal becomes embedded in the skin and has to be surgically removed. I talked to a GP recently, who told me that many young people baulk at the idea of having the jewellery removed and think that antibiotics can sort it out. They do not realise the seriousness of the problems. Many health risks could be avoided if piercing were regulated and proper after-care carried out. Anyone going for a piercing should be asked about their medical history, since some conditions could make the procedure dangerous. Sylvia Jackson mentioned the survey of GPs in Rochdale that shows that dealing with the effects of piercings that have gone wrong is an  unacceptable cost to society. The use of piercing guns needs to be investigated. I know that we do not have time to do the subject justice today, so I will simply point out that the design of those guns is based on a piece of equipment that was invented for cattle tagging. They cannot be sterilised effectively because they melt when they are run through an autoclave. I am not calling for the banning of body piercing—there is no doubt that people have a responsibility for their own health and actions—but they can act responsibly when having body piercing carried out only if they are aware of the issues and the possible consequences. In particular, action must be taken to safeguard children. This is a public health issue and a child protection issue. Parliament must take urgent action. We need a requirement for parental consent to be introduced to help protect young people, and some form of regulation and licensing of body piercing studios. This is not about stopping body piercing, but about ensuring that reputable piercers carry out piercing safely and hygienically and that the full facts about the risk and possible consequences of it are made available to the public.

I thank the First Minister for his statement. I  am sure that everyone in the chamber is very relieved by what he said. Does he agree that, no matter how this situation arose, it has shown clearly that we cannot afford to be wholly dependent on a finite fossil fuel that is controlled by a few multinationals? What steps can be taken to provide access to, and promote the use of, alternative forms of fuel for the future?

Further to the minister's comments on waiting lists and service delivery to patients, will she outline what measures, if any, to reduce waiting times for GP appointments are being considered, and whether performance targets are set and monitored for those appointments?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is promoting better children's health, particularly in relation to preventing heart disease in later life. (S1O-2037)

I am pleased to hear that response on a vital issue. Will the minister join me in commending the British Heart Foundation on its excellent poster campaign, which is helping to raise awareness of the issue? Does she agree that a hallmark of the Executive's approach to tackling ill health and child poverty has been its ability to cut across departmental barriers? Does she further agree that a good example of interdepartmental working is the positive promotion of play as a way of improving the health and well-being of Scotland's children?

When will the carers legislation working group, which was established last year as part of the Executive's strategy for carers, report on its findings? Will proposals to establish a legal right to respite for carers be included in that report?

As we are short of time, I will leave out my  preamble. I commend the Executive for the policies that it is pursuing on early education and child care, and I am pleased to learn that 68 per cent of three-year-olds are now in nursery education. Early education and child care are important in providing children with an enjoyable and stimulating experience, which can help their personal and social development. However, good quality and affordable child care can also enable parents who wish to work to do so by supporting them. Part of achieving that objective is the promotion of the vision of family-friendly employment practices to businesses and employers in Scotland. I know that the Executive is committed to promoting that. However, MSPs should also pursue that vision in our working environment. In my first speech in the chamber, I said that if Safeway could provide crèche services for its shoppers, surely Scotland's Parliament could do likewise so that parents can access the Government. I am well aware of the space restrictions in our temporary accommodation and I do not doubt that other employers have the same problem, but it is about time Parliament showed commitment and set an example for others to follow. How can we expect business and employers to adopt family-friendly policies when we do nothing, in a practical sense, in our own workplace to promote such an ethos? A nursery is required for everyone who works in the Parliament and we should provide a drop-in crèche for visitors and for people in emergencies. It is not acceptable to wait for the new accommodation, although—while I am on that subject—I hate to think that we will have three or four restaurants while being given the excuse that there is not enough space for a crèche and a nursery. Frankly, every MSP must take responsibility for that. The present members' lounge lies empty most of the time. Occasionally, it is used for lunches or receptions. If we got our priorities right, that space could become a drop-in crèche. We do not want it to become a smoking room instead. I have no doubt that the Executive is determined to provide support for children and families, and I fully support Sam Galbraith's motion. In that sense, the Parliament is family friendly. However, alongside the Executive's policies, we must get our own house in order, and we must start right now. If not, the message that we will send to employers is, "Do as we say, not as we do." Fine words and rhetoric in debates are worth nothing unless they are accompanied by action. I urge every MSP to demand action now, to prove that we can lead by example.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to encourage parents to participate in their children's education. (S1O-1967)

Would the minister agree that the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill sets the tone to enable parents—specifically those who have children with special educational needs—to have a greater say in the education of their child? That should see an end to the circumstances under which parents in my constituency feel that they have no option but to take legal action against the local authority to have their child educated in the school of their choice.

I ask this question as this is national breastfeeding awareness week. To ask the Scottish Executive what the most recent statistics are concerning the proportion of new Scottish mothers choosing to breastfeed in comparison to other EU countries, and what steps are being taken to increase the proportion of women, particularly from lower income households, who choose breastfeeding as opposed to formula milk for their babies. (S1O-1699)

Given that new mothers from lower-income households are provided with vouchers to buy formula milk, does the minister agree that there seems to be anomaly and that there is an agreed need to promote breastfeeding? Will she therefore join me in supporting proposals to introduce a voucher-based system to help lower-income breastfeeding mothers to buy healthy foods? Will she commend Lanarkshire Health Board on its excellent campaign, "You can't get fitter than a breastfed nipper"?

I was pleased to hear the minister's announcement of £200,000 specifically for voluntary organisations representing carers. Most members recognise the contribution made by carers in our society and the fact that any one of us could become a carer or require one at some point in our lives. Whether carer or cared for, I am sure that we all hope and expect that help and support will be available and that we will have certain rights. The debate is wide-ranging and I am interested in all its aspects. However, I would like to focus on the right to respite. Disabled people must have their rights respected and should not have services imposed on them. However, if our society does not recognise that carers have rights too, the outcome of the caring relationship could be that carers exercise their right to walk away and choose not to care. In some cases, carers will not even have the right to make that choice because they will simply become unable to cope. I vividly recall the story of Angela, which was told at the Shared Care Scotland conference in 1998. Angela was in her mid-40s and cared for her parents—one had Alzheimer's and the other had had a stroke—as well as her son who had Down's syndrome. All the professionals involved saw only part of Angela's difficulties. She felt that it was her duty to care for her parents and her son and felt inadequate because she was not coping. A neighbour occasionally sat for Angela, but then they moved away. When Angela told her GP that she was under stress, she was told that she was doing a good job. Angela had a complete breakdown and four members of that family ended up in residential care. Research by the Carers National Association has consistently shown that carers and disabled people are not getting enough support. I recognise the changing culture that my colleague Cathy Jamieson mentioned and I commend the Executive for that. However, the services that are available do not always fit people's needs. Common needs exist, but carers and the cared-for also have individual needs. Ask any carer about their needs and most would say that they want to be recognised and respected, to be given the appropriate information and to have a bit of a  break. That does not seem to be a huge amount to ask. We have not yet managed to empower disabled people and their carers and that means that there is still a lack of recognition, information and opportunities for breaks. Carers cannot receive services in their own right. That means that if the cared-for person refuses an assessment or services, the carer could be left unable to access support, yet still be expected to care. Services such as holidays, delivery services, domestic help and counselling should be provided to carers in their own right. Clearly, respite care and short-break care are services provided for the disabled person. However, carers are beneficiaries of such services and, in most cases, a right to respite would benefit and empower both cared-for and carer. There is no compulsion for the carer to care, but most choose to do so because of the wishes of the disabled person, love for them and a sense of duty towards them. For those reasons, it is extremely difficult for carers to refuse to care, even when they are not receiving the help and support that they need. I hope that the carers legislation working group will come up with proposals to give carers their own right to direct services and will consider the issue of respite care in full. A statutory right to respite is a logical step in empowering the cared-for and their carers.

Will the member give way?

Does not Mr Harding think that the Conservatives have a brass neck to talk about cuts in local government after 18 years of decimation of local government by the Tories? The unnecessary, unwanted and expensive local government reorganisation that the Tories implemented seemed to be designed only to break up the Labour-controlled Strathclyde Regional Council because they thought that it was too powerful.

Will the minister clarify whether planning requirements will cover masts on top of BT stations?

I am particularly pleased to take part in this debate, as I have been rather vocal on the subject of telecommunications developments since about June last year. First, I congratulate the Transport and the Environment Committee on the work it has conducted in its inquiry into the issues surrounding telecommunications developments. I submitted comments to the committee and I am pleased that the committee's recommendations have addressed my main concerns. Many of my constituents in Coatbridge and Chryston have expressed particular anxiety about the siting of masts and base stations in residential areas and close to schools, nurseries, play areas and hospitals. Although the National Radiological Protection Board has stated that there is no evidence to suggest that masts or their emissions are dangerous or are a threat to public health, neither is there concrete evidence to suggest that such masts are safe. Only time will tell. We have a responsibility to protect our citizens, particularly our children, from unnecessary exposure, which means not siting masts in residential areas or near to children's facilities or hospitals. Last year, Dr Helen Irvine, consultant in public health medicine at Greater Glasgow Health Board, called for the precautionary principle to be  applied to developments in such areas until conclusive evidence was produced to determine developments' safety or otherwise. Many local authorities have imposed moratoriums on telecommunications developments on their own land and buildings. I commend authorities that have taken such action, in particular North Lanarkshire Council. However, as we know, local authorities have no powers over the siting of masts under 15 m on private land. The lack of a requirement for neighbour notification and the lack of control that planning authorities have in making decisions on such developments means that there is no obligation for public consultation. It is not surprising that the general public see an anomaly in our planning process when a 15 m mast can appear unannounced on an individual's doorstep, yet he or she is notified when a neighbour wants to build a small extension. The plight of my constituents in the village of Glenboig highlights the problem. They discovered by chance that a day had been set to begin work on the installation of a telecommunications development on private land and under 15 m close to their homes. No consultation had taken place with the local community, despite the fact that the company involved produced information leaflets highlighting its commitment to communities. The leaflet stated that the company seeks to work closely with councils and local communities to achieve mutually acceptable locations for its base stations and masts. The company states further its commitment to discuss requirements with local councils and community representatives, to have regard for their views and concerns and to address those through open, honest and frank communication. The company failed to do any of that in Glenboig. In desperation, the villagers took matters into their own hands and put up a barricade at the end of the road to stop construction traffic. After that, I facilitated a meeting with company representatives, who seemed quite keen at that stage to attend a meeting. The villagers at the meeting asked that a site further from their homes be considered. They were not being unreasonable in doing that. The company agreed to look again at the siting of the development and to attend a further meeting. The next anybody heard, however, was that the planning authority had received notification that development was going ahead. I wrote to the company, expressing my concern and disappointment at the matter, and received a short note that merely stated the start date of development. Such a cavalier attitude to local communities  perfectly illustrates the need for a proper planning control system. The introduction of full planning control would make the system more accountable, would ensure consultation and would make provision for community input from the outset. I welcome the recent indication from the Minister for Transport and the Environment that she will respond positively to the committee's inquiry, and that the protection of public health will be at the heart of any action taken by the Executive. I also welcome the Stewart report. I accept the fact that there are benefits to modern communications systems, but they must not be to the detriment of our communities. Devolution means that we can implement a system to suit Scotland. This Parliament can lead the way in easing public anxiety, and I urge the Executive to implement the Transport and the Environment Committee's recommendations as soon as possible.

On the multi-modal study of the M8, does the minister agree that there are particular concerns about the safety record of the Shawhead junction in my constituency? Can she give any  indication of the steps that might be taken to reduce the number of accidents and to tackle the excessive congestion at that junction?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will respond to the recently published survey by its education department on incidents of violence against local authority school staff in 1998-99. (S1O-1295)

Is the minister aware that North Lanarkshire Council has employed a full-time counsellor in its education department to support staff? Will he consider promoting that to other authorities as an example of good practice, perhaps through the Scottish schools ethos network?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many local authorities now have byelaws in place to protect children from taking on unsuitable employment at a young age and what steps it is taking to ensure that those byelaws are enforced where they exist and are promoted as necessary where they do not. (S1O-1241)

Given the need for all agencies and organisations concerned with the employment of children to take a strategic approach, is the minister prepared to explore the possibility of supporting a particular pilot scheme, involving, for example, the Scottish Low Pay Unit and the Federation of Small Businesses in Scotland, to investigate ways in which employers can employ children and young people safely and responsibly?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there have been any reported cases of necrotising fasciitis in the area covered by national health service trusts in Lanarkshire during the past two years, how that level of cases compares with the national average and what action it plans to take to maintain public confidence in the light of any recently reported cases. (S1O-1187)

I thank the minister for that answer, which gives some comfort. With respect to all hospital-acquired infections, what additional training might be provided for clinical staff in the NHS in Scotland to ensure that standards and practices are widely known and strictly adhered to?

Given the recent reports of alleged cases of necrotising fasciitis at Monklands hospital, will the minister ask the local national health service trust to launch an immediate investigation into standards of hygiene and infection control to alleviate the concerns of my constituents and those in neighbouring constituencies?

Like other members, I am pleased to be taking part in this debate. I am delighted that the Equal Opportunities Committee, of which I am a member, has made a significant impact on the information that will be requested by the census next year. By its action, the Executive has shown that the Parliament and its committees have a significant role in shaping its decision making. I am grateful if the Executive has listened—even if it has been at the 11 th hour—to the concerns of the Equal Opportunities Committee and others on the need for information on religion and for expanded information on ethnicity. There have been requests for the inclusion of additional questions on other topics, particularly income, language spoken at home and the Scots language. It has not been possible to meet those requests this time. I, like others, hope that some of those matters can be addressed by the Executive by other means. I ask the Deputy Minister for Communities, in her summing-up, to comment on those matters, and on the language question in particular. There is no doubt that the information gathered from the census will be used to shape the future of all aspects of Scottish life, most importantly in the provision of public services. It is in that context that the Equal Opportunities Committee pursued an approach of mainstreaming equalities for the census content. How can we expect service providers to take account of minority needs in their forward planning if we are unable to provide them with the information that highlights the necessity to do so? As much as the debate surrounding the inclusion of a question about language remains, there is also a technical debate surrounding the ability of some of our people to understand and complete the census form, for language and other reasons. That is an issue that I would wish the Executive to address from a practical perspective. There could be a helpline, for example, or the assistance of voluntary groups could be enlisted. I would expect such action to help increase census return rates. I hope that all members agree that the changes in the census content that have been agreed will give a broader picture of Scotland's needs and the needs of its people in the 21 st century. I hope that we, as Scotland's representatives, can effectively target resources to meet needs and to help ensure equality for all.

I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on securing this important debate. Regardless of the fact that this issue is reserved to Westminster, it affects legislation on issues that have been devolved to this Parliament. Other members have made known areas for concern. We must ensure that Scotland's councils and communities are willing and able to provide the support that is needed and, as has been said, hospitality for those who seek asylum in this country. I would like to focus members' attention on one aspect of the debate. Although the UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees is of primary concern, regarding international law on this issue, the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child also has a locus. There are several references to child refugees in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and it is clear that the convention and its articles are to be applied to all children "within jurisdiction", regardless of the status of the child, their parents,  their legal guardians or their family members. In the United Kingdom—and, therefore, in Scotland—we are obliged, as signatories to both conventions, to provide child refugees with special protection and help, and to provide all children, including refugees and asylum seekers, with benefits from our social security system according to their needs. Support for children in need, who are dependants of asylum seekers, should not be at a lower level than support for any other child in the community. We have a role in providing children with basic rights such as food, clothes and a place to live, along with the right to participate fully in our society. No child, or their family, should have to face stigmatisation by the receipt of "in kind" support provision. The rights and needs of children must be of prime concern when establishing the means to support asylum seekers in this country and throughout the UK.

I am delighted that this motion has been chosen for debate this evening. I want to start by thanking the many members from across the political spectrum who signed in support of it, as well as those in attendance this evening. I believe that that shows a great willingness to improve the fundamental rights of children. Although this is a member's motion that specifically mentions a group in my constituency, I drafted it with the full support of the proposed all-party parliamentary group on children's issues. The group is working to raise awareness of children's issues in a non-party political manner, and I am grateful for the help that Children in Scotland has given in pursuing our agenda. The general assembly of the UN adopted the Convention on the Rights of the Child in November 1989. In doing so, it spelled out in an unequivocal manner the rights to which every child is entitled. In 54 articles, the convention establishes in international law that states that are party to it must ensure that all children, without discrimination, benefit from special protection measures and assistance; have access to services such as education and health care; can develop their personalities, talents and abilities to their fullest potential; grow up in an environment of happiness, love and understanding; and are informed about and participate in achieving their rights. It is not only the most comprehensive instrument in human rights law—it is also the most  widely accepted. The UK Government ratified the convention in 1991 and submitted its first report in 1994; the UN made various criticisms at that time. The second report was submitted in August last year and lists many initiatives for furthering the rights of children, such as the promise to eradicate child poverty, the emphasis on early-years provision and the introduction of key rights in the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. One of our colleagues, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, who was then a Scottish Office minister, said that at the core of the act were the rights of children and the responsibilities of adults and public organisations to care for and protect them. More recently, the Scottish Office child strategy statement undertook to identify and take proper account of the interests of children when developing policies. The ethos running through the convention is that of provision, protection and participation. The three key principles that should be applied through Scottish law and policy are those of non-discrimination, the child's best interests as a primary consideration in all actions concerning children and the child's view being given due weight. Mindsets need to be changed and mainstreaming of the interests of children must become second nature. There is a common misperception that the convention takes responsibility for their children away from parents and gives more authority to Government. That is not the case. The convention refers to the role of parents and families directly and charges Government with protecting families and assisting them to meet their essential role as the nurturers of their children. Parents have rights with respect to their children, but those rights are linked directly to the need for parents to promote and protect their children's rights. Of course, translating child-rights principles into practice requires action by Government. Many issues are involved in the debate on children, and I am sure that my colleagues will highlight some of them. I would like to focus briefly on article 31, which promotes the child's right to play. Last summer, I was invited to take part in the launch of Play Scotland's play agenda for the Scottish Parliament. The initiative challenges us to recognise that play is crucial to a child's physical and emotional health and well being, and calls for a multi-departmental approach to it. I am keen to support that agenda, primarily because of my knowledge of and association with Parents Action for Safe Play in Kirkshaws. In Kirkshaws, parents worked against the odds to transform a local derelict site into a multi-purpose play area suitable for all, from toddlers to teenagers. The motivation was the apparent connection between the lack of facilities for play  and leisure locally and young people's becoming involved at an early age with alcohol, drugs and vandalism. The group's achievement is an example of good practice, in that it incorporates key principles of the convention. The group has continued to pursue the provision of leisure activities within the play area and the wider local area, and it is now viewed as a model for others. I invite the minister, who has heard me speak in the chamber about the group, to visit Kirkshaws. Although there are success stories, there remain, unfortunately, many areas in which this society is failing to meet its obligations under the UN convention. Particular groups of children, such as those in travelling families and children with disabilities, remain disadvantaged. Shelter recently published a report that shows that thousands of children who suffer from homelessness are denied the right to play. There are children in Scotland who live in extreme poverty, and we do not need to look to the third world to see the exploitation of young people in the labour market. Last week, and again this week, "Newsnight Scotland" reported on the shocking scenes of young children working on the streets of Glasgow into the early hours of the morning. That practice breaks laws, directly contravenes article 32 of the convention and shows that our society fails to protect children. There must be multi-agency action to address that and to prevent children facing the dangers that are inherent in working in such conditions. The second report recognises that there are distinct cultural and traditional differences across the UK and includes chapters on issues that arise in different parts of the UK. The report recognises that there are significant differences in the Scottish legal system, and that devolution will further develop diversity of practice. Therefore, although we are already bound by the ratification of the UN convention, it is appropriate that the new Parliament should affirm its support and commitment to working continually to ensure full implementation in Scotland. The convention should be the main benchmark and inspiration for action at all levels of government. Although I applaud the work that the Government has done in the UK, there is no doubt that there are gaps in the implementation of the convention. One way to address those gaps would be to have a statutory children's commissioner for Scotland. Such an office could provide a proactive monitoring mechanism for the development of policy, promote children's rights, and provide an annual report to Parliament. The protection of human rights is by its nature an endless process, so there is always room for  improvement in the monitoring of performance.

I am aware of that. Although I am glad that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee is considering the matter, I ask the minister to undertake wide public consultation on the role of a commissioner, as the National Assembly for Wales is doing. Our children are citizens in their own right. We must make every possible effort to meet their rights and needs. It is appropriate to conclude with the words of Kofi Annan, the UN secretary-general: "To look into some aspects of the future, we do not need projections by supercomputers. Much of the next millennium can be seen in how we care for our children today. Tomorrow's world may be influenced by science and technology, but more than anything, it is already taking shape in the bodies and minds of our children." I hope that members will support the motion.

Like my colleagues, I am pleased that we are having this debate. I have a specific interest in  housing issues, as I worked as a homeless persons officer. I welcome the majority of what is outlined in the minister's proposals for the housing bill, in particular the need for action to provide good-quality, accessible housing in strong, secure communities. A roof over people's heads is a fundamental human right. It is a shameful indictment of society that homelessness in Scotland has more than doubled over the past two decades. The minister mentioned the number of empty houses and the number of people who are in priority need: there was some sort of equation. Finding ways of making those empty houses attractive to let is important. However, simply quoting numbers of empty houses gives no indication of size, type, location, suitability or state of repair. It does not give a true reflection of supply and need. Those who are in priority need—for example, people with children—can be helped to a degree. As long as they are unintentionally homeless, there is a statutory duty to find them a house. How long that takes is another matter. Unfortunately, many people are not deemed to be in priority need—for example, single people and couples who have no dependent children. It is extremely difficult to explain to them that, although they are homeless, society has no responsibility to house them. I am pleased that the Executive is beginning seriously to tackle the scourge of homelessness. Further, I would like some of the public misconceptions of homelessness to be addressed. In many cases, the circumstances could affect any of us. My main point today concerns the issue of the proposed extension of the right to buy. In the 1950s, the Tories promised to build a nation of home owners. Perhaps they believed that that would produce a nation of Tory voters. The scheme to achieve that involved selling off public housing at low prices and ensuring that councils were unable to replace those houses. The Tories just about managed to achieve their aim—an aim that was abhorred by socialists and which was to result in a massive reduction in public rented housing. It also resulted in many people being unable to afford their mortgages and maintenance costs. We are told that a recent survey shows that 83 per cent of people in this country aspire to own their home. I have two points to make on that. First, what other realistic choice of decent housing is there at the moment? Secondly, aspiring to own a home is different from the reality of being able to afford the mortgage and repair and maintenance costs. There is a market for anyone who aspires to own his or her home, but the aspirations of potential home owners should not be realised at  the expense of the needs of the homeless or people who are on waiting lists. It is argued that the single social tenancy cannot be fairly introduced without extending the right to buy. If that is the argument, the exemption from the right to buy of additional categories of special needs housing must be an anomaly. Further, why is the Executive telling housing associations to consider adopting charitable status to exempt them from the proposed extension? Without such an extension, I foresee the possibility of a withering away of the right to buy, and the massive expansion of affordable, decent public rented housing could be a reality. Many housing organisations—and other organisations, such as Scottish Women's Aid—have expressed concern over the extension of the right to buy. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations says that "rented housing would be residual housing of last resort" and that "it could easily create the kind of socially excluded communities that current Government policy is attempting to eradicate". Those views must be taken into account in this debate. In response to a question in this chamber, the minister said that, on this issue, we sometimes have to listen to the people, which is the purpose of this Parliament, and not necessarily to the professionals. Not all those organisations are professionals. I hope that the minister will seek out, and listen to, the voices of the many thousands of people who are homeless or on never-ending waiting lists. Their aspiration and need is for a decent, affordable roof over their heads. The many thousands who are not in the privileged position of being able to buy need a right to rent.

Does Michael Matheson think that the Act of Settlement impinges greatly on the daily lives of the people in Scotland?

I, too, am a wee bit surprised to be taking part in a full debate on this subject, although I signed the motion on the principle, about which there is no doubt. In signing the motion, I thought that Mike Russell's intention was to show the Parliament's feeling on this discriminatory act. The number of members, with differing religious beliefs, from all parties who signed the motion  showed that any fair-minded person would like this anomaly to be removed from our law. Nevertheless, we are debating an issue over which we have no power to legislate. I will not repeat Michael McMahon, who quoted from last week's Scottish Catholic Observer , in which that point was made. However, if the SNP chooses to use its parliamentary time for this purpose, it is clearly its right to do so. We can, of course, express an opinion; I am happy to express mine. The Parliament was founded on the understanding that the principle of equality was at its heart. We have a powerful Equal Opportunities Committee and a responsibility for the promotion and encouragement of equal opportunities, within the Parliament and the Executive and across public authorities and bodies. The principle of equality should apply to all Scotland's people, in all areas of life. There can be no doubt that the Act of Settlement is discriminatory to Catholics—not only in Scotland, but throughout the UK and the Commonwealth—and is offensive to any reasonable person. I well remember, as a young girl, being told that the monarch was not allowed to marry a Catholic. I grew up with that knowledge and wondered why I should have any fewer rights than other Christians, people of other religions, or any other citizen, because I am a Catholic. However, to be perfectly honest, I do not think that the Act of Settlement impinged greatly on my life or on my ability to make the most of my opportunities. Nor do I believe that the act has great significance to the daily lives of my constituents in Coatbridge and Chryston. What affect their lives are issues such as poverty, drug use and abuse, anti-social neighbours, homelessness, lack of educational opportunities—the whole huge area of injustice that is social exclusion. They want the Parliament to deliver what it has the power to deliver: social justice for all. As outlined in the Equal Opportunities Committee's statement, Monsignor Tom Connelly, the spokesperson for the Roman Catholic Church in Scotland, recognised that the Government has other legislative priorities. There is no doubt that the sentiments expressed in Mike Russell's motion are right, but I hope that they are being expressed for the right reasons—raising awareness of, and tackling in due course, this unacceptable, discriminatory piece of legislation—and not out of political expediency. If the former is the case, I trust that members will be able to support the Executive's amendment, as I intend to do. The Act of Settlement has been around for 300 years. The views of many members in the chamber have been clearly expressed and I am sure that the majority of people in our society will  welcome that. The act should be repealed. None the less, that is clearly a matter for Westminster to progress within its legislative framework; it is not for us to dictate a timetable for that. I support the amendment.

Does the member for Airdrie and Shotts agree that the doubled allocation of resources for the provision of carers services, including respite care, displays the Executive's commitment to carers issues? Will she further acknowledge that  the announcement of the requirement to consult carers groups in developing local service plans and to seek confirmation from those groups that resources have been spent appropriately will ensure that the Executive's strategy is delivered at local level?

To ask the Scottish Executive what level of provision is made throughout Scotland in secondary schools for pupils with speech and language impairments. (S1O-617)

Could the minister outline what measures will be taken to ensure that pupils who have speech and language impairments, and their parents and carers, will inform Government policy on this issue?

I am grateful to have the opportunity to speak in the debate. Like others, I commend the Executive for pursuing the strategy of good-quality, affordable and accessible child care. I have a particular interest in the issue, not only as a member of the Parliament, but as a mother and a long-time advocate of the need for universal child care provision. I warmly welcome the substantial increase in funding that has been allocated to councils to help to develop local child care strategies. That funding will ensure that the provision of play groups, out-of-school places and trained child mentors in every neighbourhood will become a reality for parents. Together with initiatives that have been undertaken by Westminster, the Scottish Executive has implemented measures to reassure parents that they will be able to work and pay for child care, and to ease parental worry about the quality of the child care that is provided. Child care is a multi-faceted, multi-agency issue, but today I want to highlight one aspect. The introduction to the Government's green paper, "Meeting the Childcare Challenge", states: "Childcare should be fun for children." Sam Galbraith earlier mentioned that child care should provide stimulating play opportunities. That concept has been developed successfully by a group of parents in my constituency, through the safe play agenda. Kirkshaws is an area that is afflicted by high unemployment and deprivation. It is, thankfully, also blessed with dedicated and determined parents. Struck by the apparent connections between young people involving themselves, at an early age, in drink, drugs and vandalism and the lack of local facilities for play and leisure pursuits, those parents formed Parents Action for Safe Play in Kirkshaws. In their own words, they "battled, negotiated and built partnerships" to transform a local site into a multi-purpose play area that caters for young people from toddlers to teenagers. Those parents continue to pursue the provision of out-of-school leisure activities for all children, and their achievements are hailed as a model for others.  Safe play, as an integral part of the child care agenda, also requires a multi-departmental approach and, in education, an ethos that supports playtime as a learning mode for all, and which encourages play activities outwith school time and school structures. In acknowledging the health benefits of children at play, we can attempt to combat issues such as the growing incidence of symptoms of heart disease in our teenagers. In housing, we should provide regulations to complement existing guidelines on the provision of play areas, in planning consents for new developments. Added to that, I would call on private developers to accept the responsibility, as parents and members of our communities, of making such provision regardless of profit margins. In training and enterprise, we can do much to promote recognised and valued qualifications and employment opportunities, as well as new qualifications. That would benefit not only our children at play, but our adults at work. The importance of play for our children, in expanding their social skills, fine-tuning their creativity, providing intellectual stimulation and improving their emotional and physical well-being, is a crucial ingredient in their human growth and development. After all, the happy and confident children of today will be Scotland's well-balanced, self-assured adults of tomorrow. It is our duty to our children to create an environment that will allow them to play at their leisure. We also have a duty to provide easy and affordable access to play areas, to make our roads safer in built-up areas, and—most important—to create the conditions in which children and their parents are free from the social, economic and educational pressures that restrict their ability to play. Our children need and deserve the opportunity, the time and the space to play. I commend the Government on its commitment to the implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. I call on the Executive to commit itself to recognising and promoting the right of the child to engage in safe play and recreational activities, as an important aspect of the child care agenda. I look forward to the additional initiatives that will be pursued in partnership with local authorities, and I welcome the commitment of the Executive to our children's future and the future of Scotland.

Like most of my colleagues, I welcome the minister's statement on this important issue. I am not an information technology expert and am just getting familiar with my laptop and with e-mail, which is becoming more popular by the day, so, as members can imagine, I found the concept of the year 2000 bug somewhat confusing. However, when I was told that some systems may not recognise 1 January 2000 or, as the year 2000 is a leap year, miss out 29 February entirely, even I could appreciate the complexities. Although I might be delighted to get a break from the dreaded e-mail, there are obviously serious ramifications for vital services and our everyday lives. Whatever services we access, a computer or electronic system is likely to have been involved, most of which will use a year date system.  Such implications exist across the public and private sectors, but it would take more than a short speech to consider all of them, so I will focus on local government. Councils provide a wide range of services to the public, so the impact of IT system failure as a result of the millennium bug would be far-reaching and immediate. Some of our most vulnerable citizens depend heavily on council services and could experience serious difficulties if any major problems were to occur in, for example, care in the community and the payment of benefits. Systems that could be affected include community alarm systems in sheltered homes and lift-monitoring systems in high-rise flats. Councils also have a general duty of care to the public and are required by statute to develop and maintain civil emergency plans. Those plans are of particular importance now and must be ready to react efficiently and effectively to any possible occurrences. Due to the serious implications of any system failure in local government services, preparations for 2000 began in May 1997. Auditors have monitored councils' preparations since then. In July, Don Cruickshank, chairperson of Action 2000, expressed concern that two sectors were still reporting a percentage of red, which meant that there was a residual risk to the aim of "no material disruption to UK infrastructure due to the Millennium bug". One of those sectors was local government. To their credit, councils reacted positively to the matters that were identified as requiring action. The Accounts Commission's most recent review showed that councils had made considerable progress over the summer. As we have heard, all 32 councils are now blue, which means that the assessment has identified no risk of material disruption to the infrastructure. It must be recognised that that progress is not the result of a few months' effort; it is the culmination of councils' work over a much longer period, with the assistance of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. It shows that councils have acted on public commitments made by their leaders earlier this year to take effective action to beat the bug. Credit must be given to council staff for their hard work, dedication and professionalism. However, there is no room for complacency. Progress to date must be sustained to ensure that there is no disruption to vital public services. Councils need to continue with their excellent efforts up to and beyond the new year. As has been said, the threat of the bug will not disappear then. There have been significant costs for councils,  which the Executive has recognised and to which it has allocated an additional £10 million. It is also funding specialist units in COSLA to provide advice and assistance. I congratulate the Executive on that, but urge it to consider the actual costs for councils after audit, with a mind to revisiting the settlement if necessary. Given the pervasiveness of computers throughout society, we cannot assume that nothing will go wrong, but the strenuous efforts made by local government and other public bodies and organisations have, no doubt, corrected the majority of potential problems. Furthermore, as the minister said, achieving blue status has required rigorous contingency planning to anticipate every conceivable failure. I believe that the public can have confidence that, in the words of the Prime Minister, "there will be no material disruption to essential public services due to the Millennium Bug as we go through the Millennium date change".

I welcome the minister's statement. Will he explain why additional funding has been given to the police but not to the fire service?

I welcome the Executive's commitment to the voluntary sector and to volunteering. That commitment is reflected in "The Scottish Compact". I welcome the formal acknowledgement that volunteers and volunteering make valuable contributions to the development of a more inclusive, participative and democratic society. I will focus on two areas that are mentioned in the compact under the heading "Recognition". It is pertinent and important that the Executive has been clear in its commitment to recognise and support the sector's independence, as stated by the minister. That independence includes the right to comment on and to challenge Government policy. As has been mentioned, some organisations might be wary of biting the hand that feeds them. I heard a comment on that issue from a voluntary organisation yesterday, but I was pleased to point it in the direction of the compact and to reassure it that it is perfectly acceptable for it to put its views forward, even if those views challenge Government policy. That organisation will be reassured by the minister's comments today. It is also important that the Government is committed to supporting volunteering initiatives as a means of extending people's participation in their communities. I have a vested interest in one such initiative—volunteering in practice—that is  now nearing the end of its pilot status. I was the volunteer manager for one of the two pilot projects that were designed to tap into the great potential that exists for extending voluntary activity into primary care. There is a long-standing tradition of volunteering in the national health service—valid contributions are made by many groups and individuals. However, it was felt that a more co-ordinated strategy for volunteering in the NHS was required. To that end, Volunteer Development Scotland has been developing such a strategy since 1997. It consulted health boards and has had assistance from local volunteering development agencies. NHS trusts are now required to develop volunteering policies by the end of next year, and those policies must be submitted to the Scottish Executive. As part of the volunteering in health initiative it was recognised that there was not the same tradition of or opportunities for volunteering in primary care. What activity there was lacked co-ordination and focus. That initiative was instigated to identify the volunteering opportunities in general practices and to encourage and promote the engagement of volunteers. The aim was also to enhance the quality of care and support given to patients and carers and to produce good practice guidelines. Examples of projects within that initiative include delivery of prescriptions to the elderly and the housebound, family support programmes, assistance with community transport, and support for people with medical conditions that require a change of lifestyle, such as diabetes type 2. The benefits of such projects are unlimited. Opportunities are provided to improve the overall delivery of services and active citizenship is encouraged. Through them, people become more involved in their communities and inequality is tackled through empowerment and participation. Those projects complement the work that is currently undertaken by paid staff and professionals. Pilot schemes in Culloden and Dundee are coming to an end; the results are being made available for any who are interested to see them. I hope that the Executive will take them on board and that it will take steps to encourage, support and promote the development of that type of volunteering activity in primary care. I would like to see such initiatives in my constituency and throughout Scotland.

Thank you. I was aware of that and I welcome Richard's pointing it out in the debate. Although I have focused on two aspects of the compact, I welcome the document in its entirety and I recognise its potential as a starting point for the national strategy for volunteering in Scotland and for the further promotion and development of volunteering. I support the Executive's motion.

rose—

I move, That the debate be extended.

The maximum time would be 6 o'clock.

I am pleased to participate in the debate, and I thank Nick Johnston for raising the issue. I also thank members who have shown support for the motion and the one that I lodged on telecommunications developments. The issue has undoubtedly caused concern to communities throughout Scotland, and certainly to  some in my constituency of Coatbridge and Chryston. The erection of telecommunications masts in residential areas, near schools, nurseries and play areas, has sparked anxiety among parents, communities and society in general. Recent reports have suggested links between the emissions from those masts and serious illnesses, but the NRPB has stated that "there is no evidence to suggest that these masts or their emissions are dangerous or a threat to public health." Importantly, the board has not stated categorically that the masts are safe. Its findings and statement do nothing to dispel the fears of our communities. Indeed, they may further fuel the notion that the emissions from those masts are not safe. Dr Helen Irvine, consultant in public health medicine at Greater Glasgow Health Board, recently called for the implementation of the precautionary principle when it is proposed that masts be erected near schools, play areas, nurseries and residential areas until such time as evidence is found conclusively to determine their safety or otherwise. I hope that that stance will be supported by members and implemented by local authorities throughout Scotland. It is important, however, to note that local authorities can take action only in respect to their own land and buildings. They have no formal role in any decision-making process regarding proposed masts under 15 m in height on private land—as Nick mentioned. Such masts can appear unannounced and unplanned and have caused a certain amount of visual pollution of the environment. Authorities are also unclear on their legal ability to reject planning applications solely on the basis of the public perception of danger. Despite receiving about 400 protests to a planning application for the erection of a mast in a small community in my constituency, the local authority felt ill at ease with including public perception as one of the planning considerations in rejecting the application. That was because of the lack of clear, unequivocal guidance on the public perception of danger as a valid planning consideration. I commend the authority on its decision to refuse planning permission for that development. Such planning factors can and should be addressed by the Parliament. Like Nick, I acknowledge the inquiry recently set up by the Transport and the Environment Committee, into planning and other issues surrounding telecommunications developments. I welcome the Scottish Executive's proposals to address some of the concerns surrounding those developments. However, its proposal to implement a prior approval scheme for masts under 15 m does not fully address the two most important factors that  relate to permitted developments: public concern and local authority powers. It is an anomaly in our planning process that the public's concern about those developments, justified or not, cannot be formally raised when dealing with masts under 15 m high and cannot be definitively construed as a valid planning consideration regardless of the height of any proposed mast. Giving full powers to local authorities to carry out a formal consultation process and to make informed decisions, rather than suggestions, on all such developments would help to ease public anxiety and would allow the authorities better to control the siting of all developments to the areas of least possible impact. The prior approval scheme will depend too heavily on the good will of developers to make alterations to their proposals. It is likely that any developer submitting a proposal for the erection of a mast at a particular site would have previously investigated other options, and so would be reluctant to make alternative arrangements. I call on the Executive to rethink the introduction of the scheme, and instead to remove telecommunications developments from the class of permitted developments in the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (Scotland) Order 1992. I ask the Executive to issue guidance to planning authorities on the legality of accepting public perception—on health or any other grounds—as a valid planning consideration. We are a new legislature and can lead the way in effectively addressing the concerns over the issue. We must take the steps that are necessary to ease the anxiety in our communities throughout Scotland.

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for extending the debate. I thank Andrew Wilson for securing this debate and I pay tribute to the Executive and to Parliament for taking seriously the contribution that is made to society by volunteering and the voluntary sector. Having been a volunteers manager with Volunteer Development Scotland until last Christmas, I have a specific interest in contributing to the debate. I worked on an on-going pilot project called Volunteering in Practice, which was instigated to assess volunteering opportunities in general practitioners' practices, to encourage volunteer participation and to produce best practice guidelines. Prior to engaging any volunteers, the issues of confidentiality and unsupervised access to children were of paramount importance. It was difficult to know at the outset of the project whether SCRO checks could be accessed, and the only avenues seemed to be through health boards or local authorities. The question of possible costs was very much in our minds. We recognised the fact that SCRO checks did not have a fail-safe ability to deliver protection for children. The validity of the checks depends heavily on the information that is given by the individual in question. For example, failure to disclose a previous name or address could render a check invalid. Nor is it necessarily the case that all ex-offenders should be excluded from volunteering; their exclusion would depend on the type of offence they had committed and the type of volunteering they wanted to do. Voluntary organisations must implement best practice. To add to what Karen Whitefield said, the recruitment and selection process, including the taking up of references prior to engagement, on-going staff and volunteer training and established supervision systems are all vital in providing a safe environment and ensuring rapid detection of any person who poses a danger. The SCRO checks system cannot deliver guarantees on its own. Although the voluntary sector can have some relief in the knowledge that  it can carry out checks, a number of concerns are posed. Interpreting information, assessing risk, securing indemnity insurance, its cost, the money required for the checks and whether the individual or the organisation pays, are all important issues. I welcome the proposed review. Guidance is needed on when such checks should be used. Further consultation with the voluntary sector is essential to ascertain what other options may be available and what can be done to overcome the problems with the checks.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As members of the voluntary sector have turned up, would you consider a motion to extend the debate? That has happened in other debates.

I move, That the debate be extended by up to 30 minutes.

Given what Mr Wilson is saying, a review seems a sensible course of action. Other issues  are involved as well as cost. Does he support a review?

I will keep my speech brief. I welcome the opportunity that Pauline McNeill has given us to raise awareness of breast cancer. Given that breast cancer is the most common type of cancer among women in Scotland, it is extremely important that the protection and treatment on offer are as effective as possible. I want to raise one issue in particular. In recent months, I have heard from breast cancer sufferers in my constituency, who, although generally happy with their treatment, have raised the issue of inconsistencies in prescribing practices by GPs in respect of repeat prescriptions. The drug tamoxifen is well established in treating breast cancer and is prescribed for up to five years. In addition, trials are in progress, in which tamoxifen is given to women at high risk, in order to assess  the preventive qualities of the drug. The success of that project depends on more women coming forward to take part. Given the potential of the drug to reduce the incidence of breast cancer and the possibility that it might also kill cancer cells directly, it is difficult to understand the variations in the repeat prescription periods. Some GPs prescribe for three to six months, yet others will provide repeat prescriptions for only one month at a time. That increases the cost and inconvenience to women who need the drug to save their lives. In its September 1999 report, "Supporting Prescribing in General Practice", the Accounts Commission for Scotland highlights variations in prescribing practices and calls for better management of repeat prescriptions. Better management would be to ensure uniformity in the prescription of tamoxifen, and to issue guidelines recommending that the care of breast cancer sufferers come before cost savings in prescribing. I urge members to take whatever opportunities are available during Breast Cancer Awareness Month—this month—to ensure that issues related to prevention and treatment are highlighted and addressed.

To ask the Scottish Executive what guidance it will give local authorities on the implementation of an article 4 direction to restrict permitted development and require application to be made for the erection of all telecommunications equipment, regardless of height. (S1O-376)

What further guidance will be provided to local authorities with regard to the acceptance of public perception of danger as a valid planning consideration?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make a statement on the progress being made towards a national child care strategy. (S1O-250)

I thank the minister for his response, but I would like to draw his attention to one particular aspect of the child care agenda that I feel is not given the acclaim that it deserves—that of safe play. No doubt the minister is aware of the added value that play can offer to a child's education and social development—

Yes, I am about to.

I just wanted to put safe play into the context of the child care agenda. Could the minister clarify the role that play will have in Scotland's child care strategy, with specific reference to the advancement of the provision of out-of-school care? Could I also draw his attention to the excellent facility at Kirkshaws built by Parents Action for Safe Play?

I welcome the opportunity to participate in this debate on an excellent programme for the good governance of Scotland and, more important, an agenda designed to ensure the delivery of this Parliament's priorities and promises to the people of Scotland. The concept of identifying year by year a timetable for delivering the priorities will undoubtedly revolutionise the way in which Scotland's people hold the members of this Parliament accountable. However, I would like to refer members to one promise that is made in this programme—the promise to introduce next year a carers strategy to assist unpaid carers. The issue is pertinent to a great number of my constituents in Coatbridge and Chryston and to thousands of carers throughout Scotland. According to current statistics, at least one eighth of the members in this chamber should have already experienced the demands and difficulties of caring at home for a friend or relative. I welcome the initiatives that were previously announced by the Executive in pursuit of a needs-led caring at home agenda. I commend it also on its recognition of the unpaid work carried out by many of Scotland's citizens. That work, undertaken by almost 500,000 people in Scotland, is estimated to save the Scottish taxpayer some £3.4 billion a year. Appreciation of that is long overdue. Additional funds have already been allocated to local authorities throughout Scotland for the provision of respite care, and the resourcing of much-needed assistance for carers is symbolic of the commitment shown by the Government and is richly deserved by Scotland's carers. I share the Executive's hope and vision for modern community care provision and look forward to the adoption of that ideal by local authorities and other care providers. While congratulating the Executive on its current and future pledges to carers, I seek assurances that the needs of carers and the cared for will be central to the development of our agenda and our  legislative proposals. I hope very much that monitoring procedures will be put in place quickly to guarantee that our plans for community care are effectively delivered at local level, for the benefit of people in greatest need. I see that Dorothy has left, but I take on board to some extent her comments about consultation. I trust that our vision of a needs-led approach will be successful and will ensure proper consultation and resource allocation by local service providers. I look forward to the programme for government being implemented and I support the motion.

I chose to make my first speech in this debate because, although I am proud to represent Coatbridge and Chryston here in this Parliament, I also want to be proud of the Parliament that we are shaping for the future. I support the First Minister's motion to move forward with the construction and completion of the building at Holyrood.  Scots are not fooled by the folly of a small number of people who would have us remain with the status quo-a status quo which excludes the people of my constituency from accessing me in a parliamentary environment; a status quo which goes no way towards providing the family-friendly environment that the people of Scotland want; a status quo which strengthens the notions of ivory towers and closed doors in our political processes.  I believe that the people of Scotland do wish to access their representatives in a parliamentary environment and do wish to see family-friendly policies emanate from Parliament and be embodied within it. They do want to see real openness and transparency in government first-hand.  We have the opportunity to achieve progress and establish the people's Parliament, not solely in our policy decisions on the people's priorities, but in the physical environment in which those decisions are made. We should establish a Parliament that provides access to all, regardless of differing abilities, and embraces the Government's priority of inclusion. We should establish a Parliament that seeks to attain environmental excellence that will be hailed as a beacon to others.  In the Parliament we have an unrivalled opportunity to display to the world the excellence that exists in Scottish business, for example, through an arena for Scottish trade and industry exhibits. We could utilise the Parliament building during recess for innovative schemes to encourage young people to take part in the political process and we could use it as a resource for community groups. The Parliament building should make provision for working mothers and fathers. If Safeway can provide creche facilities for parents while they shop, surely we can provide  them for parents while they lobby Government.  These ideals are not possible in our temporary accommodation and a new search for a permanent home will not deliver any increase in quality or value for money. As we have heard, delaying or abandoning the process will have cost implications. Although I have sympathy with people who feel that we should use an old historic building, such buildings exist because of the vision and courage of someone in the past. We are making history with our Parliament: the building should be a sign of our times for future generations.  The Parliament building should accommodate our wishes, should make provision for inclusion, and should reflect the sentiments and views of the Scottish people. We have to accept that the measures that will be required to do that-if we are to build on solid foundations-do not come cheap. Clearly, the original construction cost estimates of 1997 have been exceeded to meet the demands for increased floor space and additional requirements. Is that really the main issue to consider when deciding where the permanent home of our new-found democracy should be based? It has taken 300 years for the Scottish people to have their Parliament returned to them. Their desire is for a Parliament that will reflect and address their needs and aspirations, and that will do so not on a temporary basis or with a make-do mentality.  The people of my constituency of Coatbridge and Chryston, and all the people of Scotland, want a Parliament that will encourage positive and progressive debates and decisions on the issues that affect their daily lives. I believe that they want that process to take place in a building that is fit to reflect the importance of those issues, a Parliament building that will bear the symbols of Scotland's heritage and the aspirations for Scotland's future.  We have a duty to Scotland and its people today, tomorrow and in the next century. That duty involves ensuring that Scotland's Parliament and the Scottish Parliament buildings are a permanent fixture of Scottish life for many generations and many centuries to come.