8. To ask the Scottish Government what assessment it has made of the availability of the help to buy (Scotland) scheme for residents of island areas that do not have participating builders. (S4O-02834)

Will the minister undertake to look into the situation in Shetland, where participating builders are not coming forward? Will she look at the flexibility of the scheme to allow housing associations or Shetland Islands Council, as a social landlord, to take on that role for the scheme, which could assist people?

The cabinet secretary has already decided to abolish the crofting counties agricultural grants scheme and replace it with a new scheme. Would he be so good as to tell Parliament, and therefore crofters, what the eligibility rules will be for that new scheme, when crofters will know about it and when they can, therefore, plan their businesses in light of a change that he has already announced?

In 2012, cancer was the cause of one third of all deaths of men and women in Shetland. The disease and how islanders tackle it are the reasons why I have initiated this parliamentary debate. I thank colleagues from my Liberal Democrat benches, the Conservatives and Labour for supporting the motion on oncology services at Aberdeen royal infirmary. The shocking death statistics for Shetland highlight why the rising number of people who are in need of specialist cancer care is one of the great health challenges of the 21st century. Medical advances are enormous, but the investment in cancer research still has much further to go. Treatment of the disease depends on specialist medical staff across the varieties of cancer that afflict men and women. Trained staff are essential, and having enough trained staff is even more essential. Today in Parliament, I wish to highlight the importance of ARI having a full complement of trained expertise to diagnose, treat and continue helping people to fight cancer. It is not just the granite city that depends on ARI for cancer care. Patients arrive from across the north-east and the islands. Orkney and Shetland send islanders to ARI for a variety of specialist care and procedures. Aberdeen is the closest major hospital to Shetland, but travel still means an hour’s flight south and a hospital transfer, or a 12-hour overnight ferry crossing. That is straightforward for the hale and hearty, but for those who are sick, worried and fearing the worst, a flight or the north boat is a major factor. I have shared too many planes home from Aberdeen with Shetlanders after hospital treatment, so I know that it is no picnic. With cancer treatment, and chemotherapy and radiotherapy in particular, the medical advice is to limit the stress of travel. Let me share a couple of observations that have been made to me by Shetland general practitioners. Bixter’s GP said: “The service provided by Aberdeen to all Shetland patients means keeping travel times and stress on patients and family to an absolute minimum”. Citing the challenges for accompanying families, Yell’s GP said: “Aberdeen is far enough to travel as it is, and if it were further relatives may not be able to visit.” The arduous nature of cancer treatment dictates what the body and mind can endure. Resting between bouts of radiotherapy is essential. Returning home to Shetland between treatments is unrealistic and for many, frankly, impossible. Liam McArthur will mention that point, and I hope that the minister will listen carefully to what he says on it. Geography dictates much of the cancer treatment pattern, which is why CLAN Haven in Aberdeen is so important. It is much more than just a place to stay; it is a centre of peace, love and emotional support for Shetlanders who are going through the mental and physical efforts of care. Cancer patients stay for free and families accompanying them stay for a fraction of the cost of a hotel in the overheated Aberdeen economy. I stress the importance of a loved one accompanying a cancer patient. The emotional turmoil of the disease is absolutely enormous, so a wife, husband, nephew or just a friend is absolutely critical. They need somewhere to stay, which is why CLAN is so good. Shetland raised more than £600,000 for the new CLAN Haven. The redoubtable Debbie Thomson has shown me round. It is a wonderful place with wonderful staff. Last year, 39 Shetlanders stayed at CLAN while they received radiotherapy, which was for an average of 27 nights each. That is how important it is. Just last week, the national health service north of Scotland planning group acknowledged that. It said: “What has been evident in organising external support has been the difficulties in co-ordinating accommodation”. It continued: “NHS Grampian in collaboration with CLAN provide a first-class service for accommodation support which other Boards find difficult to match.” That is a powerful testament to the service, which is arranged to help islanders in Aberdeen and which is not replicated elsewhere. It is also why, for islanders, being referred elsewhere should be the last resort and should be based on a particular clinical need and not a shortage of oncology staff at ARI. When people started approaching me last year saying that ARI’s oncology department was understaffed, alarm bells rang. In October, a constituent wrote to me saying: “I was down in Aberdeen yesterday seeing my oncologist half way through my chemo. Part of this was to plan my radiotherapy. He hit me with a bit of a bombshell. It turns out that due to a lack of oncologists who specialise in radiotherapy I may have to receive my treatment in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dundee or Inverness.” As it turns out, following pressure from NHS Shetland, Shetland-based GPs, patients and many other people, such travelling has been minimised. In his letter to me on 18 November, in response to my representations, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said that ARI was three consultants under the complement required to cope with the workload. I understand that the number has now been reduced to one. The chief executive of NHS Grampian has said that the number of north isles patients who have been referred elsewhere in Scotland is very small, which I very much welcome. That proves that pressure can pay off, but it is clear what would have happened if the matter had not been pushed. I thank the cabinet secretary, who responded to my representations, and I hope that Alex Neil will maintain the pressure. NHS Grampian tells me that oncology is still understaffed. I thank Mr Carey for his candour. There has been a variety of temporary staff—locums—and that is not good for continuity of care or keeping NHS Grampian’s budget in order. Shetland GPs have made me aware of complaints regarding a locum at ARI, who is no longer practising in Aberdeen. That rather makes the point about permanent staff and the importance of quality of care; it also highlights the inherent weaknesses of a system that depends on locums. The wider picture must surely be addressed. Why is there a shortage of oncologists? Is the power of medical schools and the teaching hospitals across the United Kingdom too great? The training of specialist cancer care staff for five or more years into the future is taking place now. There must be an argument for training more staff rather than fewer. The quantity of temporary appointments, not just in cancer care but across other specialisms, means that too much of the NHS budget is spent on higher payments to short-term staff. That is not desirable, and I hope that ministers are giving the matter considerable attention. Shetland and Orkney patients need cancer care of the highest quality, in the closest hospital to the isles. The NHS faces the challenge of reducing the enormous stress and worry of a killer disease, which is responsible for a third of male and female deaths in Shetland. That challenge is best met not by referring people across Scotland but in Aberdeen and in as local a health setting as possible, where the support of family and loved ones is easier to arrange and maintain throughout treatment. I ask the Scottish Government to recognise the issue, not just in January 2014 but for every January, and to work with NHS Grampian and the island health boards to deliver the cancer care that my constituents need.

Does that collaborative work across the three areas mean that the consultants and trained staff will cover one another, instead of patients having to move between Inverness, Aberdeen and other locations?

Will the minister ensure that the Bellwin formula applies to the subsea cable between Shetland and the UK network that was broken, which cut off broadband and mobile communications on 28 December? Will he ensure that such communications, which BT will invest in this year across the whole of the west coast of Scotland, are protected in the future, and will he investigate how that can best be done?

Is the cabinet secretary aware that there is currently an industrial dispute pending at the Sullom Voe plant between Petrofac, the contractor for the Total gas plant, and the union? Has he had a chance in his busy day to be in touch with either the contractor or, indeed, the union, given the potential to disrupt what is at the moment the largest civil engineering contract in Britain?

Will the cabinet secretary update the Parliament on the status of the European Union-Norway talks?

The EU fisheries talks next week may not agree much. The continuing failure of international discussions involving the EU, Norway, the Faroes and Iceland will mean that agreement on stocks caught and fished in EU waters will not happen until January—if the industry is lucky. The cabinet secretary was good enough to illustrate that point earlier. I and the fishing industry are very concerned that the industry will have no fish to catch well into 2014 because it suits some countries to have no agreement. That is where we are this year, which is very different from previous years. Iceland and the Faroes have no interest in being helpful to our fishermen. The EU sanctions in place over their illegal fishing of pelagic stocks are hurting. Those countries can block agreement on the mainstays of the Scottish fleet, which are cod, haddock and whiting. That is the current position. Norway, which makes Machiavelli look a rank amateur when it comes to negotiations, is resisting EU attempts to give the Faroes and Iceland a larger slice of mackerel quota, and quite right too. They may do that, however, on the basis of extracting a better deal for themselves on other fish stocks. I am sure that the cabinet secretary is clear that if there is no agreement between the EU, Norway, the Faroes and Iceland, it will lead to immense pressure for a deal on mackerel. The EU will argue that agreement must happen to allow the Scottish white-fish fleet—and indeed other fishing fleets—to sea in EU waters. The price of that deal is greater Faroese and Icelandic access to mackerel. That is what the local industry fears—it is certainly what I fear—will happen in 2014. The Faroes and Iceland will be rewarded for illegal fishing. I hope that the cabinet secretary will confirm that that would be utterly irresponsible and unacceptable. In my view, he should resist that Hobson’s choice. It would be very wrong if our white-fish fleet could catch fish in 2014 only at the expense of cuts in mackerel quota for the Scottish industry. Those two are linked as they have never been linked before. The most important win that the cabinet secretary can achieve next week in Brussels is, as he said, on effort—the time our fleet can spend at sea. The cod recovery plan is a shambles. Two years ago, the industry was promised by both the Commission and the Government that there would be changes to the plan. However, as fishermen said to me in Lerwick yesterday, nothing about it has changed. The SFF advise that the Commission’s proposals on cutting the time our boats will have at sea in 2014 are unacceptable. As the cabinet secretary rightly said, the Commission hides behind EU law, but that is the law that it and the Government told the industry two years ago would be changed. It has not been changed, so will the cabinet secretary assure the industry that coming from the December fisheries council with anything worse than an effort freeze is simply not an option? Fishermen have complied with draconian EU rules, some of which are designed here in Edinburgh. Our vessels are allowed to fish for only 90 days in a year. It is possible to achieve more days by jumping through further bureaucratic hoops, but we do not ask any other business in Scotland to restrict its open trading to just 90 days out of 360. Despite sacrifice layered upon sacrifice, there appears to be no let-up in the draconian measures placed upon vessels. If the cod recovery plan is bad—and it is—fishermen also fear the imposition of a discard ban, not because they do not believe that stopping the dumping of marketable fish is the right thing to do, but because the important thing is getting the plan to work in reality. No one—and I mean, no one—has yet explained to the industry how a discard ban will work in practice. It is right to stop dumping. Every fishermen would wish to do that, and the processing industry would wish to stop it as well. However, many Scottish white-fish boats, and certainly the Shetland fleet, depend on a mixed fishery. They catch and have quota for different species. One cannot just catch one species in a net and then haul for a second species. That is not the way a demersal fishery works. So, the devil will truly be in the detail. The industry wants an assurance from the Government that it accepts that the policy must be sensible and possible; otherwise, far from reducing discards, it will increase them. I know that the cabinet secretary is all too well aware of that, but he needs to commit not just to the rhetoric of a discard ban, which we are all very good at, but to ensuring that it works in practice. There has rarely been a more fraught year than this for the EU fisheries council, not because the prognosis on quotas is bad but because there is a link between what happens in international talks on the pelagic industry and what happens to our white-fish industry like we have never seen before. If there is any sell-out by the EU on rewarding those who are fishing illegally, there will be an outcry, not just in Scotland but right across the EU. Of that there can be no doubt. I certainly support the cabinet secretary’s motion today. He goes to the talks next week with my support. However, I suspect that the talks between the EU and Norway, the Faroes and Iceland will be far more important in the longer term than what happens in Brussels in a week’s time. I move amendment S4M-08450.1, to insert at end: “; notes the importance of the EU Agriculture and Fisheries Council in December 2013 agreeing a pragmatic implementation of the EU discard ban on the whitefish fleet; recognises the need for changes to the Cod Recovery Plan, which discriminates against the Scottish industry; supports increases in quota allocations and days-at-sea, and calls for EU international sanctions over mackerel to be given time to deliver the outcomes that the EU has agreed”.

Alex Johnstone started his contribution by saying that this annual debate is Parliament’s way of sending off the minister with great support. It did not always feel that way back in the early days; I remember a few debates that were certainly not like that. I can only imagine what Richard Lochhead’s reaction would have been if Ross Finnie had squeezed in a fisheries debate between debates on human rights and sport. I will leave that there. I agree with the priorities that the cabinet secretary set out in his opening remarks, and I agree with his point about the freeze on days. I would argue for an increase in that figure—as I am sure he would—but he has to work within the art of the possible. He has to work hard with other member states on dealing with the inherent flaws in the cod recovery plan that Jenny Marra touched on. They do not go away. We keep being told that the plan is going to go because it has no further role to play, but every year our fishermen see that it is still in place and imposing the kind of restrictions that the minister has to deal with every December. As a representative of an island that is massively dependent on fisheries, I would dearly like to see the end of an inherently flawed policy. I also agree with the cabinet secretary’s point about monkfish flexibility.

I will just finish my point. Monkfish is the most valuable species to the Shetland fleet, being worth approximately £4 million out of the £60 million of fish that was landed in Shetland, which is a quarter of all fish landed in Scotland.

I do not in any way doubt the cabinet secretary’s involvement or his expertise, as he has taken part for many years. However, my knowledge of the process has taught me—I am sure that Stewart Stevenson, who like me is an ex-minister, will accept this—that it is the bilaterals that matter. The work that matters, and of which Richard Lochhead has huge experience, is not in the Council chamber. We may make a big song and dance about that aspect, but the reality of European negotiations is about the people whom one talks to in the coffee room—I shall keep it at that—and the agreements or near agreements that one can come to there. I would like to make two other points about observations that colleagues across the chamber have made. First, we have talked the talk on discards, but if we look at the Norwegian experience of a discard policy we see that it is anything but a discard policy. The Norwegians describe their fishing approach as one where they have banned discards, but if we look closely at it, as I am sure the cabinet secretary has, we find that there are areas in which they have a discard ban and that they also have what is in my view an enlightened policy that recognises their white-fish industry’s needs and its catch in a mixed fishery. That relates to the one point that I would make about Stewart Stevenson’s earlier remarks about our industry volunteering for selective gear. I am sure that, like me, he would recognise from his own constituency that when our boats were asked to put cameras on board it was because there were more days to achieve from that policy. The industry was not exactly ecstatic about it—I am sure that Mr Stevenson had the same kind of conversation on the pier as I did—so we should be careful what we say about the balance between our industry moving forward on selective gear and the reality that it has been forced to do so because that is the nature of the requirement. My final point is on the north-east Atlantic mackerel situation, and I am grateful to other colleagues who have mentioned that. It is tied to white-fish stocks for the first time in our observations on those matters, and I wish the minister well in untangling a difficult knot.

I agree with the sports minister about the principle of giving young people opportunities. Does she recognise that in outlying areas an argument is being made about the need to address transport costs? The draft strategy does not particularly address the issue, as I read it. Will she ensure that the final version covers that point?

Richard Lyle was right to say that most American politicians, even to this day, still pray in aid John Fitzgerald Kennedy, and many around the world do so, too. That has led to some of the greatest put-downs in American politics. The one that I remember best was from the 1988 vice presidential debate, in which the Republican Dan Quayle was holding forth about his experience in office compared to Kennedy’s when he entered the White House. He was up against Senator Lloyd Bentsen, who was quite a bit older than Quayle. Bentsen pulled himself up to his full six foot two, looked over the podium and said: “I knew Jack Kennedy ... Senator, you’re no Jack Kennedy.” I suspect that many of us would have been pretty proud of that kind of political put-down. Thirty years ago, I spent some time in an American history class with students of my age discussing presidents. The class teacher asked us to name the president that we would most like to study, to learn about what they had done for their country. Inevitably, many chose Jefferson, Lincoln, Eisenhower or of course Washington. I said Kennedy, for two reasons. First, there was the fascination that members have described with the kind of person that he was—yes, he was flawed but in many other ways he was utterly magisterial—and with what he brought to his politics and his country. We have to remember that that time of change was about the new frontier, the new beginning and replacing the war hero, Eisenhower, who had served his country in many ways. America was changing and Kennedy epitomised that, grabbed it and drove it in a way that I do not think anyone else could have done. Just five weeks ago, for the first time in my life, I got to Dallas and took my family to Dealey Plaza. We went into the book depository, which is now a museum, went up to that sixth floor and looked out of that window. My son said, “Dad, are those two crosses on the road what I think they are?” They are—they mark the spots where the first bullet hit Kennedy and where the second one hit some yards further down the road. We walked round Dealey Plaza and behind the picket fence. I confess to Malcolm Chisholm that I have read quite a lot of the books and the conspiracy theories, but I still do not know what I believe. However, having been there, I know that it is an awful lot closer when you are there than when you see it on television or in a Kevin Costner movie.

Forgive me, but I will just make my speech. We will never know who killed Kennedy, and I suspect that, even after reading the Warren commission’s report, neither will America. As members have mentioned, Kennedy brought forward civil rights legislation. I point out to Jackson Carlaw that, in Robert Caro’s incomparable book about LBJ, he describes how the legislation passed through Congress and what Johnson did to get it through, particularly against his party’s wishes, but the point is that it would never have got through had it not been for Kennedy’s death. The sad conclusion that Caro comes to in that important text about American political history is that the only reason why the legislation passed through Congress was because Johnson was able to twist, cajole and make senators and congressmen recognise the importance of the legacy that was the civil rights legislation and therefore rightly get it through the legislative and lawmaking systems. The other enduring legacy of Kennedy is his speech making. His inaugural speech in 1961 is, for many of us, the defining text on how to write a speech. Believe me, most of us, including me, will never get there but, as an ex-speechwriter, it is nice occasionally to try. Obama does that. His speech in Chicago when he won the election was up there with Kennedy’s, although not quite as good. Many fine men and women will seek to get to the top of the rhetorical Everest that Kennedy created. On the 150th anniversary of the Gettysburg address—when we remember that a speech can be two minutes and not 22—it is important that we remember Kennedy’s legacy of the power of speech and words to swing an audience and to move a country. That is possibly his most enduring legacy—the one that the world will never forget. Whether we can remember what happened or, like many of us, we cannot, we will certainly always remember JFK.

I found the Deputy First Minister’s explanation of all those amendments highly stimulating. I am by no means opposing them but ask her to reflect on the balance of new amendments that are being introduced at stage 3 against amendments that have been lodged to respond to issues raised at earlier stages of the bill’s consideration. I was doing some reading last night for this debate and found two very good points of order, one from Bruce Crawford and the other from John Swinney, at stage 3 of the Licensing (Scotland) Bill back in 2005. Indeed, Mr Crawford might remember the occasion well. In fairness, the amendments to which he took very fair exception were manuscript amendments, which, of course, the Deputy First Minister has not lodged. However, I wonder whether in the Parliament’s consideration of stage 3 proceedings some thought might be given to the balance between new amendments and those that are consequential on previous discussions on the bill.

The amendments are a sensible stab at a genuinely difficult issue. I believe that Lewis Macdonald seeks to improve the bill. Throughout consideration of the bill, the Deputy First Minister has made sensible remarks about transparency and the evidence that the committee took from the earliest stages of our deliberation was strong on that simple principle. Therefore, when a measure is proposed, even at this late stage, after the stage 2 debate, I believe that there is merit in seeing what can be done to strengthen that transparency for the very reason that the Deputy First Minister has used from day one—and with which I agree—that the bill must command public support. It must be seen to be entirely beyond reproach, and Lewis Macdonald’s amendments seek to help with that, so I hope that members will support them.

Earlier, I met a Government minister from Jordan, who described to me the challenges of providing sanitation, water and food for the million and a half Syrian refugees that Jordan is dealing with, and of educating the hundreds of thousands of new children in Jordan’s schools. On days when we bandy round the word “historic”, we should probably think about those who are less fortunate than we are and who live in challenging circumstances, wherever they are around the globe. I thank Andrew Mylne and his clerks to the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, as well as the advisers, who gave the committee trenchant and helpful consideration during the bill process. I also thank Bruce Crawford for the way in which he convened the committee. Fairly, he made a political speech, much of which I enjoyed although not all of which I agreed with. I did not recognise his point about the manner in which the SNP wants to frame the debate. It is entirely fair for all of us who disagree with the proposition of separating Scotland from the rest of the United Kingdom to question that very robustly indeed. Just because people question it does not mean that they are anti-Scottish or anything else. I agree with Mr Crawford’s point about raising the tone. Let us hope that that is what happens, rather than what we have seen from some in his party in just the past few days in respect of the current Secretary of State for Scotland. I thank the Deputy First Minister for the tenor of her remarks and the fair manner in which she has conducted the bill process. I agree with her observations on the introduction of votes for 16 and 17-year-olds. I noted with great interest the decisive verdict that 16 and 17-year-olds came to in Aberdeenshire in the recent widely held plebiscite in schools. Interestingly, there was full engagement and, more to the point, a very interesting result in terms of what might happen next year. Like others on the committee, I have raised a number of issues about the way in which the campaign will be fought and conducted. I make no bones about my concerns on the use of taxpayers’ money for what are clearly political activities. I think that that will happen and I do not see any way in which it will be stopped. After next September, there might be many deliberations on what happened and how it was done but, in my view, there is not much to prevent taxpayers’ money from being used in that way.

I will give way to Patrick Harvie.

It is directed at both. I made that point in the committee, but Mr Harvie did not support the measure that I proposed, and nor did anyone else for that matter. I hope that the member will reflect that I made that point about both Governments. Clearly, I was in a minority of one, although there is nothing particularly new there. I also have deep concerns about how much taxpayers’ money will be used in the context of the white paper. From what we are told, it is clear that the white paper will be sent to every household in Scotland. I do not think that taxpayers’ money should be used—

Let me make this point. The Deputy First Minister said that the white paper will be published shortly and, clearly, it is to be sent to every household in Scotland. I wonder whether it will be announced in the Parliament or to the media. I hope that the Presiding Officers will stand up firmly for the right of this Parliament to hear that major statement of Government policy first, before we hear it addressed to CNN, the BBC and The Scotsman, although I rather suspect that the media will be more important than a mere Parliament on a day like that. I want to mention the historic questions that have been pushed by the Government and its back-bench members in relation to the alternative. I believe that the onus is on those of us who represent the best of both worlds—the continuance of Scotland within the United Kingdom—to make a strong case for more powers for this Parliament, as I have always done. From the day that I was elected to it, I have believed that the Parliament should be strengthened and its responsibilities augmented, and I hope that those who hold similar views can make that case in the coming months. I entirely concede to Bruce Crawford the point, which he has made to me on many occasions, that the onus is on those of us who make that case to come up with a plan. Personally, I am happy to accept that challenge.

I was speaking personally, but I take the wider and interesting political point that Ms MacDonald makes. I hope that in future Scotland can move away from a centralised nationalist state—we have had a centralised state under the SNP—to a decentralised state that encourages local decision making and moves in a much more positive way to an exciting vision in which local people are involved in the decisions that they want to take. That is the Liberal Democrat future that I would like to see across Scotland. I do not and will never support institutions of state such as the centralised police force that we now have. Just yesterday, we saw a report from Audit Scotland that showed why I was right at the time to oppose that bad measure that the current Government introduced. I would rather that we debated those issues and had proper and robust discussions about them than spent all our time considering our constitution. I finish with Malcolm Chisholm’s very fair observation that, whatever the result of the referendum—however our people decide where they wish to go after that determination in September next year—we must all consider that it will be our responsibility to work constructively together on the future of our nation.

The minister mentioned the £3 billion that is being invested in rail through the capital investment programme. How much of that budget is for rail between Edinburgh and Glasgow?

I make the point to Alex Johnstone that when Sarah Boyack became the first transport minister under devolution, she did not inherit a transport policy, but a roads policy. Such was the nature of policy at the time; previous London Governments with responsibility for transport policy left only a roads policy to this Parliament. I am still supportive of governments that move to much more balanced spending in order to address—as Fiona McLeod has just rightly recognised—the importance of other forms of transport, including cycling and using our feet, but principally bus and rail. I do not think that that is a wrong approach. I disagree quite profoundly with Alex Johnstone and the Tories on the matter, as I have since 1999, when Murray Tosh was the Conservatives’ transport spokesperson. Keith Brown has got the matter broadly right. I hope that he realises that we all have greater challenges to face when organisations such as Transform Scotland write, as it has for the debate—I am putting a quotation to him just as I had them put to me when I was a minister—to say that the “Government’s own transport indicators demonstrate that its policies have failed to move people on to public transport, failed to reduce congestion and led to an increase in climate emissions.” Any Government’s objective must be to look at the balance of spending between road and rail—or “motorised transport”, as some members have called it—and to consider how to best to achieve the greatest impact in moving the greatest number of citizens in the ways in which they want to be moved. I have some sympathy for the minister on bus re-regulation, not least because—Lewis Macdonald will remember this well—I resisted it when I was in Government, which did not make me particularly popular among the Labour group. However, I was an awful lot more unpopular with the SNP because it was Glasgow members including Sandra White and Nicola Sturgeon who were leading the charge on bus re-regulation. It is, of course, for the minister to sort out his policy and for his Government to decide what it wants to do on Iain Gray’s bill. However, there may be some merit in some of his proposals. I therefore suggest that the bill should get the proper parliamentary hearing that such a measure, which is aimed at addressing a fundamental issue, deserves. That would, at least, recognise the nature of the particular problem. I will not and do not accept that we have a year-zero approach to what happened before 2007. The Larkhall to Milngavie rail line opened in 2005. It was the first line to open in 25 years, which is a considerable tribute to the promoters and all who were involved. However, it is not fair to say—I do not suppose Keith Brown really believes this, but we have to do politics—that nothing happened on rail before 2007. A lot of good projects came forward, and that is a good example of a project that happened.

I will try to keep the consensual tone going by saying that I accept that. I want to make particular mention of the organisations, including Keith Brown’s council at that time, that played an important part in moving that project forward. I have two points to make around journey times, which a number of members have mentioned. It is the fundamental issue that the minister will have to address when he looks at the new approach to tendering for the ScotRail franchise that Transport Scotland announced just the other day, with the short list for those who will bid to run our rail services. Journey times are fundamental to helping the competitiveness of rail in comparison with road. We all have our own examples. In the context of Aberdeen and the north-east, Lewis Macdonald rightly mentioned a road that—like the A9—I drive along a lot. At the moment, travelling by rail from Inverness to Edinburgh or Inverness to Glasgow is not competitive with travel by car or by bus. I put my son on the bus between Edinburgh and Inverness a lot. I believe that, when it comes to future investment, a close look has to be taken not just at capacity on rail routes, but at journey times. I encourage the minister to think about that issue and to address it through his budget. Infrastructure investment is not just about dualling major pieces of trunk road infrastructure, much as I appreciate that politically that is a highly attractive thing to do. If we do not cut journey times by rail between our major cities, the balance of spending will not matter, because we will not encourage the shift away from road that most members hope people will make by giving them the option of using extremely good public transport systems to get them from, for example, Aberdeen to Edinburgh.

Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that GPs who refer cancer patients to the Aberdeen royal infirmary for radiotherapy are concerned at the lack of specialist oncology services and staff at that hospital? Will he acknowledge that patients who travel from Shetland are now being referred to other hospitals throughout Scotland? Will he discuss with NHS Grampian how best to avoid that happening in the very trying circumstances in which patients are finding themselves? It is of great concern to GPs locally in cases in which there is a considerable need for the patient to be treated as quickly as possible and in particular at Aberdeen royal infirmary.

I draw members’ attention to my declaration of interests. I spent last Saturday—as many of us do at this time of the year—at my local mart, in Lerwick. I heard two clear messages there. There was a third, but it is not important for this debate. The first message was about prices. The cabinet secretary is all too well aware that there is concern, especially in the sheep sector, about what is happening to livestock prices. The second message, which is more important in the context of today’s debate, was that the Government of the day, and politicians, not see the debate about the future of the CAP through the prism of independence, but through the prism of needs of Scotland’s farmers and crofters. I make that point in the reasonable tone that the cabinet secretary adopted in his opening remarks. It is surely in all our interests to follow that approach. I say so because since 2001 Scotland’s sheep numbers have fallen by the thick end of 1 million. In 2012, 495 producers across Scotland came out of beef production—there are nearly 500 fewer beef herds in Scotland, out of some 7,000. For any of us, that is surely a worrying and significant trend, so the Government’s admirable food and drink strategy—which I support and which I believe is a genuinely positive aspect of Government activity—is being undermined because the building bricks of food production are being eroded. That is what the new CAP should be about. Do we want active, financially viable farmers, crofters and growers throughout Scotland? Most of us would answer that in the positive. As other colleagues have done, I suggest that the Scottish Government needs to take action in some areas. I acknowledge that the cabinet secretary set out some of those in his opening speech. The first is that the consultation that we understand is to be published in December should acknowledge the timescale to which the minister is operating. If, as is usual Government practice, he adopts a three-month consultation period, it will not finish until March. However, as he said in his speech, the timescale for approval of the implementation regulations by the European Commission puts an immense amount of pressure on the Government to have everything in place for 1 January 2015. As far as I can see, and as a lot of farmers have said to me, if the Government rightly consults on many of the issues, we will not necessarily need to spend as long as we normally do on everything else, especially as the cabinet secretary set out in his opening speech a clear direction of travel on some issues. However, he needs to consult on ensuring that all the options are available to the Government in making the right judgments about how the new area payments system will work. Coupled beef support to assist suckler cow herds is certainly one of those options, but I do not share Claire Baker’s concerns about the so-called Irish tunnel. The cabinet secretary should consult on that mechanism because of the really strong views about the transition that will take place over the coming six years from the current system to the new one. For some, a fast drop into a new world will, without a shadow of a doubt, mean 25 per cent to 50 per cent cuts in single farm payments. Therefore, a system that clearly has some favour in Europe and that understands the length of transition that is needed in order for farmers and crofters to adapt to the new system must have some merit in it. I hope and ask that, in his closing speech, the cabinet secretary will acknowledge that that is an option that Scottish agriculture might wish to follow and that, therefore, he will include it in his consultation when it is published later in the year. The cabinet secretary also acknowledged that moving towards an average payment system based on area might hit some producers—notably, intensive livestock farmers—very hard indeed, and I agree with him. That supports the contention about the Irish tunnel model. Another area that the consultation that the cabinet secretary is about to publish must surely consider is areas of natural constraint. He mentioned that in his opening speech and I hope that he will clarify the situation for us in his closing speech. My understanding is that the ANC model can be used to help areas such as agriculturally productive islands that face real pressure because of the changes. Orkney, Islay and Tiree are all obvious examples. It would be helpful for the agriculture industry if the cabinet secretary could clarify whether he envisages ANCs being part of the system and, therefore, whether he will ensure that that is in his consultation. The third aspect concerns the level of the area payments per hectare. I highlighted the decline in livestock numbers throughout Scotland. Many farmers and crofters, including in my Shetland constituency, want a high rate per hectare. As the cabinet secretary pointed out, that has significant issues for others and it is understandable that that would be so. How the cabinet secretary’s two or three payment areas model fits into the assessment of how individual farmers and crofters will be affected is important. I encourage him—as we did in a debate some months ago—to publish modelling on that. I do not know where the Scottish Government’s modelling has got to, but it would be helpful to the industry to understand what modelling has been done and whether, at this stage, it is able to identify the differences that must already be becoming apparent, were a two or three-payment system to be followed. I want to make two other points. First, I very much agree with Alex Fergusson’s point on the balance between pillar 1 and pillar 2 spending. I hope that the cabinet secretary will clarify that in his closing remarks. I share the concern that were the heap of money to be moved across to pillar 2, then the budgetary pressures in pillar 1 in relation to what that would mean for farmers and crofters would be even more significant than they are already likely to be. I know that doing what Alex Fergusson suggested will not make the cabinet secretary any friends in the green non-governmental organisations, but that is the kind of horrible balance that any minister must strike. My final point is on the mapping penalty regime for individual farms, which I have of course mentioned many times to the cabinet secretary. He has reassured me in the past that the new CAP system will be fairer in that regard. I simply hope that that is the case. I encourage him to keep making the argument on that and to ensure that the Scottish Government, as the responsible Administration for the new CAP, insists to Brussels that we must have a fairer and more proportionate system that will help—or at least not be so unfair to—crofters and farmers, not just in my Shetland constituency but right across the country.

The external convergence fund has been a notable feature of the debate. Not that long ago, the First Minister asked Iain Gray, Annabel Goldie and me to join him in the delegation that he led down to the Ministry of Defence on the issue of jobs at Lossiemouth. That was a successful cross-party campaign that was led, rightly, by the Scottish Government. We made what I hoped was—and I think that it was subsequently discovered to be—a reasonably coherent cross-party case against a change that was going to be damaging to Scottish interests, particularly those in Mr Lochhead’s constituency. Not only did we do that, but we all joined Mr Lochhead in his own patch to make the case in front of a football crowd at the stadium in Elgin. I do not regret doing any of that, which I thought was a good way in which the Parliament could work. I make an offer of similar cross-party action to Mr Lochhead today on the issue of external convergence. I share the concerns of the cabinet secretary, Alex Fergusson and Claire Baker about what is happening on the issue. There is no question but that the minister’s argument in relation to the funds coming to Scotland based on equal payment share is the right argument, and others have made it as well. If Mr Lochhead wants to construct a way in which we can all come together to support that argument and make the case to the UK Government, even to the minister who has been subject to some criticism during this debate, then I would certainly join him in that. If he thinks that doing that would help, he can take it from me and from—I suspect—my colleagues on the other front benches that we would be delighted to play a constructive role in making the right argument. I hope that he can take that in the spirit in which I intend it. I accept that a debate on Scottish agriculture just before a referendum on Scottish independence is bound to feature references to independence. We had Rob Gibson’s and Angus MacDonald’s speeches to behold in that context. They certainly failed the test that I got at the Shetland marts last Saturday, which was to stop talking about independence and start talking about what we need out of CAP reform. However, so be it: if that is how colleagues in other parties, but particularly the nationalists, wish to conduct their affairs, that is of course their right. All that I would say to Nigel Don on EU negotiations is that he is right that it is not a matter of whether Scotland could be independent and a member of the European Union; it is about the terms of such membership. I agree with him on that point, which is the sensible and only way in which to look at that issue. I do not worry so much about agriculture and the rural economy, though; I worry a lot more about the fishing argument, because the Spanish would love a negotiation on fish with an independent Scotland. We can therefore agree on something at least, which is that it is about the terms of negotiation rather than whether there would be a negotiation. On the EU budget, it is often the case that the nationalists attack the rest of us for lack of consistency on the budget. However, I say to Roderick Campbell and others that it is not consistent to go on and on about the budget when the nationalists have had three positions on the EU budget during the course of the past year: in here they voted for an increase; in Westminster they voted for a cut; and in Brussels their MEPs voted for a freeze. If they are going to make the consistency argument about the budget, they must do so having been consistent in their own voting record in the different Parliaments here, in London and in Brussels.

I do not even begin to understand that one, but if it makes Mr MacDonald feel better, then so be it. I will move on to some of the better arguments and more considered thoughts in this debate. David Stewart, Graeme Dey and others made very important arguments about SRDP. Frankly, I do not envy the cabinet secretary on this one, because any assessment of what budget movements from pillar 1 to pillar 2 will mean will make life incredibly difficult for active agricultural producers. On the other hand, as Graeme Dey eloquently described, there are good businesses in his constituency and, no doubt, right across our constituencies and regions that have benefited from SRDP funding. All of us who have been involved in and around this industry for a long time know that direct moneys into farming bank accounts mean that the money is recycled into the local economy, whether through payments to suppliers, machinery shops, fertiliser providers or the local shop for the cornflakes for the kids. That is the way in which the rural economy genuinely moves; it is sustainable and is the case for both rural and island areas. Mr Lochhead has a frankly horrible dilemma in that context—I say that in a genuinely positive spirit—in trying to get it right. The only other observation that I would make is that I guess the cabinet secretary has some choices around, for example, forestry, which I think Graeme Dey rightly mentioned. The Scottish Government has in a Scottish policy decision made a very big commitment to covering 25 per cent of productive Scottish land with trees by planting—I think—10,000 hectares a year for the next 10 years. I apologise if I have got those numbers wrong. That very big and significant financial commitment is coming from the SRDP budget, and my only observation is that it is for the cabinet secretary to decide whether the right priority is to meet what he has described as his climate change targets through that measure rather than through other routes.

That, too, is my understanding, but I am sure that Mr Robertson will agree that the target remains and that land will have to come from somewhere in order to meet it. I will finish with a couple of minor points. Mike MacKenzie and Alison Johnstone made a very good point about crofting and scattalds; indeed, it was at the heart of my point about the million breeding sheep that we have lost from Scottish agriculture over the past decade, which, I hasten to add, happened not under one Government but under different Governments and different CAP regimes. The fact that I can walk a large chunk of the Shetland scattalds and see no active production at all suggests that some really fundamental questions have to be asked. Finally, I do not believe that a one-size-fits-all policy for area payment rates or, indeed, the detail of what happens can be appropriate given Scotland’s geography. The challenge for the cabinet secretary is to recognise that, in the Highland area for example, the Black Isle is very different from Wester Ross and that the system has to deal with that in some way.

I reflected on Richard Baker’s motion for this debate when I flew out of Sumburgh on Tuesday, and accordingly I paid more attention than normal to the safety briefing. I agree with Maureen Watt’s observations about how different the helicopter emergency training that some of us have been through is from the reality of what happened when the Super Puma went down on that summer evening, 23 August, 2 miles off Sumburgh Head—in fact there was not much of a swell, relative to the normal swell there. I put on record my gratitude to all of those who were involved in dealing with that accident, onshore and offshore, and I congratulate the members of the emergency services on their professionalism. Indeed, I will meet some of the staff when I go to Sumburgh tonight, and I will thank them personally for what they did. We need to separate the two points that Richard Baker brought to Parliament’s attention today. The first point is his absolutely understandable request that we examine the fatal accident inquiry system. That has to be reformed. It is nothing short of outrageous that four years has gone by since the accident in 2009 and the loved ones and families of those who died then still do not have a definitive account of what went wrong. The system is clearly not working and, therefore, measures that come forward from any party to address that should be supported and actively considered. The second issue that Richard Baker and others raised is that there are now four inquiries under way. I am not convinced that there should be four separate inquiries. I think that that makes Lewis Macdonald’s point. We should be having one definitive public inquiry, led by an appropriate judge or another figure, rather than four separate inquiries. Arguably, having all of those separate inquiries gives not only the trade unions and the workforce, who are desperate for certain knowledge about what happened, but everyone else who has a deep and long-term commitment to the industry a degree of doubt about when all the inquiries will report, how they will interact and what they will mean. I urge the industry and the Governments in London and Edinburgh to think quickly about whether it is advisable to have four separate inquiries going on instead of pulling them all into one, which is what I think should happen. I am not convinced that the CAA inquiry is all that others believe it to be. The CAA has a central role in investigation and a central role in regulation. Therefore, I am not quite sure how the CAA can also investigate incidents such as the one that happened off Sumburgh on 23 August. I absolutely take the point that Maureen Watt and others made about the expertise of the Norwegians. That is an entirely relevant point. However, surely that should be addressed by an independent public inquiry rather than by having one of the bodies, the CAA, which should be giving evidence to an independent public inquiry, acting as the master of the terms of reference for further work. I do not doubt the CAA’s commitment, expertise or ability to bring strong recommendations to the table, but it is part of the system, so I do not see quite how it can undertake that work. The situation is similar with regard to the oil industry’s work. I will not be the only member who has talked to Malcolm Webb and others in the industry about what they plan for the helicopter safety steering group and the other reviews. However, it strikes me that the confidence that the industry and the workforce need for the future is best rebuilt via an independent inquiry that will allow the industry to address the issues. BALPA said a lot of pretty relevant things about the inquiries when it expressed its concern over the nature of the CAA inquiry. That needs to be dealt with, and I hope that, in the interests of people’s confidence, we will end up with one publicly led inquiry.

I apologise as I will have to leave before the end of the debate, because I have to get home to Shetland tonight, although not, I hasten to add, to play golf—I will do that on Sunday morning. I join one or two colleagues in recognising that, as Patricia Ferguson said, this is the first time since 1999 that we are having a debate on golf without David McLetchie, so there is a big hole on the Conservative benches. All of us who are golfing aficionados certainly miss him—probably not for the politics but certainly for the golf. David would have revelled in a recollection of the annual match between MSPs and the press, which a number of us, including Neil Findlay, Chic Brodie and others have played in over the years. Neil Findlay will have noticed that Tom Watson said the other day that he would rather that there were no picks at all for the Ryder cup team. He thought that the “purest form” of the cup would be to have the top 12 Americans playing in the rankings as the American team. Heaven help us if that principle is applied to the MSP team when we play the press. I thank the minister for her speech and for what she said about the development of golf for youngsters—boys and girls. The motion is entirely supportable, as is the Labour amendment. The important point is that policy in relation to hosting the Ryder cup and clubgolf survived a change in Administration. That does not happen to all policies, by any stretch of the imagination. It is entirely to the Government’s credit that it rightly carried on with the programmes and approach to the Ryder cup in such a positive spirit. This is the home of golf, so it is right to debate what golf can provide, not just to England, Wales and Northern Ireland but to the wider golfing world. There was a big debate about whether Gleneagles is the right course for the Ryder cup. The purists might say that it should be played on a links golf course, given that that is the epitome of Scottish golf. However, money talks and Gleneagles is the venue—and it will be fantastic. I have to say that my grandfather was a member at the king’s course, and he would have much preferred that course to be used than the Jack Nicklaus-designed centenary course. I confess that I am a traditionalist, and I think that the king’s course knocks the socks off the centenary course. However, I am not the person who makes the decisions—nor can I hit the balls as far as the pros can, by any stretch of the imagination, which is why they play golf courses of 7,500 yards instead of the rather shorter king’s course. A number of members mentioned tickets, but we did not get into the detail of the issue. I would love to attend, but like thousands of other golf fans in Scotland I will be watching on telly, because I never made it past the ballot. I would be interested to know how many Scots got tickets to watch the event. There will be a huge amount of corporate attendance and a huge number of people from all over the world, but how many ordinary Scottish fans will be there? In my home club in Shetland, I know only two people who got a ticket, and I wonder how many Scots got through the ballot.

I honestly do not know the answer to that. I think most of us who are golf fans would frankly have done anything to have the chance of getting a ticket. The fact that we did not get one is just in the nature of the game. On the Ryder cup itself, American success in Gleneagles next year—as opposed to the astonishing events in Medina last year—will be down to Tom Watson. He is seen by most golf fans across the UK as an honorary Scot. He has won the open championship here many more times than we can imagine. For anyone who has walked around with him—as I and many other Scots did in 2009 when he darn near won the open at Turnberry—I suspect that he is not so much the secret weapon of the United States team as a pretty obvious Exocet missile that they will fire at team Europe. Paul McGinley and his colleagues will have to be absolutely on their metal, and not just when it comes to playing golf, bearing in mind Tom Watson’s utter class and style in terms of how he conducts himself around a golf course. That is at the heart of what the Ryder cup is all about. It is of course a team competition. As we have seen on many occasions, many of our players on the European side revel in the team experience. They might not win majors—Colin Montgomerie is the obvious example, but my goodness me he is the ultimate in team players, although Ian Poulter has rather taken over that mantle. I was lucky enough to be at the Walker cup in New York a couple of weeks ago.

He might have won 40 major tournaments, but he has not won a major. Colin Montgomerie has said himself—I have seen him say it on television many times—that the mark of a world-class player, rather than just an excellent player, is winning a major, as the example of Darren Clarke and a number of other leading players from these shores illustrates. I wish that Colin Montgomerie had won a major. He had two or three chances. I could go through them, but I will not, because I cried when he did not make that seven iron into the middle of the green—but, anyway, we will move on. The team element of the Ryder cup is essential because it brings so many important values to sport, such as the importance of team work and seeking to win for the team. Being at the Walker cup provided me with a real illustration of what needs to be done. There were no Scots in that team, but I am told by the Scottish Golf Union and leading amateurs in the game that that will change next time round, because there is a bunch of very good Scots coming through who will be competitive. I know that Neil Findlay will say something about golf courses and the membership challenges, so I will not go into that. The only other point that I want to make about visitor income—the minister and Liz Smith mentioned the importance of visitors coming to Scotland to play golf—is that it is not just about Prestwick, Dornoch, East Lothian or the great championship golf courses that we all enjoy playing; it is about so many other golf courses across Scotland that any golfer can go and play. Frankly, it is nearly impossible to play some of the championship courses, particularly Carnoustie, even for those of us who can play a bit of golf. However, one can go and play an awful lot of really good golf anywhere in Scotland, have a nice meal afterwards at a good clubhouse and just appreciate the experience that is golf in Scotland. I hope that the national tourism drive to bring visitors to Scotland from all over the world is not just about the big courses but the run-of-the-mill golf courses right across our country that provide a great Scottish golfing experience.

I thought that John Mason’s speech was deep on irony, but then I realised that he was being deadly serious. I was standing in a queue at Heathrow a couple of weeks ago, waiting for the Edinburgh plane home, and a businesswoman turned round and said to me, “So, Tavish, if the SNP has its own way, will I need a passport to get home?” I do not know the answer to that, and nor does anyone. Will I need a passport to visit my daughter in Leeds, or my family in the west country of England? Who knows? The only certain aspect of a yes vote in September 2014 is uncertainty. The border arrangements between an independent Scotland and England would have to be negotiated, and Scotland would have to negotiate with the rest of the UK on how to enter a country that is the biggest market for our goods, where many of us have family and friends and where so many Scots work. How would that uncertainty be so good for the people of Scotland? The nationalists assert that those who ask such questions are scaremongering and that a white paper will answer every question, as well as many that have not even yet been asked. Most of us doubt that, but the one certainty is uncertainty. If the nationalists are asked whether Scotland will keep the Queen as head of state, Mr Salmond says yes—

Another says yes, but on the television this week Ms Hyslop said no, there will be a referendum on the future of the monarchy. What is to be Scotland’s currency? Mr Salmond says that it will be the pound, but the chairman of the yes campaign Dennis Canavan says no, Scotland will have its own currency. Yesterday, the National Institute of Economic and Social Research said that the additional cost to an independent Scotland of staying with the pound would be 0.72 to 1.65 per cent above UK borrowing costs. Scots with mortgages—millions of us—want a straight answer on that, and on pensions, employment rights and jobs, around which there is more uncertainty. In every area of policy, independence is a walk in the dark. It is opening a door into a pitch black room and trying to find the door on the other side. We may never come out, but one certainty is that the door marked “UK” will be locked for ever. There is no way back—on that, I agree entirely with Mr Salmond. It is irreversible. I do not believe that most Scots will enter that room. For all the faults of our present flawed system of democracy, the majority of Scots—the great majority—will stay with the best of both worlds. Scots want a Scottish Parliament with more powers doing more things but within the larger family of the UK. [Interruption.] I want to see a federal United Kingdom, in which the decisions affecting Wales, Northern Ireland, England and Scotland are taken in those nations but we come together to agree the right way forward on international events, where the UK’s collective strength is immensely more powerful than the individual voice. I do not understand why any Scot would actively seek to lose a place on the United Nations Security Council or to stop carrying the most votes possible into the European Union’s Council of Ministers or to cut the record level of overseas aid to assist in Africa and countries around the world that are less fortunate than us. Yet that is what the nationalists want. [Interruption.]

I am encouraged by the progressive voices in the Labour Party who have also made the case for a federal UK. Those are not enough, but there are some still to come. The other entirely negative argument that the nationalists in Government use is that they are powerless because this Parliament does not have full economic and legislative powers. Let me say in passing that I do not remember that being said when Glasgow won the right to host next year’s Commonwealth games. However, take the environment—a word that was barely mentioned in the recent budget speech setting out Scottish spending in the years ahead. This Parliament passed world-beating environmental legislation—a claim made consistently by ministers—but the carbon-reduction targets under that legislation have been missed by this Government ever since they were set. The environment is secondary to independence, as are our schools, the hospitals that we depend on and the buses to work. This nationalist Government is sadly fixated not on Scotland’s needs but on its own. I confess that I misjudged Mr Salmond’s Government. I actually thought that the SNP believed in a decentralised state, with decision making involving local people in their own towns, villages and communities, but six years of nationalist Government have shown how wrong I was. The most striking change to the Government of Scotland under nationalist rule has been centralisation. The levers of power are pulled in Edinburgh, with command and control of the public sector by nationalist ministers. Local government has been removed of financial powers—thank goodness the local councils are now led by David O’Neill, who will stand up to that. The police have been centralised into a national force, with policing now based on Strathclyde Police writ large—I have no doubt that a more enlightened decentralised Scottish Government in the future will have to address that wrong policing policy. The quango state across Scotland is just not worth having. The nationalist Government should go the whole hog and subsume every quango into the centre. Today, the pretence that VisitScotland and Scottish Enterprise are anything other than wholly owned and directed subsidiaries of the nationalist Government is gone. The quango state—unelected, undemocratic and a tool of Government ministers—is the reality of nationalist Government today. One certainty about next year’s referendum is that the Electoral Commission will be powerless to stop the Government machine being used entirely for political purposes. The Scotland that I want is a decentralised country that relishes and enjoys its economic, social and geographical diversity and in which decisions are taken at local level to benefit local people—consumers, businesses, teachers and nurses. That is why, when islanders meet in Kirkwall tomorrow, we will be working out what we want, not what Edinburgh or London wants. “Our islands, our future” is about recognising that the best people to decide the future of the islands are those who live and work there.

I did not campaign for this Scottish Parliament, nor for a home-rule settlement within the UK, to have one-size-fit-all politics from St Andrew’s house. The alternative, which is a positive alternative, is a federal UK with a stronger, more accountable Scottish Parliament, for a Scotland in which decisions are taken not by know-it-all ministers in Edinburgh but by local communities in a vibrant, exciting reawakening of democracy.

That is the Scotland that I want to be part of, and that is the Scotland that we will build after this nation votes decisively for a positive future within our United Kingdom.

The referendum is going to happen next year—2014—and people across the nation will decide whether we should remain part of the UK or separate from it, so the referendum must be conducted properly. On that, at least, Parliament can surely agree. I thank the convener of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, Bruce Crawford, for the way in which he handled the stage 1 proceedings. He knew fine that he had an in-built SNP majority on the committee and that he could have got through what he wanted. Instead—to his great credit—he conducted those proceedings properly and all members of the committee at least got their voices heard. Mr Crawford was quite correct to say that there was broad agreement on how to proceed. That was important, and it reflects a decent effort by Parliament to make the referendum work in the way in which all of us want it to. I welcome the tenor, at least, of the Deputy First Minister’s remarks. I know that she had to chuck a bit of red meat to the back benches at the end of her speech but, broadly speaking, I entirely take the points that she made, particularly her point about the inclusion of 16 and 17-year-olds in the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill. I also accept the very fair point that Rob Gibson made about Gaelic. I can tell him that many of us would speak in the debate that he suggested in our own dialects, if we were given time to do that. However, I cannot accept Linda Fabiani’s point about the pro-union parties offering more powers only if people vote no. That is exactly the same line that we got from the Government’s front bench in Shetland just the other week, when it said that if people voted for independence, the islands could have some more powers. That argument seems to suit your front bench very well indeed, Ms Fabiani.

I will happily give way to Mr Swinney when I have finished my point. The people who care most about Shetland are the people who live and work there. I hope that he will accept that.

We have also got devolution in the Scottish Parliament. Given that Mr Swinney is a member of the front bench, I hope that he welcomes that. I want to pick up on what Bruce Crawford, Annabelle Ewing and others said about the tone of the debate. I am all for a robust debate. Mr Swinney and I could very cheerfully debate these matters extremely robustly, but I fully agree with the point that members have made about the broad tone of the debate. I accept that one of my limitations is that I may sometimes slightly lose it when I make an argument that I believe in, but—good gosh—we must ensure that the discussion that we hold over the next year is held properly, because there is nothing more fundamental than the future of one’s country. I hope that members of both front benches—those who are in the better together campaign and those who are in the yes campaign—will say, “No more,” to the disgraceful cyberchatter that we are all subjected to. There is no place for that in this debate, and I hope that Nicola Sturgeon will take the opportunity of her winding-up speech to reflect on the need to end all that bile.

I could not agree more—we have all been subjected to it, as I have made absolutely clear. I hope that Nicola Sturgeon will reflect on that, just as I hope that Alistair Darling and others will do. I also hope that politicians will recognise that not everyone is engrossed in the referendum campaign. Just the other day, David Grevemberg—the admirable chief executive of Glasgow 2014—said that we could do without any politics in the Commonwealth games next year. Sir Jonathan Mills, who is the head of the Edinburgh international festival, said the same about the arts in today’s papers. I hope that there is a lesson there for politicians not to use such events in a way in which—

I do not understand that remark. Ms Robison might want to reflect on David Grevemberg’s piece that was published today. I hope that she agrees with it, because I certainly do, and I do not understand her observation.

I want to briefly touch on section 32 and schedule 8 and the definition of “referendum period”. During the debate, I have picked up on the fact that there are some serious lessons that must be learned. I welcome the Deputy First Minister’s response to the committee in the letter that I got today, which says that, in line with standard election practice, the Government will issue guidance to its staff and to those in public bodies for which it is responsible for the 28-day pre-referendum period. We will receive that guidance shortly, as Annabel Goldie said earlier. I hope that that guidance will cover the whole of the regulated period and I wonder whether the Deputy First Minister would be so good as to advise us on that in her closing remarks. That is important not least because, at paragraph 263 of the stage 1 report, Nigel Smith is quoted as saying: “both governments will be regulated for the first three months of the referendum not by this Bill but ministerial codes and public outcry. And for the last month, by a referendum Commission with few tools in the Bill ... This is no regulation of government at all.” That is a direct quote from Mr Smith. I hope that Governments here and in Westminster will reflect on that, because it will be important for the conduct of the campaign.

While the minister is on the subject of statistics, one statistic that his Government is using at the moment is that 75 per cent of people in the Highlands and Islands will benefit from the investment in broadband upgrades that is to take place next year and the year after. However, does he accept that it is more important to invest in the 25 per cent of households and businesses that do not have access to broadband or that are on dial-up speeds? Will he bring his office to bear on that subject, rather than just ensuring that those who already have broadband get something better?

I gently point out to Kevin Stewart, after his great tribute to The Economist, that the magazine once published another article about independence, which was featured on the front page. He might not have been so keen to quote that article in the context of his exposition of what a wonderful magazine The Economist is. Perhaps we should always take these arguments in the round.

No, you have had your say, Kevin. We listened with great interest but did not give a lot of thought to what you said.

A lot of speakers on Mr Stewart’s benches have run down England this afternoon. That is a bit of an unfortunate side to this debate, but I suppose that we will just have to put up with it for the next year. We have heard the independence budget and this is a debate on the independence aspects of the enterprise networks—that is what it is going to be like. What Maureen Watt said about a clear direction being given to the enterprise networks is absolutely true, which is why I think that the Labour amendment misses the point of the debate. There has never been clearer direction for all the quangos and agencies in Scotland: they are told what to do by the Government of the day. Like it or not, that is the nature of the quango state that we have in Scotland today—it is absolutely controlled from the centre. The challenge function of the Highlands and Islands Enterprise board and the Scottish Enterprise board that I recall from my time as a minister does not exist in the same way today. That is not just my assessment; it is what board members have told me privately—of course, they could not possibly say those things publicly.

Let me make a parliamentary point to that reasonable argument from Jenny Marra. The last thing that Scotland should do at a time of difficult public spending cuts is to spend yet more money on consultants and big KPMG-type organisations, who would undoubtedly be commissioned to do the work. I am not about to say that Mr Fraser’s committee is not doing its job properly, but Parliament’s job is to scrutinise such matters. If people want parliamentary reviews of the structure of the enterprise companies, they should get the parliamentary committees to take it on and conduct a full and proper investigation into the matter. In fairness, that is what happened in the past. If Parliament did not do much of a job with that, perhaps we should examine ourselves rather than always assume that the right thing to do would be to employ expensive external consultants to examine other areas of public policy.

No—although I will come to Mr MacKenzie, because he made some really silly points to which I want to reply. Mr Ewing was looking for ideas, which is a good principle. Let me give him an idea that relates to Scottish Enterprise. As I am sure he is aware, there is a considerable movement worldwide to invest in high-speed rail. The interesting aspect from a Scottish perspective is not so much the track but what the track sits on. In Scotland, at Heriot-Watt University, we have a centre of world excellence in that, which Scottish Enterprise has had a small look at. I thank it for that interest. Our challenge is not in how to engineer a train that goes much more quickly; it is in the existing track testing. There is a track-testing station at Heriot-Watt University that is a global centre of excellence. The university has just signed a memorandum of understanding with Atkins—the major international engineering business—that can take the work into a new dimension. Indeed, the chief executive officer of Atkins said at the signing of that memorandum on 19 July: “With 15,000 miles of new high speed track due to be laid in the next decade … we have a Centre of Excellence which is a ‘go-to’ place for design and testing of new ideas such as design of new shape of embankments.” I hope that the minister will encourage his ministerial colleagues to visit the centre and take an active interest in it. As yet, that has not happened at ministerial level. It has happened at Scottish Enterprise level and I am grateful for that, but the centre needs similar ministerial interest for the simple reason that—the nationalist case is always running down England and I must bring this piece of news to the SNP’s attention—in its most recent regional growth fund the UK Government awarded moneys to the University of Huddersfield and its institute of railway research to create a centre of innovation in rail for exactly such work. SNP members always say that nothing good ever happens in England. There is an example of investment in rail in England. We could do the same in Scotland. Scottish Enterprise has shown some interest in it, but we have not had any ministerial involvement in the centre of excellence here in Scotland’s capital city. I plead with the minister that he show some leadership where his colleagues have not and that he have a close and encouraging look at the centre.

I will make one other point on oil and gas. I do not think that Mike MacKenzie ever listens to anything that Fergus Ewing says because, when Oil & Gas UK published the latest investment figures, the first press release that I saw that morning was from Mr Ewing, saying what an outstanding success it was and that it was all down to the considerable work that was being done—

Mr Ewing said that it was all down to the useful work that the Scottish Government and the UK Government had been doing. He was at pains to press that point and I applaud him for that, so I do not know where Mr MacKenzie was when those world-leading UK investment figures were announced and I do not recognise his description of the UK oil and gas industry. We should talk it up rather than use the kind of examples that he used in his arguments. As the decommissioning round that is going on in the northern North Sea continues, I hope that Mr Ewing and his ministerial colleagues will concentrate hard on the supply chain, because that is where there is great potential for Scottish jobs in both the Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Scottish Enterprise areas.

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether it has considered issuing maximum travel times for journeys to school in rural and island areas. (S4O-02293)

I am grateful to the minister for that reply. Does he accept—I am sure that he does, as he too is a rural member—that circumstances in which a pupil walks half a mile on unlit roads with no pavements, to a bus stop, followed by an hour and a half on a bus on single-track roads, leading to an overall commute of three hours to school, could be considered to be detrimental to the pupil’s education and wellbeing, which he will recognise as terms that are defined in the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010, on rural school closures? Are such circumstances a matter for his Government and his policy, or for local authorities?

2. I intimate my entry in the register of members’ interests. To ask the Scottish Government what its policy is on tenant farmers’ right to buy in light of the comments by the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment at the Royal Highland show on 20 June 2013. (S4T-00407)

While I share the Government’s frustration about the lack of availability of new tenanted farms in Scotland, does the minister accept that the Government’s position means either working through the existing arrangements to achieve an agreed way forward with all agricultural sectors or having a statutory tenant farmers’ right to buy? Does he accept that the Government’s position has created the very uncertainty that it wished to avoid by ensuring that no tenant farms will become available for rent until it decides its policy? When will it clarify the policy?

I thank the minister for that straight reply in accepting that there is an uncertainty that I suspect we all wish to avoid. Does he recognise that many people at a recent NFU Scotland conference on the tenanted farm sector argued that the best way to increase the availability of farms is to encourage retiring owner-occupier farmers to rent out farms long term? Does he agree that that is what the Government should be trying to achieve? Does he recognise that the Scottish Tenant Farmers Association said last Thursday that the cabinet secretary’s statement could “blow the SFTA apart”? None of us believes that that is sensible, so does he accept that the Government must repair those relationships that are essential for constructive reform?

First, I thank the minister for the courteous way in which he has handled the bill. It helps enormously those of us who represent constituents in the crofting counties if we have a minister who is prepared to listen to the arguments. I recognise that Paul Wheelhouse has done exactly that. I also thank Mr Gibson and his colleagues on the RACCE Committee—that always seems like such a strange title so let me just call it the rural committee—for their forbearance in dealing with complex matters now and undoubtedly in future. Above all, I thank the crofters in Shetland who brought this shambles to my attention in the first place, because it affected owner-occupiers in the islands. I am pleased that the Government has introduced the bill and I support it, as my party will tonight at decision time. However, as the minister recognised, there is an awful lot more to do. The minister mentioned the other fixes that will be necessary; as other members have said, they are considerable and varied. The minister made a point about how he and his department plan to address those issues. I suggest to him that officials could visit Shetland and other crofting counties to hear at first hand—which they will—about the practical difficulties that many crofters now face. I welcome the fact that the minister said no to Shucksmith 2. I rather agree with his position. The issue is to get on and sort out the problems that undoubtedly exist. I take Mr Gibson’s point about Government legal advice, but I am sure that he would recognise that there is a big difference between that advice and the Crofting Commission’s legal advice. I do not think that the Crofting Commission should be allowed to get away with simply hiding behind its legal advice, which is increasingly its position to those of us who are making representations to it on behalf of constituents. I would not expect the minister to respond to the point today, but we are in the wrong place if crofters who are trying to resolve complex but in some respects straightforward issues are constantly told by the commission that they must take its legal advice—at the expense of taxpayers and crofters around the crofting counties—without the opportunity to question that legal advice. I hope that the minister might consider how best to challenge that issue, given the considerable powers that he and his colleagues have under the existing legislation that Mr Gibson mentioned. Some in the crofting counties are very concerned that the entire edifice that is crofting law could collapse if concrete steps are not taken to put it on a much more level footing. Although that will not happen overnight, there are people I respect, who know the issue inside out, who say that the matter is at the tipping point. The minister has rightly dealt with the current problem, but there is much more to do. I have two final points. First, as others have recognised, what we should be debating in relation to crofting is the production of quality beef and lamb around the counties, the livestock—cattle and sheep—that the crofting counties produce for breeding, the local food, and active local people in strong rural and island communities. I suspect that what we may be debating in the coming months will be the September crofting law conference to be held in the Signet library here in Edinburgh. It now looks like too many of us will have to go along and listen to the lawyers, whom I think Mr Fergusson nearly described as criminals—I might or might not agree with that description; we will find out after the conference—debating the issues inside out. I hope that, by the time that some of us attend the conference and listen carefully to what is said, the minister will have had a chance to talk to his officials and pull together some thoughts about the best way forward. I am sure that we can all agree on that point.

9. To ask the Scottish Government when people and businesses in Shetland will be advised whether their area will be included in the 75 per cent of the islands that Highlands and Islands Enterprise has stated will have access to superfast broadband. (S4O-02270)

I thank the Deputy First Minister for the honesty of that answer. Does she accept that, as I understand it, there are no plans to improve any of the seven exchange activate telephone exchanges in Shetland and that therefore the policy is the wrong way round? Surely, the aim should be to get broadband to areas that currently have no broadband, or little of it, rather than to enhance the provision in areas that already have it.

Will the cabinet secretary clarify from her lecture of 5 June whether economic criteria will now play any role in arts spending for projects the length and breadth of Scotland?

Is the minister aware that the climate change legislation law that the Scottish Parliament passed says that the “Scottish ministers must ... ensure that the net Scottish emissions account for each year in that period does not exceed the target set for that year”? Given that the law has now been broken for the second year, what is the point of the law and who is taking account of it?

I thank the cabinet secretary for a copy of his statement. Will he accept that there is the width of the North Sea between the rhetoric on discards and the practical implementation of the policy, which could be extremely difficult in a mixed fishery? Will he also accept that, in implementing that policy, he needs to get the balance right between achieving the policy on discards and ensuring that boats have a sustainable future? Will he assure Parliament that the policy will include the full flexibility to allow us to achieve that? Will the cabinet secretary ensure that, when the regionalisation elements of the new common fisheries policy are implemented, no Scottish boat will have a stricter or more onerous regime applied to it than will be applied to other EU vessels in our coastal waters?

I am happy to speak in this useful debate on youth sport. The starting point for me was when I was reading my papers for tomorrow morning’s Public Audit Committee, in which the committee will consider the “Commonwealth Games 2014 Progress report 2: Planning for the delivery of the XXth Games”, which is one of the standard reports that the committee gets. The report specifically mentions legacy and I am sure that the minister is familiar with the contents of the following paragraph from the Auditor General: “There is no specific funding for legacy but the strategic partners have aligned their existing initiatives”. She goes on to say: “In the current economic climate other public and private organisations may find it difficult to invest to achieve a long-term legacy.” That suggests the challenge that there is in relation to legacy. For there to be significant and long-term progress in youth sport, the Government, all the agencies and local government will have to make a long-term commitment to face the challenges. That is why I wanted to pick up the point about schools in our amendment. Schools are where the debate about the long term should be. As the minister said, the Government is investing considerably in a new school building programme. In many ways, it is doing no more than previous Governments did, but that is as it should be. One or two councillors of no political persuasion have observed to me that the approach is in, in effect, private finance initiative by the back door—but that is for another day and another debate. Patricia Ferguson made a point about sportscotland. Surely we should be using our leading agency, with all the expertise that it has put together since 2000, when it produced a paper on the school estate being widened out for community sport in its “Guide to community use of school sports facilities”. Sportscotland should be integral to the process, but from my quick bit of research into the way in which the Scottish Futures Trust is building schools, and the way in which the hubcos around Scotland are acting, that does not appear to be the case. As Patricia Ferguson mentioned, sportscotland is not therefore directly involved, which is a mistake. If the minister takes one idea from me for the strategy that she will publish in the autumn, it would be to change that approach. After all, the organisation is currently carrying out a research study on sports facilities across the school estate in Scotland. The research is being done by Sheffield Hallam University, which is due to produce its findings this summer. I would have thought that that would be an integral part of assessing where we are and what needs to happen. It is one thing to make the very welcome announcement about cashback for pitches as the minister did—or was it the First Minister?—but if we look closely at what the Scottish Futures Trust is doing on school buildings, we find out that it does not directly involve sportscotland, as I believe it should, in an assessment of what the correct facilities should be for the development of sport in schools. The Parliament considered the issue through its Health and Sport Committee’s pathways into sport inquiry back in 2009. The committee recommended that sportscotland should be a statutory consultee for any proposed development of a school. That might be an academic point, because a statutory consultee will be consulted at the end of a process rather than the beginning. I would rather that, instead of following that recommendation, the minister ensured that sportscotland is involved not only in the future but from now on—I cannot believe that it is not happening now, although I have heard from the horse’s mouth that it is not. In addition, a closer relationship with the Scottish Futures Trust should immediately be put in place for what is our premier sports body. Sportscotland is also responsible for implementing the active schools policy that started under the previous Government and has rightly been carried on by the present Government. I understand that the sportscotland board will consider an extension of the policy in the coming months. If we believe in the active schools programme, logically we should take forward active consideration of how sportscotland works with local government to achieve the right facilities in our schools. The minister referred to community sports hubs. I forget her figures and she will correct me if I have them wrong, but my figures are that 75 per cent of the hubs are expected to be in the school estate. If the minister is aiming for all to be in the estate, I completely agree with that as it is eminently sensible and the way to go. However, we are some way away from some but not all education authorities—to say nothing of some headteachers—accepting that schools are a complete community asset. From personal experience, I know that many still consider their schools to be a school first and a community asset second.

I am happy to accept that point and agree with that approach. The Scottish Sports Association has given a briefing to members for this debate in which it highlights the importance of places in the same way: “school fields, pools, halls and gyms are Scotland’s great untapped sports resource - if we can open up existing and new schools every community can be active.” That seems to me to be the essence of what we should be achieving to ensure that we have a lasting legacy for the future. I move amendment S4M-06921.1, to insert after second “youth sport”: “; notes research from Join In highlighting the ongoing volunteering efforts of many Olympic Games makers; further notes the increased appetite among the public to get involved in volunteering, which, it believes, demonstrates one important way in which major sporting events can deliver a legacy benefiting grassroots sports; recognises the importance of ensuring that all new primary and secondary schools built through the Scottish Futures Trust include sports facilities that are widely and easily available to the public”.

Christine Grahame gave us a litany of all the sporting and gym equipment that she did not like. I would have thought that, after the vote on courts this morning, she should be more worried about the high bar—but maybe that is just me. I confess that I sensed a slight frisson of—how can I put it delicately?—atmosphere between Jenny Marra and the minister in an intervention. I have fallen into a few political traps in my time, and I certainly sense a political trap being laid for the minister by Jenny Marra over the national performance centre for sport. If the minister’s colleagues do not award the centre to Dundee, Jenny Marra will no doubt slam the Government for that; if they award it to Dundee, she will undoubtedly take the credit. That is the benefit of the great political traps of our day. That exchange brought to mind the importance of the national performance centre for sport. I rather agreed with the minister’s response to Margaret McDougall, who made the case for locating it in Largs, because it struck me that having a centre for more than just football—one that covers a range of sports—is the right approach for Scottish sport more generally. The case for that approach is well proven. I have been to Heriot-Watt University to be talked through the bid that it has submitted. I must confess that, like Alison Johnstone, I find its bid pretty compelling, but, in fairness, I do not know in any detail the benefits of either the Dundee bid or the Stirling bid, which I am sure are equally strong. I guess that that is ultimately a decision for the Government. However, on the principle of a national performance centre and of £25 million being invested in sport for the long term, I endorse the approach that the Government is taking. As other members have said, we are a sport-mad country. When we take an international view of investment in other countries, we see that they have been down this route over many years and across many sporting disciplines. Such investment is an important principle and a practical measure that can help considerably. On sport more generally, I believe that the Riccarton bid would be stronger were consideration given to the stadium issue that bedevils Edinburgh to this day. Stadiums matter, but elite athletes matter more, because they inspire young people. We have heard about curling and about many different sporting figures, and it is healthy to concentrate not only on our well-known and exemplary elite athletes but on the many unsung heroes who support people at all levels. I sneaked a look at the British Lions this morning, and it is quite nice to see a young Hawick lad called Stuart Hogg playing fantastically well—indeed, starring—at fly half. As a representative of a rugby-mad town such as Hawick, he is certainly the epitome of youth sport. Alex Johnstone raised an important issue about participation or “activity”—a term that other members have also commented on—versus elite sport. If we are to inspire the next generation and encourage more young people to follow different sporting disciplines or to take part in a range of sports and then decide which one they want to pursue, we need a bit of both. What really struck me about the Olympics was how much money went in from the national lottery to deliver for sporting success, and how focused that funding stream was on success, both for young athletes coming through and for more established elite athletes. There was no room for failure, and sports that did not match up to the agreed targets simply had their funding reduced. Irrespective of how that approach develops in future, Scotland faces a challenge: UK-wide lottery funding is fundamentally important to the number of young Scots who can make it.

I hope that the minister is not running down what team GB achieved. Nationalist members can shake their heads if they want, but given that the minister has raised the issue, I note that Sir Chris Hoy and other great Scottish Olympians have made the point that they got where they were and achieved so much for Scotland and for team GB because of the funding that came into their sports. Chris Hoy has said that he would not have achieved all that he achieved if he had not trained in Manchester regularly. I hope that those who want to separate us from all that do not dismiss that argument lightly. [Interruption.] It is a serious point. If members talk to anyone who is seriously involved in athletics, they will find that they think that it is a serious point, too. I hear that SNP members on my left dismissing it, but members need to talk to those who are involved in athletics to understand the point.

It is disappointing to hear SNP members criticising that point. Katherine Grainger would not have won her gold if she had not been competing with another athlete from another part of the UK. That is statement of fact. She has said it, so let us recognise that. On young sportspeople and school pupils who have to travel from the far-flung parts of Scotland, I heard a member say that she was concerned about being 40 minutes from Glasgow. Well, that is pretty close from my perspective. The other side of the coin for people from Shetland and Orkney is that the Scottish Government has just cut the funding that was available for group discounts on ferry vessels, which are how we get to Aberdeen and then into sports on the mainland. It is all very well talking up all the other funds but the Government is cutting a really important fund that helps swimmers, fencers, football teams and schools to take part in sport across Scotland. That is profoundly wrong. I hope that when the Cabinet visits Lerwick in July, it will change that policy for a rather better one. Richard Lyle made a fair point about volunteering. To me, the many mums and dads who spend so much time driving their children, encouraging and cajoling them and dealing with the tantrums when an event, a game or a match is lost are the essence of sport and why so many of us are delighted to be part of it.

Does not this whole issue prove that, as the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee has suggested, there is a desperate need for consolidation of all crofting legislation into one act?

I entirely agree with Mr Gibson’s conclusion on the issues that are still outstanding. Does his committee have any plans to have another look at those matters and to provide advice on how we could deal with them?

Mr Gibson mentioned hedges in his definition of crofts. The definition of a croft that we usually use in Shetland is a piece of disputed land, surrounded by legislation, into which one pours money. The same principle broadly applies. I have been very taken with the number of speeches that have, in effect, characterised crofting law as a charter for lawyers. I suspect that the concern of many of us who represent crofters across the crofting counties is that more and more of crofters’ time is taken up with seeking legal advice rather than heading to the department’s office to try to sort out the single farm payment. In a sense, that is the Government’s biggest challenge. The minister gave a very fair answer to earlier questions about consolidation—or, as Rob Gibson put it, codification, if that turns out to be the way forward—but, to be frank, all Governments have ducked the issue so far. The Government of which I was a member ducked it, and the current Government has not yet found time to address it either. I do not know whether any Government will decide to take on such a mammoth task, not least because, in the context of Scotland as a whole, the issue is awfully small beer. As Claudia Beamish said, we are talking about only a relatively small number of people. However, as legislators we impose legislation on people, and at present—for the reasons that the minister gave for introducing the bill—our legislation is causing difficulties and preventing people from going about their normal, agricultural and crofting way of life. Given what crofting entails, I am sure that Rob Gibson would strongly agree with that point.

I do not disagree with that assessment, although the land is not much use if it does not have people on it. My concern is—and has always been, not only since I have been in Parliament but long before, when I was an NFU Scotland member and a farmer at home—that successive bills on crofting, as we have heard, just add layer upon layer of legislation, and the purpose of crofting is forgotten. The Government is quite right to introduce the bill, as I made clear at an early stage. I thank the minister for progressing it as quickly as he can, given the constraints that Governments face. The only point on which I disagreed with Alex Fergusson during his interesting romp through ancient mythology was that I am not sure that someone should not have picked up the issue in 2010. After all, that is why we employ lawyers. The loophole came to light—I am sure that Paul Wheelhouse will correct me if I am wrong—only because the Crofting Commission’s own lawyers found it. We could have a long, irrelevant and pointless debate about how big the loophole is, but it has been found. That raises the question of why the Crofting Commission’s lawyers did not find it during the passage of the 2010 act.

I am sorry—I was so taken with Alex Fergusson’s run-through of various features of mythology and trying to remember my schoolboy Greek that I lost his point, but I take note of what he says. I will briefly address the wider points that other members have raised, which relate not only to the bill but to other issues. I have sent most of the correspondence that I will mention to the minister, so I will not go into any detail, but I note that there are significant problems in other areas. I am grateful to Rob Gibson for suggesting that his committee may consider those issues, and to the minister for his earlier reply in that regard. I will give an example of one particularly go-ahead crofting couple at home in Cunningsburgh in Shetland. They run a very good agricultural business and a bed and breakfast, and they have built self-catering accommodation. They have done all the things that, in terms of public policy, we expect them to do, and have turned a small unit into a successful and thriving unit on which to bring up their family. However, they now face a situation in which the Crofting Commission views them as joint landlords of a vacant croft, and they cannot decroft any land without agreement. In the email that I received from them just the other day, they point out, with some justification—this may answer Graeme Dey’s question about how widespread the problem is—that there will be hundreds, if not thousands, of examples of the problem in Shetland alone. Landlords and crofting landowners have given or sold land for gardens, house sites, sheds, garage grounds, polytunnels, driveways—you name it. In the circumstances, it seems remarkably unfair that, in the case that I mentioned, the system stops that couple making progress simply because of the way in which it is now being ruled by the Crofting Commission. Worse than that, the couple took up the issue with the Land Court and got a letter back just the other day in which the very helpful clerk to the court advised them that, whether as individuals or as a crofting couple, they could not challenge the Crofting Commission’s policy in the Land Court, although they could pursue a judicial review in the Court of Session. That makes the case, does it not? The best advice that, as legislators, we can give a crofting couple who are making a real go of their business is that they can go to the Court of Session. I think that we need to do a bit better than that. I hope that the Government can introduce some concrete plans to deal with the other anomalies that Rhoda Grant and others mentioned, which I also believe need to be sorted. It is important to deal with the reality of the crofting counties. Angus MacDonald made absolutely the right point about differences across the crofting counties. I hope that the minister will reflect on the situation, which I am sure that he has seen in his own visits around the crofting counties. Recognising those differences will be absolutely the key to whatever the Government decides to do. I hope that the bill will be passed quickly and that we will quickly get on to other matters that need to be addressed.

I take Mr McGrigor’s argument about who would have to make that call. In his analysis, is the real danger that it would again be lawyers who made that call, and none of the rest of us?

I have recently chaired meetings in Shetland with the agriculture industry, Shetland Islands Council and environmental bodies including RSPB Scotland, all of which agree that the population of geese in Shetland is growing too rapidly and needs to be addressed. Will the minister ensure that the agencies for which he is responsible bring their energy to bear on the issue so that we can find a proper way of reducing the goose population to a level that does not have the kind of economic effect that he mentioned in his earlier answer?

One thing on which I agree with Alex Johnstone is that there was a complete reversal of policy in 1999. The budget that the Liberal Democrat-Labour Government inherited was aimed entirely at roads rather than at rail, and we turned that around. I do not expect nationalist ministers ever to give that Government credit for anything, but that was the most dramatic change in transport policy that could possibly have happened. That change proved the point of devolution because it proved that Scotland could take a completely different route. The Conservatives’ lead spokesman at the time was Murray Tosh, who I remember excoriated Sarah Boyack, who was the first transport minister in that Administration. I thought that Murray Tosh was just plain wrong about that. The shift in policy towards a more sustainable transport system was made by that Government, and those of us who were around at the time are very proud of that fact. Keith Brown has taken on many of the good initiatives that he inherited. As Elaine Murray said, he has been able to take the credit for opening stations that were started under the previous Government. That is the nature of politics so there is no point in being churlish about that, but occasionally it would be nice if the current Government gave some credit—even a smidgen of credit—to those of us who were brave enough to stand up against the roads lobby and all the rest at the time who said that we were completely wrong to make that switch in policy.

That intervention absolutely gives the game away. I was trying to remember what the Scottish National Party position was on the big policy change that we made in the budgets. To be entirely fair, the Conservatives said that they did not support our position, but I now remember that the SNP’s then transport spokesperson Kenny MacAskill seemed to say that we were right while the SNP attacked us at a local level—as usual with the nationalists. Stewart Stevenson has just given the game away. Since the nationalists want to talk about their record, let us look at that, but first let me pick up Keith Brown on what he said about ticketing. I applaud his efforts to simplify the system, and he is quite right to do that. However, he should not claim all the credit—perhaps the claims are made not by him but by the people around him—because, as a correspondent from Kincardineshire wrote in The Scotsman the other day, “ending the practice of split ticketing ... benefits precisely 0.3 per cent of the travelling public and First ScotRail has ... a £2.28 million subsidy from the Scottish Government to cover downturn in revenue as a result of ending split-ticketing.” In considering the minister’s sensible moves to try to end that process, we should recognise that it is not without its costs by comparison with the benefits that it brings. In today’s transport world, the Government’s record on train journey times bears some scrutiny. We can have important debates on how we should procure the services and whether, instead of using franchises, we should look at the other models that Elaine Murray and Patrick Harvie have proposed—as they are quite entitled to do so—but I suspect that what matters most to the travelling public is journey times. Through answers to parliamentary questions that I have lodged—not through anything that I have done—we find that the Government’s record, particularly in the north-east, is pretty lamentable. In the period from 2007 to 2013, in which the SNP has been in Government, average journey times for Glasgow to Edinburgh, Edinburgh to Glasgow, Edinburgh to Aberdeen, Aberdeen to Edinburgh and Inverness to Aberdeen have increased rather than fallen. It is no wonder that people in the north east and the Highlands wonder why their Government has left them behind in all the rail investment. The north-east of Scotland is the economic powerhouse of the Scottish economy, as oil and gas is one of the few sectors—sadly—in Scotland and the United Kingdom that is moving ahead at a rate of knots. It should benefit from rail investment that is proportionate—at least to some extent—to what is happening elsewhere. Cuts in journey times are needed to allow the people in that economy to make connections to the places that they need to go. However, the record—I am reading out the Government’s own statistics from its parliamentary answers—illustrates that the situation has got worse. The transport minister has mentioned a cut of 17 minutes. I presume that he was referring to the services from Glasgow and Edinburgh to Inverness, because, in answer to a parliamentary question in December, he said: “Journey times for some services operating between Glasgow/Edinburgh and Inverness will be reduced by up to 17 minutes”.—[Official Report, Written Answers, 4 December 2012; S4W-11393.] I looked into that and lodged another question. It turns out that, of the 266 services over seven days between Glasgow and Edinburgh and Inverness, one service is 18 minutes faster and one service is 17 minutes faster. That is 0.8 per cent of the services. Although the Government is congratulating itself and patting itself on the back, those figures suggest that it has an awful lot more to do to help people who genuinely want to travel by rail to and from Aberdeen and the Highlands. The Transform Scotland briefing neatly sums up the challenge that the Government still faces, not least in persuading those of us who believe strongly in a renaissance in rail. I applaud the minister’s language in the debate and his general approach to talking up a golden age of rail, but the figures that I mentioned strongly suggest that he has a long way to go. Transform Scotland said just this week that “railways north of the Central Belt remain uncompetitive with the roads—and are due to worsen”. I fear that the Government has an awful lot more to do. I move amendment S4M-06766.3, to leave out from the first “acknowledges” to end and insert “notes Transform Scotland’s observations that ‘railways north of the central belt remain uncompetitive with the roads and are due to worsen’; recognises that some rail journey times between Glasgow/Edinburgh and Aberdeen have increased since 2007; further notes the failure of the Scottish Government to take forward the Aberdeen Crossrail project, which included the reopening of the Kintore station and recognises the ongoing overcrowding on services between Inverurie, Dyce and Aberdeen, and calls on the Scottish Government to focus on improving journey times and rail links to, and in, the north east.”

I am grateful to Mr Stevenson for giving way. I take his point, but I was simply quoting the Government’s own figures on average journey times. I also looked at the SNP’s manifesto from 2011, with which I am sure that the member is entirely familiar. It says: “Our proposals will also mean faster and more-frequent connections between Inverness and Aberdeen, and between these cities and the central belt.” That did not happen, as the figures that I used show.

Is the cabinet secretary familiar with paragraph 57 of the Audit Scotland report, which comments on the use of compromise agreements to silence whistleblowers? Is he aware that, at the Public Audit Committee meeting this morning, the Auditor General for Scotland could not tell Parliament how many compromise agreements have been used among the 14,000 members of staff who have left the public sector over the past two years? Is he able to enlighten Parliament as to what that figure is?

In speaking to my amendments in this group, I want to ensure that the Scottish salmon industry, which has been a notable economic success for some years now, continues to be so. My concern about this bill and the Government’s proposed measures is that they add costs and bureaucracy and create the real danger that our industry will be micromanaged. I cannot believe that that can be in the minister’s or indeed the Government’s interests. Even if it were the Government’s intention to micromanage the industry in this way, which I genuinely do not believe to be the case, there is also always the danger of what a future Government might wish to do with the very sweeping powers that this Government will take when, as it assuredly will, it passes the bill with its own amendments. The industry, which has grown considerably in recent years—indeed, the Government has a target of growing production by 50 per cent by 2020—employs 1,100 jobs directly on farms and 4,000 in processing and, over the past five years, has invested £205 million of capital expenditure. It cannot be in any Government’s never mind the Parliament’s interests to introduce a bill that in my view fails the Government’s own better regulation task force tests. Just the other day, I had it explained to me just what the task force has done under successive Governments to reduce unnecessary bureaucracy, cut red tape and ensure that industries across Scotland are more able to compete in very competitive marketplaces—in this case, the food marketplace—against international competitors that have no such regulation. As I am sure the minister accepts, the industry is very heavily regulated. Many Government bodies, local authorities and others already regulate salmon farming to a considerable extent. With this bill and these particular measures, the Government will through its own department, Marine Scotland, potentially become involved in every aspect of fish farm management. The simple purpose of my amendments in this group is to avoid that very real difficulty. Those of us who represent communities, islands and the areas of Scotland where this industry has succeeded economically know that these kinds of powers are already being used and agencies are already becoming involved on a day-to-day basis; however, this Government apparently wishes to take more powers in this area. Very real concerns about that aspect of the bill have been expressed to me and other members of all political parties in the chamber. I appreciate that the minister has written to the industry to state that it is not his intention to micromanage the industry and, for what it is worth, I entirely believe him. However, my concern about the bill that will be passed today relates not to an individual minister but to the fact that Government legislation will be on the statute book long after he and I have left this place. In considering the various aspects of fish farm management agreements, I would argue that there already are very strong and good working relationships between Government and its agencies and the industry. There has been a progressive approach to how the industry can develop. I do not understand the Government’s justification for the range of additional powers and responsibilities that it wishes to take in respect of the industry and its future operation. Sampling has been a big issue. As the minister knows, there is potentially a challenge to that under the European convention on human rights. I appreciate that the Government’s line—and that of the Parliament—will be that the bill is legally competent. However, the industry has very real questions about that issue and is taking legal advice. In considering this group of amendments, I would ask that Parliament considers the balance between an industry achieving the Government’s targets on increasing production in order to export around the world and be a great Scottish success story and the sweeping powers that are being taken here in respect of the day-to-day management of that industry. I move amendment 8.

The minister might admit defeat but he knows that he is going to win anyway. It must be a great position to be in. I confess that I share the minister’s concerns about Alex Fergusson’s amendment 3 but I think that the minister could have made another point about it. As he and Alex Fergusson have pointed out, SEPA has researched the issue and produced its findings but I think that there are certain fundamental questions that the agency needs to answer. It seems to me that one question that should be posed is this: given that SEPA provides discharge consents for fish farms the length and breadth of Scotland, what happened to the agency’s normal day-to-day monitoring processes that this information only came to light in this way? The minister talked about taking this information “out of context”, which was a very diplomatic way of describing what might actually happen in practice, and I am sure that Mr Fergusson will accept that someone less charitable than he is might use the information in a very—shall we say—public manner. For that reason, I do not find favour with amendment 3. I take the minister’s point about my amendments, but I would have been much more minded to withdraw or not to move them had the Government set out—

That is a reasonable point but the judgment is about the word “some”—and I appreciate that there will be a difficult judgment call in any of these decisions. Mr Fergusson will remember that in the early 2000s the industry came under enormous pressure from certain lobbies without any justification, and what happened then reminds me of what can go wrong when the word “some” is interpreted by those who take issue with the industry. I am afraid that I will be a bit cautious on that issue. Although I take the minister’s point with regard to micromanagement, I just wish that the Government would set out clearly how it will avoid it. I repeat that it is not my contention that this minister or his officials—

That is a very fair response but I repeat that I am concerned not with this minister but with what could happen in the future. Given that those of us charged with passing legislation in this place must express that responsibility with an eye on what is happening not just now but in the future, I will press amendment 8.

I am concerned that amendment 14 is farm by farm by the back door, for the reason that the minister outlined in his intervention on Claudia Beamish earlier. I know of farms in my constituency that would be identified without a shadow of a doubt. That is the reality. The commercial consequences of that would be considerable. Some people may not believe that commercial arguments are relevant to the debate, and that is one point of view, but I do not share it. Graeme Dey made some observations about the industry moving forward, which I think was in response to a helpful push from the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. That has been the right approach. The industry has announced a fish health management report just in the past couple of days, and I think that it has been submitted to the minister. That is a sensible and constructive way forward. In addition, the science project that the industry, the SSPO and the Government are undertaking must be the basis for what is done, even for Claudia Beamish and Alex Fergusson, with their observations about how the industry has to be as transparent as possible. That science project means that there should be an independent assessment of the impact of the industry on other species. I suspect that that is what Claudia Beamish and Alex Fergusson are driving at. That seems to be a reason to allow the process to continue in the way in which Graeme Dey has suggested. That would provide a balanced and proportionate approach to the challenge, while ensuring that we do not get embroiled in what I think are pretty significant issues of commercial confidentiality, which any industry would have very strong views about were the Parliament to impose the provisions of what is a no doubt well-meaning but misjudged amendment.

Amendment 21 seeks clarity from the Government about a difference between sections 16 and 6. I raised this issue at stage 2 and again seek an explanation from the minister, because I have spent some time looking at the issue and for the love of me have not been able to find the other legislation that he mentioned in his response at stage 2. Section 16, which concerns emergency action notices, allows a 14-day period for appeal, while in section 6 the appeal period is only seven days. If the minister can clarify the reason for that difference, I will be more than happy to withdraw the amendment. I move amendment 21.

I am grateful to the minister for putting that full explanation on the record. As I am content with it, I will withdraw amendment 21. Amendment 21, by agreement, withdrawn. Section 7—Marine enforcement officers’ functions

The minister might correct me on this, but I am concerned that the amendments have not been subject to parliamentary scrutiny. They will, I think, insert new measures in the bill and they will create significant new powers, as will some of the minister’s later amendments. As I recollect, we discussed wellboats at stage 2, but the discussion was about the definition of a wellboat and not about the powers of enforcement or the powers of the fiscal in relation to charges, although I am happy to be corrected on that, too. The Parliament has no mechanism whatsoever for reviewing legislation if an amendment that is new to the Parliament is lodged at stage 3. As far as I can tell, the committee has not looked at the subject of the amendments in the past. I am therefore concerned that what the amendments will introduce is a new measure that has not gone through consultation. The bill was consulted on last year, which is some time ago. The issue must cause concern about how we adequately scrutinise legislation in the Parliament.

The debate on this group is simply about the minister and the Government taking the power to charge for services that will now be provided by various Government agencies, notably Marine Scotland. As we know—some of us have dealt with this matter over some years—Marine Scotland has three distinct functions: enforcement of regulation, policy and research. The contention and the concern of many people across the industry are that, in instigating the charging regime, there is an inherent conflict of interest in respect of the Government and its agencies, and that there is therefore a need for transparency. That is what my amendments seek to provide. There are two other practical points. First, the industry can procure some services from other sources—it does not need to buy in those services only from Government. There is considerable concern that the way in which the bill is now drafted means that there will effectively be no choice, and that the Government will state what services and functions have to be undertaken and how it will charge for them, and that is that. I seek, particularly in amendment 37, to ensure that there is some transparency in that process. Secondly, the fish health inspectorate of course plays an important role, but it fulfils one of the three functions within Marine Scotland, which I think creates a pretty clear conflict of interest. The inspectorate is able to charge for services that are not underpinned by statute or secondary legislation such as a ministerial order. The Government is taking a very considerable power under the bill, which will come through via secondary legislation—the minister was gracious enough to admit that—and I rather suspect that the Parliament will scrutinise those provisions a lot less than it would if they were in the form of proposed primary legislation. There seem to be some basic points around transparency that are important in the context of the Government taking a power to charge an industry for services that the Government provides. My amendments seek to ensure that that transparency is there, and that there is some clarity in the process. I move amendment 29.

I am grateful for that clarity. Will the minister reflect on the point about the industry procuring services from a different source?

There is a fundamental point about the Government’s taking the power, which is why there is an onus on us in Parliament to seek to instigate in primary legislation a reporting mechanism that allows for the transparency and clarity that I am trying to achieve in my amendments. Indeed, we have no alternative but to do so. The minister has only reflected on the point about the industry procuring services from a different source, but there are potentially a considerable number of ways of doing that, and I would have hoped for a stronger answer to my point. I will press amendment 29 because I believe that it sets out an important principle that we should adopt.

If it will help, Presiding Officer, I say now that I will not move the rest of the amendments in the group.

Some of what the former political editor of The Herald used to say to me came back to me as I watched the news last night. Bill Clark used to say when he phoned up, “Tavish, I’d like you to comment on the war of words between Labour and the SNP. Don’t worry, I’m not going to use it, because I won’t fit your comment in, but we should have a chat about it anyway.” When I watched the news last night and saw Gordon Brown attacking the Tories in determining that the union was better for Scottish voters and in the next clip saw Nicola Sturgeon attacking Labour in pitching for the left-of-centre vote, I thought, “Gosh, no wonder the public are wearying of what is going on at the moment.” Nicola Sturgeon went for the left-of-centre vote yesterday, but today we understand that the SNP’s campaign has a pro-business, cut-corporation-tax, right-wing agenda. We heard Fergus Ewing talk about oil tax earlier on. So, the SNP is left wing on Monday and right wing on Tuesday. I say to Linda Fabiani that no party can shake a stick at the SNP when it comes to being all things to all people. Here is the problem for the SNP: the voters are not stupid. Yes, the bill is about participation, but if we want to encourage interest and ensure that the voter takes the issue seriously, it does not help that the Government is a tax spender one day and a tax cutter the next. I do care about the battle of ideas and vision but, to be frank, if I were to spend three weeks at home just now helping with the lambing I would miss nothing on independence. A vast percentage of the population of this country have made up their minds—and no wonder, given what has been going on. Instead of the reforms that Scotland needs, instead of testing the utterly debilitating orthodoxy of Scottish political thinking and instead of developing new solutions for old problems, this Parliament will shout at itself right through until September 2014. Because the Government of the day will use its majority to railroad through its position on every issue and every law, it seems that Parliament, in the eyes of an increasing majority of the population, is irrelevant.

Today could provide a chink of light. It could be a genuine opportunity. I thank Helen Eadie and Graeme Pearson for their thoughtful contributions, which were more than we had from the SNP.

Helen Eadie and Graeme Pearson made thoughtful contributions on the kind of Scotland that we might create if we really—[Interruption.] You know you are getting to them when they shout at you. You really know you are getting to them when they all start badgering away on the left wing. I suppose that Bob Doris is one of the left wingers speaking up over on the SNP benches. We could take a different position from the UK Government, which would be progressive, right and part of a much talked-up tradition of Scotland’s social fabric. That was the argument that Graeme Pearson, Helen Eadie, Patrick Harvie and Alison McInnes made. Alternatively, we might not. If nationalist ministers do not support progressive change on prisoners’ rights, that is of course their right, but they should set out their principled case as to why Scotland should retain a complete ban on convicted prisoners voting.

Ministers should say why Scotland being the same as Armenia, Bulgaria and Russia is better than being the same as Norway, Sweden and Finland. If Mr Stevenson wants to answer that question I am happy to give way.

Yes—I support the abolition of the House of Lords. We hear many speeches from SNP ministers that say how Scotland’s social and humanitarian fabric would be all the stronger if independence happened. There is a pretty big gaping hole in that argument today. SNP ministers cannot, on one hand, make all those speeches that say that it will all be wonderful and then on this difficult but undoubtedly progressive issue ignore that argument.

It is far from me to get into what is left or right, but the one thing I know about Neil Findlay is that he is left wing. These days, I do not know what members on the SNP benches are. MSPs have today extolled the virtues of giving 16 and 17-year-olds a vote in the referendum—rightly so. That is a genuinely correct decision. However, that case would be stronger if, after deciding to include some of our fellow citizens, they explained why excluding others is acceptable. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice said recently: “offenders should be sent to prison as punishment, but ... our prisons should also be about the rehabilitation and reintegration of offenders back into society as contributing citizens.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 26 February 2013; c 2380.] Mr MacAskill is absolutely right about that and I commend his approach. I wish he would win the arguments in his cabinet for a change in position in prisoner votes. To allow prisoners who are on short term sentences to vote would—as the Howard League for Penal Reform has observed—send a powerful message that they remain part of wider Scotland with a stake in our nation’s future. To do the opposite would be to send precisely the opposite message. Is this an issue of morality, the law or just politics for this nationalist Government? I sense that it is a political judgment. The principled and progressive argument—the argument that will not, of course, find universal favour—is discounted. I suspect that that is because the Government has weighed up the political balance and wants to be safe. That is its right, and with its majority no progressive change in this area will take place to the bill. That means that not only I, but many other Scots will observe that when the nation’s politicians faced a genuinely tough call about building a better Scotland, they bottled it in favour of the politically safe status quo. That is a shame.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what recent assessment has been made of dementia services in NHS Shetland and the availability and retention of staff to deliver these. (S4O-02077)

A constituent of mine who has dementia has been regularly transferred to the Royal Cornhill hospital in Aberdeen. Does the cabinet secretary understand the difficult circumstances that that creates for his family? Will he undertake to work with NHS Shetland to consider how best services can be delivered through investment in the necessary staff and, potentially, capital investment in an appropriate facility, with the aim of finding a way to minimise the amount of travel? Inevitably, such travel means that patients are further away from their families in what are extremely difficult times.

2. To ask the Scottish Government when it will bring forward proposals to amend the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 to allow owner-occupier decrofting. (S4O-02046)

I am grateful that the proposals mean that legislation will be passed by the summer recess, if I understood the minister correctly. This morning I had a communication from constituents in Shetland, who pointed out that they cannot get a mortgage deal that expires in August this year because they have no title to the plot that they need, as a result of the decrofting shambles. Is not it time that the matter was resolved? My constituents are not alone; many other people in the crofting counties face the problem, which goes on and on.

Will the minister confirm whether the vessel that this is being procured will provide the service across the Pentland Firth while the crankshaft is being replaced and for the entire period for which MV Hamnavoe is out of service? Will he therefore confirm that neither MV Hrossey or MV Hjaltland will be taken off the Lerwick and Kirkwall to Aberdeen routes during that period?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea scientific figures for 2012 show that the spawning stock biomass of cod in the North Sea is two and a half times larger now than it was in 2006. In the light of that, is he prepared to say that the cod recovery plan has come to the end of its useful life and that it should be abolished? Also, when will regional management take over in the North Sea?

I thank the minister for providing an advance copy of his statement. I agree with his point that capital investment in Scotland’s canals has certainly taken off since 2001, following some years of neglect. Does he share my view that Neptune’s staircase is one of the engineering wonders of the world and that many great achievements have been made on the canal network because of the engineering expertise that it has given rise to? I wonder whether the minister will reflect on the fifth aim of his strategy—delivering a high-quality experience—with regard to the self-operation of locks. My recollection from a previous life is that active users of our canal network made a considerable case for being able to use the locks after a certain time at night when, because of scheduling arrangements, they were usually closed. Has there been any progress on that matter to encourage more people to use our canals, an aim that the minister is rightly pursuing?

I, too, declare an interest as an honorary fellow of RIAS. I very much agree with Linda Fabiani’s point that the Deputy First Minister’s bill should not be seen as a panacea for all the challenges of a procurement system here in Scotland. No piece of legislation could do that. However, let me rise to the challenge put down by Gordon MacDonald in his opening remarks and offer some thoughts about areas that the Deputy First Minister may wish to consider, either for her bill or just in the form of Government procurement actions. As the Deputy First Minister knows, the Government and Shetland Islands Council have recently commissioned, through the hub North Scotland Limited—or north hubco—joint venture, a new Anderson high school for Lerwick, which is a very welcome project. I thank her for the answer on the subject that she gave me some weeks ago at question time. The subject raises some fundamental questions about the process of procurement that is now undertaken by these enormous procurement systems in different parts of Scotland. In the north, which covers my constituency, Miller Construction Services, one of the UK’s largest building companies, is part of the north hubco. It has three directors on the board. We still do not know—and it would be unrealistic and unfair to expect the Deputy First Minister to answer the question today—whether any other company was allowed to tender for the new school. We do not know the price of the school or indeed the other five schools that were procured as part of the same contract. We also do not know whether a number of other small businesses had an opportunity to provide a price and therefore help the value-for-money argument that the Deputy First Minister and other members have rightly made in the debate. I hope, therefore, that in testing the current systems, never mind introducing new ones, the Government will give some thought to ensuring that there is transparency in the process that it currently operates through its hubco set-up throughout Scotland. I ask no more than that firms should have the chance to price for work. On the point that many members made—with which I heartily agree—about small businesses merely getting the chance to tender for work, never mind winning it, it is worth pointing out that the north hubco’s architects are a Newcastle-based company called Ryder Architecture. I do not know whether Scottish firms—whether Aberdeen firms or a consortium of Scottish architectural businesses—had an opportunity to win that work or, indeed, even be on the first list. It strikes me that these are areas in which a transparent process would be welcome. That is an important principle, which I commend to the Deputy First Minister in her consideration of the bill. Elaine Murray rightly raised a number of submissions that we have been given for this debate, a number of which made some important points. The FSB’s briefing points out that only one in six small firms—which it defines as those with a turnover lower than £500,000 a year and typically employing fewer than 10 people, not the 250 people that Elaine Murray rightly drew attention to earlier—had participated in a public tender in the preceding year, and that more than two thirds of small construction firms say that they have opted out of public procurement entirely over the past three years because the costs are prohibitively high. That seems to chime with the remarks of the Deputy First Minister and others about the need to approach the issue from a new angle. Chic Brodie made that point, and I had some sympathy with his observations. The FSB points out that the overall value of work going to small firms has remained fairly constant for the past six years, which suggests that there is considerable room for improvement and considerable scope for the Government to come forward with some new measures. The Government’s move towards a single standard PQQ is an important and positive step forward, but there are many other initiatives that could come forward in the procurement bill or by other means that would be welcomed by small businesses. We talk the talk on small businesses, but this bill, and other Government activities, should allow Parliament and the Government to walk the walk as well. We should not forget the traditional forms of procurement. Dunfermline high school, which was mentioned in the RIAS briefing, has a beautiful new building. It is airy and bright, and the headteacher says that it achieves 98 per cent of what he wanted it to at the design stage. Good things can be done by traditional forms of procurement. That seems to be an important component in the overall argument about value for money. I welcome the detailed work that the committee, led by Maureen Watt, is doing in this area, but I want to ensure that we do not view the bill as the be-all and end-all, and that the Government brings forward other initiatives that can further the work.

The First Minister will be aware that Iceland and the Faroes announced an illegal grab of 52 per cent of north Atlantic mackerel this week, and that the Faroes announced a new quota of three times the international agreement on Atlanto-Scandian herring. On 7 February, the First Minister told Parliament that he was appointing an international figure to mediate. Can he tell Parliament what has happened to that initiative? No fishing representative could tell me of any progress. Will he now push harder for international sanctions, which are the only measure that those countries will understand?

I thank the minister for his statement. The Presiding Officer will recall that when Parliament passed the Mental Health (Public Safety and Appeals) (Scotland) Act 1999, the process took 13 days—if I have my numbers correct—from the introduction of the bill to royal assent. I commend that approach to the minister. I appreciate that he must have all-party support; he certainly has the support of the Liberal Democrats. Will he undertake to work with MSPs—not that many of whom are directly affected by the issue—on a cross-party basis to resolve the situation and fix the problem as quickly as possible, while ensuring that due account is taken of the need for proper scrutiny?

7. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities last met hub North Scotland Ltd and what matters were discussed. (S4O-01961)

From the briefings that the minister has received, is she aware that the new Anderson high school in Lerwick is to be built by the tier 1 bidder Miller, and yet a local consortium of three Shetland building businesses was not allowed to bid? Will she look into why that happened and give me an explanation as to why taxpayers and value for money were not helped by having a broader tender?

As a famous United States senator said some years back, “just because everything has been said doesn’t mean everybody’s said it.” I bow to the superior knowledge of James Kelly, Bob Doris and the many others who have opined sensibly on the history of Livingstone and what he means for today. I want to make a couple of remarks on James Kelly’s latter point about lessons for today. However, first, with my Commonwealth Parliamentary Association branch hat on, I thank my colleagues for the role that the CPA has played in the partnerships, internships and MP visits, as well as for sending Sarah Boyack and Alex Fergusson to Malawi. We found out in a meeting earlier that that was an extremely useful visit on which they brought to bear their considerable knowledge of Parliament. To impart that knowledge to colleagues in another country is sometimes the most useful work that we can do. I also congratulate Patricia Ferguson—this has nothing to do with the debate—on being elected to a national body in the CPA. The British Isles and Mediterranean region elections have just taken place, and her election is a notable achievement for the CPA Scotland branch in the context of the debate around the Commonwealth. I have two points to make in respect of Livingstone and his legacy. First, when the President of Malawi delivered a speech here in the chamber just a couple of weeks ago, she mentioned business investment. Maureen Watt and Jamie McGrigor made two very sensible suggestions about what we could do in our role as parliamentarians and what the Government could do, too. The first suggestion was on oil and gas. Maureen Watt rightly pointed out that our history, involvement and experience in dealing with American multinationals—multinationals that have the ability to make a difference not only to Aberdeen, but to my part of the world—would be of relevance and use to that part of Africa. The second was Jamie McGrigor’s suggestion about the old Highlands and Islands Development Board model, which represented a notable change in public policy back in the 1960s and achieved practical things on farming and agriculture. Given what I have learned from listening to the special envoy, Alex Fergusson and Sarah Boyack in our meeting, that seems to be a beneficial model. Sandra White ended that meeting by observing that our best investment in the future of Malawi would be to make that investment long-term and sustainable. If that is the lesson that James Kelly rightly drew from his earlier remarks, and it is the long-term theme that the minister and—because I hope that this will be an enduring theme—those who come after the minister in Governments of whatever persuasion will have, it is well worth having not one, but two members’ debates on it. No doubt there will be more to come.

Would Christine Grahame not accept that the opposite of that argument is that Dumfries and Galloway constabulary was not big enough to investigate Lockerbie?

I start with the press release that I have just received from the NFU Scotland, which welcomes today’s debate. In lodging the motion, the Liberal Democrats have made the Government respond to us. The NFUS announced that the less favoured area payments will start to arrive in bank accounts from Friday. I am sorry to be getting this in 10 minutes before Richard Lochhead can say it. The fact that Richard Lochhead has had to rush out the announcement shows our importance. Farmers across Scotland now know that when they get a parliamentary debate from the Liberal Democrats, the minister gives more money to Scottish agriculture. I commend the minister for that welcome approach. In recent weeks, two constituents have come to see me about common agricultural policy reform. One has built up his livestock numbers. He breeds quality ewes for trade, he contracts fences, he shears, and he manages shipping of livestock across the quay in Lerwick every autumn. Despite all that hard work, he now faces the uncertainty of not knowing what single farm payment he will have in 2015. The second constituent is the son of a good friend. He is a young farmer with enormous potential in the industry, and he has a route into farming through succession, although he has no entitlement. He needs certainty for his bank. Scottish agriculture has notable opportunities. Crofters, farmers and growers produce quality goods. The Liberal Democrats support a pro-Scotland food policy and say all power to the minister’s elbow on his promotion of Scottish produce, and to Jim McLaren of Quality Meat Scotland for the same. Why the SNP voted against our local food procurement amendment last night is quite beyond me. However, there are bigger questions about the day-to-day ability to farm and to produce lambs, calves or strawberries. After I left school, I worked on an American midwest cattle farm. At that time the farmers wanted the US Congress to pass the freedom to farm act. When I speak to my adopted Kansan family today, I hear that little has changed except that fewer people are working, but they are working in bigger agri-businesses. Is that the future that we want for Scottish agriculture? I relish Shetland’s having hundreds of active crofters but, as in the rest of Scotland, numbers are falling. The paperwork and the fear of breaking Government regulations are driving many people away. Surely CAP reform should be about something that is so much better. If public policy supports the provision of food from local markets with traceability, quality and provenance built in, that will cost. However, if politicians mirror short-term public opinion and support the cheapest of food, who knows what the future will hold for Scottish agriculture? CAP reform must be tailored to Scottish needs, but we cannot pretend to be divorced from the English or wider European marketplaces. The Scottish Government’s own food policy proves that case. The most recent worrying development has been the closure of a major light-lamb processing factory in Wales. That facility bought hundreds of Scottish hill lambs and this year’s lamb crop will have fewer markets as a result. Our motion, which is on behalf of every farmer, crofter and grower, is pressing the Scottish Government to state its position on common agricultural policy reform. Every farmer and crofter whom I have met of late—the cabinet secretary meets a heck of a lot more than I do—asked me one simple question: what will my single farm payment be in 2015? That is the question that the Government needs to answer. What will the Scottish framework of payments be? The modelling work that the Welsh Government is doing is right. It published on 6 February proposals that bear some examination. They go into considerable detail about the different share of support under the coming arrangements, and how farmers across Wales are expected to gain. Page 12 of its report illustrates the modelling “on how a single flat rate across the country would affect farm incomes” and how “48% would gain but 35% would lose at least 10% of their current payment.” In fairness to our colleagues in Wales, they are in no way ducking the serious repercussions of agricultural reform. In the paper, the Welsh Government goes on to state: “around 85% of farms with an historical payment of less than €1,000 would experience a gain of 10% or more from the change to a flat rate payment.” It looks at differential rates and provides a regional assessment, which I would commend to the cabinet secretary here in Scotland. It also states that “In terms of regional changes,” the largest gains will be “in the Southern region compared to its aggregate historical entitlement value.” Interestingly—I also commend this point to the cabinet secretary—they recommend “extending the modelling to consider the effect not just on the direct payments received by farm businesses, but on their entire farm incomes.” That seems to me to be a reasonable and appropriate approach to a very difficult issue. As that paper was published on 6 February, I can only suggest that Wales has led and Scotland should now follow. The Welsh Government has tackled some of the things that farmers in Scotland are crying out for and has provided an illustration of what payments are going to look like. When will the cabinet secretary start to get around Scotland with a region-by-region breakdown of single farm payments and tell our farmers and crofters what his plans are? That is what his Welsh opposite number is doing. He is not holding one April conference, but is meeting farmers every night right across the country and talking about his plans. Scotland’s agriculture minister has enormous discretionary powers to shape a Scottish CAP. Scotland has a different approach from England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and that is as it should be. In effect, there are four CAPs across the UK. We have less favoured areas, but England does not. We have coupled payments—that is what the beef and calf scheme is—but England and Wales do not and that, too, is as it should be. However, our ministers should tell farmers and crofters what their plans are within the huge discretion that they have from the European Union. Mr Lochhead’s amendment cites the Pack report, which was produced back in 2010. However, I looked again this morning and I could not find any observation, any release or any Government statement on whether the cabinet secretary agrees or does not agree with the Pack report’s recommendations. Some of them were pretty challenging for any future support system for Scottish agriculture. The inquiry’s recommendations included: “Future direct payments should be distributed in Scotland on the basis of distinguishing LFA and Non-LFA land.” It also concluded: “The change from the current historic base for” single farm payments “to the Inquiry's approach outlined here should take place as soon as possible after the European negotiations are complete.” Again, I do not know whether the cabinet secretary favours that approach, with a transition of only one year as opposed to the much longer transition that many in Scottish agriculture are calling for. That is a fundamental decision that our cabinet secretary must take, and he must give Scottish agriculture an early indication of how he plans to proceed. Can he tell us how he plans to move from historic payments to area-based payments? Many people across the industry believe that that transition should take as long as possible. Does he agree? Will he invoke what the Irish presidency of the EU now describes as the “Irish tunnel”? That means partial convergence so that half of farmers will see less change. That would ease payment changes and allow better planning, and it is seen to be a more stable approach. Does the cabinet secretary consider that to be the right option for Scotland? Has the Scottish Government asked the European Union to allow a great majority of annual payments to be made in advance in December? That is a serious proposal that the NFU Scotland has made time and again. It would help with cash flow, it would mean fewer in-year changes, and it would also be administratively easier. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will reflect on that. What is his view? What assessment is being carried out of the need for a safety net for extensive producers so that they do not get caught up by a well-meaning but hopelessly prescriptive activity test? That point was alluded to in last night’s crofting debate. Does the cabinet secretary support the simplification of regulations, notably for small producers and crofters? He is rightly sympathetic to new entrants—people who have been kept out of the subsidy regime since 2005. What is the Scottish Government’s position on the size of the national reserve? At 3 per cent, is it big enough? Farmers and crofters need answers to those questions. The EU budget, the framework of the common agricultural policy and the flexibility to tailor to Scottish needs are now all in place, yet our industry has no certainty. When does the Government plan to provide that clarity? We believe that Scotland’s farmers and crofters need to see financial modelling, a region-by-region breakdown and an active minister-led discussion with firm illustrations of the policy options that could be pursued. On behalf of the industry, we want the cabinet secretary to be clear on his approach before the Easter recess. Farmers and crofters need to know that information and it is the responsibility of this cabinet secretary and this Government to show them it. I move, That the Parliament notes the crucial importance of a Scottish common agricultural policy (CAP) within the UK; believes that farmers and crofters across Scotland need to understand what decisions the Scottish Government plans; notes that the Welsh Government has modelled CAP reform into payments by region and commends a similar approach for Scotland, and calls on the Scottish Government to set out its plans for implementing CAP reform and to seek the agreement of the Parliament to this before the end of March 2013 so that farmers and crofters can plan for the substantial changes ahead of implementation on 1 January 2015.

Will the member give way?

They are three-faced.

I fear that Claire Baker is right that both this debate and the debates on food that are going on in different forms throughout the country have come out of yet another food scandal. I used to be involved in agriculture daily. It was a source of some regret to me that the only time that politicians got really interested in food debates or fishing was when there was some big scandal going on. Therefore, I hope that this debate will be not only about the constructive points that members of all parties want to put to the minister about his food policies, public procurement and other aspects of the industry—which is really important for Scotland—but about taking a much more mature and reflective look at the wider picture that Clare Baker painted. It is important that the debate not only concerns the export trade, important as that is—I pay tribute to the Scottish Government for the way that it has stepped up on that point—but encapsulates food in its widest possible sense, from the school plate right through to a whisky bottle that is sold in Japan. There can be no greater illustration of that wider debate than the Sunday Mail report this weekend on the substituting of lamb with beef that it is claimed is widespread in Indian restaurants. I suspect that, if anything would bring home to most Scots the issue with the food that we eat, it would be the thought that the lamb on the menu of their local restaurant or takeaway of an Indian persuasion is, apparently, not all that it might be. That is the kind of issue that is strongly in their minds. In that report, Professor Hugh Pennington, whom many members have come across in the past, went on to describe what needs to be done and to point out the gaps that currently exist. That only illustrates the point that the sector does not stand still and that the regulatory environment and the measures that are in place to protect the consumer and enhance the consumer’s experience need constantly to be refined and reconsidered. Before I discuss local food procurement, I will raise one particular measure, which concerns fish. Fish is a healthy part of a balanced diet. Mackerel and herring are notably rich in omega-3 oils, which are extremely good for human health. That also applies to salmon. Therefore, food policy for Scotland should include a heavy focus on fish. Right now, white-fish prices, for species such as haddock and cod, are at very low market levels. There are increasing white-fish imports from northern Europe—and indeed from across the world, to take Patrick Harvie’s point about food miles. Sixty per cent of all fish that is eaten in Scotland is bought in fish and chip shops, and yet those shops are buying from the Faroes, Iceland and Norway. Less than 10 per cent of fish caught from Scottish waters is used in Scottish fish and chip shops. We need a net-to-plate strategy that stimulates Scottish and indeed UK demand for home-caught product. The Scottish Government should promote the provenance and quality of Scotland-caught seafood in the way that it is rightly doing with beef and other products. Why is Seafish—a quango that is responsible for promoting fish as a healthy part of the diet—spending advertising money on promoting fish from Iceland and the Barents Sea? There is a leaflet, which some members might have seen, in fish and chip shops the length and breadth of the country in which Seafish highlights fish from Iceland and the Barents Sea. It must be pretty tough on the Scottish industry, which watches Iceland break international laws and catch mackerel illegally, to find that an industry promotion body that is based in Edinburgh is helping to sell Icelandic fish into our markets. I ask the cabinet secretary to look into that. With the other devolved Administrations, he appoints the chairman of Seafish and approves the board. The position cannot be filled unless he agrees with the appointment, so the Scottish minister has great power to wield on behalf of the industry in the promotion of food policy. However, does that not serve to illustrate that too many people across all the numerous Government agencies and quangos are not pulling for the industry? Will he undertake to fix the issue and therefore help the Scottish white-fish industry? The new Scottish food policy and procurement approach for schools and hospitals should include fish to a far greater level than before. That would mean more locally caught fish on more dinner tables and in work canteens, schools and hospitals; fairer prices for our boats; traceability for food contracts, including North Sea Marine Stewardship Council caught haddock, from net to dinner plate; and economic benefits from that approach to Scotland and indeed the UK. I have raised in successive weeks at various question times the sourcing and procurement of frozen food by 28 of the 32 local authorities from Brakes, the company that Claire Baker mentioned earlier. Mince for school dinners comes from that company, but—I asked Michael Matheson specifically about this a fortnight ago—no minister has been able to tell me from which farm that mince is sourced. Michael Matheson said that the Scotland Excel contract includes traceability as a criterion, so I am at a loss to understand why mums and dads, teachers and pupils as yet do not know where the mince comes from. They know that it comes from Brakes, but they do not know which farm it comes from. As the company is a Kent-based conglomerate, it is fair to assume that it sources from widely across this country and no doubt Ireland as well. If the minister can tell the Parliament more about that when he winds up, that would be genuinely helpful. Scottish farmers must comply with the most exacting traceability standards in the world, and promotion bodies such as Scotland Food & Drink and Quality Meat Scotland use that positively, and rightly so. Surely farmers have every right to expect that, in return, their children in local schools will know where the mince in their school dinners comes from. They do not know that at present. When will that change? I finish with a point about the statement that the Government and Convention of Scottish Local Authorities issued after the summit last week. It is a little disappointing that Mike Russell, the education secretary, is not here, as I am told that he was part of that. The statement does not mention sourcing or local produce. I hope that, when he winds up the debate, the minister will take some time to go into what was achieved at the joint meeting, particularly on sourcing and local produce. It was right to have the meeting, and I agree with him about the need for it. However, what changes can be expected in schools, hospitals and the public sector, and will that work drive local food and local procurement? I move amendment S4M-05892.1, to insert at end: “, and further believes that reform in public sector food procurement is needed to place a greater importance on procuring quality produce from local suppliers.”

Bruce Crawford’s best line of the day was “Ask not what you can do for your country. Ask what’s for lunch.” I thought for a horrible moment that he was quoting the First Minister—I have never been in any doubt that the First Minister eats for Scotland—but he quickly clarified that he was quoting Orson Welles. It was certainly the best and most appropriate food line of the day. This debate, inevitably, is one in which local members take the opportunity to mention every possible delicacy from their part of the country. Further to Jean Urquhart’s salient point, I quickly add that the Fort fish and chip shop in Shetland, in common with the example that Mr Stevenson gave from his own patch, does not sell anything other than locally caught fish. As other members have reflected, the point is that not enough of that is going on. There might be an opportunity for the minister in that regard. There seems to be two main issues in the debate. The first is around public sector procurement, which is something that the Government can do something about; by contrast, although the Government can help the broad spectrum of exporting industries, it does not have the whip hand over them and cannot change things. The second issue is the one that Richard Simpson and others have raised in some detail about regulations and having the right balance. There will always be a debate about balance, whether it relates to trans-fats, inspectors in meat plants or the new food body about which Michael Matheson, the health minister, made a statement to Parliament a week or so ago. That balance will continue to be of interest to Parliament. I want to talk about whether our food procurement and public procurement policy only benefits big business and the large concerns that we have heard much about today from, among others, Neil Findlay, or whether the system and regulations can be altered to help, in particular, smaller businesses and suppliers. That help would very much capture the mood of today’s contributions. It is important that we look at the Scottish Government’s study on the issue, which was published last year. The “Assessment of Regional Cross Sectoral Collaborative Approach to Public Sector Food Procurement”—perhaps Mr Lochhead could come up with snappier titles for his studies in future—says: “This study has reinforced the view that price is still the dominant factor within food procurement decisions and this pressure is increasing”. It does not say that that pressure is decreasing or changing. Therefore—this comes from the Government’s own study—there is much for the Government to address around how food could be procured on a regional basis. The study goes on to say that there is a general reluctance on the part of small businesses to engage in the food procurement system, and sets out a number of good examples of local food procurement in Scotland and across the United Kingdom. It also says that changes need to be made to the current structure of food procurement. There needs to be strong support for small businesses and contracts need to be sized appropriately. That all seems to be at the heart of what needs to change about the way in which food is procured in the public sector, whether for our schools, hospitals or care homes, or more generally. In a letter from the Federation of Small Businesses—it was, no doubt, sent to other members—the organisation particularly highlights the importance of that proposed change. It says: “The recent aggregation of Scottish public sector contracts means that a small number of large businesses often win a great deal of public contracts. The food sector is no exception.” I am sure that the minister is alive to the fact that the FSB is making such observations and that he will want to make considerable progress during the summit that I am sure he will talk about during his winding-up speech. The minister also mentioned the Commonwealth games and the fact that Glasgow 2014 is working with Scotland Food & Drink to produce a games food charter. Two million meals, served over 11 days of competition, will showcase Scottish food. The Ryder cup should surely follow that example, albeit over three days rather than 11. The point is that the Scottish Government and its agencies should commit to such an approach to food procurement, and that local authorities should do the same; that would be a commendable move.

Yes, of course. [Interruption.]

That is the rest of my speech gone.

I am sure that the intervention would have been well worth waiting for. I am sure that Mr Lochhead will promote another food debate in a few weeks’ time, and perhaps the Labour Party will give Mr Malik a second opportunity—

Can I have a little bit of time for all that? It was not my fault.

It was not my fault, Presiding Officer. My final point is on the debate around supermarkets versus local food producers. Rob Gibson and other members rightly raised the issue with some feeling. Claire Baker and others made the point right at the start of the debate about the choices that people have depending on their income level. One might describe supermarkets as a necessary evil in the context of a debate about where people buy their food. I hope that, in winding up, the minister will address that issue, which is fundamental to many people and is based on their income level.

I, too, thank Jean Urquhart for giving us the opportunity to debate crofting this evening. Some of my colleagues might have seen crofters on the BBC’s “Shetland” programme last night, but it turned out that they were from Glasgow, rather than from home, but there we are—we must remember that it is a drama, not a documentary.

Do not blame the BBC, Mr Gibson. That is a cheap shot. The most pressing issue, certainly for owner-occupiers, is the shambles that was created by the Crofting Commission and the Scottish Government over decrofting, and I wish to address that directly. Across the crofting counties, 3,000 crofters are now denied the right to remove crofting regulation from their land by an interpretation of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010. I presume that, last year sometime, some bright spark in either the Government or the commission decided to question the decrofting provisions in the act. I cannot find out where else this interpretation has come from. Legal experts have now pored over the act, and they have created a legal opening that has allowed the Government and the Crofting Commission—which are joined at the hip on this issue—to stop any further owner-occupier decrofting. Worse, there is now legal uncertainty over title to land that has been decrofted since the 2010 act was passed. I have had crofters, solicitors, house builders and others constantly on the phone since this utter shambles emerged via the Crofting Commission website. The other day, I asked the First Minister to sort it out. When the nationalists were in a self-inflicted hole over the removal of the fishing and shooting rights of Raasay’s crofters, Alex Salmond read the internal riot act, and the policy changed within a week. The decrofting fiasco affects far more crofters across the crofting counties. It is a mess that needs to be resolved immediately, as Jean Urquhart, Claire Baker and Jamie McGrigor have rightly said. It is unacceptable for the Government and the commission to state, as they did jointly last Thursday—interestingly, the statement was issued after Parliament had finished for the day—that it is now up to crofters to take their own legal advice. That is what the Government said last Thursday night.

Mr Wheelhouse may have sent a letter, but he sent it by email. I had not been in my office, because I had been in a committee, serving the Parliament. If he had wanted to have the First Minister briefed on the matter, he could have done so. If he chooses not to send me a letter and actually let me know about it, but instead to do it by email, I do not think much of that at all. More to the point, I do not think much of the way in which the Scottish Government is handling this issue on behalf the crofters I represent in Parliament. It is about time that, instead of casting blame on others, he stood up and did his ministerial job and got the matter sorted out. That is his job as a minister. Ministers are there to take decisions, not to blame everyone else for the mistakes of the 2010 act. This is a hole of the Government’s making. I expect the minister to use today’s opportunity, instead of prevaricating and blaming everyone else, to say how he will sort the matter out. Will there be emergency legislation or will the minister, as Jean Urquhart said, use the measures that Brian Inkster has highlighted? It is his choice to do that. He can wave his pen at me as much as he likes, but it is his job to do that. The Government need not expect to turn up in Shetland on 25 March for the Highlands and Islands convention and lecture us about how good it is if it does not have this matter sorted out. The situation is entirely of its own making. The minister can tell Parliament how long he has known about it—how long the Government has been sitting on it. Is it four months, five months or six months? How are crofters to get the money back that is now due to solicitors because of the legal uncertainty that has been created? The minister will also need to tell Parliament and lawyers—the Law Society phoned me about this yesterday—what they are to do with their insurance premiums, which will now go up. The minister is shaking his head. He should speak to the Law Society instead of shaking his head about these things. The Law Society says that the insurance premiums that lawyers face in small legal practices will now go up because of this uncertainty. Those practices will have to deal with the outcomes of this Government’s mistakes on the legislation. There are many crofters across the counties who doubt this Government’s commitment to crofting—no wonder after this fiasco and the changes that Jean Urquhart rightly referred to around CCAGS grants, agri-environmental schemes and the hideous penalties applied to crofters over minor mapping changes. Here is an opportunity to improve that record—no more waffle from the First Minister or anyone else. Crofters want this mess sorted out and they want it sorted out now.

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met Scotland Excel and what matters were discussed. (S4O-01865)

I do apologise to the minister for dragging him away to answer questions in Parliament. Was the principle of the traceability of livestock, which consumers now expect, recognised at that meeting? Parents, pupils and teachers now expect the contents of school dinners to be traceable. If the minister and the Government accept that principle, does that mean that procurement policy through Scotland Excel will change and move forward to achieve that?

Is the First Minister aware that Shetland crofters, who are owner-occupiers, cannot currently decroft their land, which causes immediate legal and financial difficulties? Is he aware that I have raised the matter with ministers and have yet to have an answer? Does he accept that the mess was caused by the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 and will he undertake to look into the matter and report immediately back to Parliament? If he can fix Raasay in a week, will he fix the Shetland mess by next Thursday as well?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I refer to standing order 7.3 and your comments on 5 February. Members will have heard on Radio Scotland this morning the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth explaining the contents of a Government report that asserts what will happen after a vote for independence. That document adds to the list of those that have been released to the media without the courtesy of the appropriate parliamentary route being taken. My colleague Willie Rennie raised that point on 5 February with you, Presiding Officer, when a previous report was released to The Sun and the BBC before Parliament had seen it. That fact was confirmed by an answer to a parliamentary question that I had from the Deputy First Minister yesterday. The matter is important because the Government has promised another dozen reports in the coming weeks. Parliament is democratically elected. It may be inconvenient for ministers sometimes to have to stop what they are doing in order to report to Parliament, but that is the democratic system. We now have a situation in which the Scottish Government treats the Parliament with contempt. [Interruption.]

Presiding Officer, if you are prepared to act in defence of the Parliament, you will have our full support.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement and I commend the approach to the issue that he has outlined to Parliament today. I also commend the appointment of Ray Jones and Jim Scudamore, who appear eminently suited to the tasks that the minister has outlined. Does the minister accept that procurement policy has to be part of the reviews that he has outlined to Parliament, particularly in the context of the question that I asked him during topical question time on Tuesday? Can he say anything about the costs of the new body? Will it be Government funded or will the costs ultimately lie with industry and, indeed, consumers?

I thank the minister for giving way. He mentioned the amendments that he plans to lodge and he answered a parliamentary question this week in which he acknowledged the considerable amount of secondary legislation that will have to be introduced. Will he give a commitment that that secondary legislation, when it is introduced, will be subject to full consultation—particularly with the industry, because that is the aspect of this process that they potentially fear?

I agree with the point that Mr Gibson is making, but presumably he would also reflect that that conflict, which he rightly describes, is not true of the whole country or of all the areas that the committee looked into. It is perhaps important to reflect that.

Can the minister tell us from where Brakes, which is a £2.5 billion, Kent-based company, buys the mince that ends up in Scottish school dinners, given that 28 out of 32 Scottish local authorities are compelled to use the company, through the Scottish Government’s centralised procurement system, instead of supporting local butchers and allowing local food to be served in local schools, hospitals and care homes?

Does that answer mean that the First Minister and his Government have turned their back on the European Union sanctions that the European Commission previously agreed? Does he recognise that white-fish boats from Shetland, as well as those from north-east Scotland, are now prevented from fishing in Faroese waters because the Faroese Government has taken unilateral action, too?

I begin by agreeing with the broad tenor of the minister’s remarks and thanking Rhoda Grant for her observations on decommissioning, in particular. I agree with her central observations on safety. In the regular discussions that the minister has with the industry—I am thinking of Dana Petroleum, in particular—perhaps he could have a wee word about geography. He cannot have been the only person who spotted its curious decision to give the Barra and Harris fields, which are 100 miles east of Unst, the names that it did. There are plenty of seabirds that fields have yet to be named after. During one of his many busy days, perhaps the minister could impress on the industry the need—not least for the benefit of his poor colleagues who represent the Western Isles—to get its geography a little more accurate. I want to make three main points in support of my amendment. First, the offshore installations in the North Sea have now been with us for the best part of three to four decades. Every industry contact whom I meet—including the process engineer from the Forties field whom I met on the train from Aberdeen this morning—says that the most significant requirement is the constant need for re-engineering, reinvestment and the giving of attention to the fabric of oil rigs, gas platforms and every piece of kit out there. That is hardly surprising, given what has gone and what will go in the future. Huge investment is needed, but it makes sense because, as the minister hinted, some of the major unplanned maintenance shutdowns during 2011, when production of gas and oil fell considerably—by 21 and 17 per cent respectively—were caused by the fabric challenges that the industry faces. It is in the interests of Government strategy here and in London, which is about enhancing recovery and maintaining the degree of progress that the minister talked about, for such unplanned shutdowns and unplanned maintenance to be limited to a large extent. That strongly supports the point that Rhoda Grant rightly made about safety. I meet plenty of safety reps at home and across Scotland who advocate the case for investment. The need for such investment represents an enormously positive opportunity for the supply chain, not just in the north-east of Scotland but across Scotland and the rest of the UK. Given the state of the whole economy at the moment, the oil and gas sector is one of the highest growth areas. We should recognise that and support and encourage it. The issue comes down to jobs, businesses and success. We should strongly support investment in the fabric of the industry. There is also a need for onshore fabric maintenance. Sullum Voe oil terminal was opened in 1978. At the tail end of last year, BP announced a £300 million reinvestment in the terminal, which Arthur Spence—the Shetlander who is in charge of the terminal—said to me on the phone this morning would secure the terminal into the 2040s. That means that it has the same potential lifetime as the one that the minister rightly identified for the entire industry. That is a very important commitment by BP, by the partners to the terminal, and indeed in the UK continental shelf overall. The islands that I have pleasure in representing in Parliament have taken oil as part of our life for a long time. All my life, oil has been very much part of things. We deal with the risks as well—I could hardly fail to mention that on the 20th anniversary of the Braer. We also take the risks from west of Shetland. I recognise that for some, particularly in the environmental movement, there are huge challenges and they are right. I have been on an exploration drilling rig west of Shetland. The environmental and weather issues that will be confronted out there should not be underestimated. Rhoda Grant rightly mentioned helicopters and it is said that as regards helicopter transfers to Schiehallion and Foinaven the delays are far more than, for example, to an oil rig east of Aberdeen for all the obvious reasons. In that context, I am disappointed that Chevron’s Rosebank gas pipeline option is to bypass Sullom Voe, but we hope to gain business from crude oil shuttle tankers at Sullom Voe. I am sure that the minister takes his role seriously in the context of the overall assessment, analysis and approval of oil and gas recovery plans and that when strategic decisions are taken about where pipelines are based they are taken on the basis of the best long-term interests of the entire industry. On field extraction, I agree with the argument already made by members, not least because who would have envisaged a decade ago that horizontal drilling was possible. Now, we can be taken into control rooms and shown 3D maps of how it is done. Technology moves on and I cannot guess where it will go in the next 10 years but it will go further and further. I thank the minister for his work in relation to decommissioning at Lerwick. It is not just about Lerwick, as Rhoda Grant rightly suggested. It is about every port in Scotland. There is so much work out there over the next 20 to 30 years that it will not just be one port—in that case, happily, in Shetland—that benefits, but many ports across Scotland. Although decommissioning is moving back because of crude oil prices of $100 a barrel, there is no question but that it will be an important Scottish business in the future as well. I move amendment S4M-05310.1, to insert at end: “; notes the need for constant investment in North Sea oil and gas assets for personnel safety; further notes 43 offshore field transfer deals during 2012 between private and state-owned companies; appreciates the necessity of long-term certainty around the £30 billion decommissioning of oil and gas platforms, and recognises the decline in North Sea production from its peak of 137,099,000 tonnes in 1999 to 51,972,000 tonnes in 2011.”

I used to think that there would be a few challenges in holding together all the parties that believe in keeping the United Kingdom together but, after that speech and the attacks on Mr Harvie by his “colleagues” in the SNP, I think that it will be a piece of cake. We were doing quite well on the constitution until all the back benchers got going on it. Stewart Stevenson said most about it, and I will deal with his arguments because he made the legal argument—he got his researcher to dig out some piece of legal paper that shows that various islands in the far Pacific are now independent. If Mr Stevenson wants to have a legal argument about oil and gas, I commend to him the report by UK Economics Focus that was published last night, which says about oil and gas that there are potential complications here. For example, a significant proportion of Scottish oil lies in waters surrounding Shetland, which would put the latter in a strong position in the event of independence negotiations between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. Indeed, secession by Scotland could encourage similar aspirations by Shetland. If Mr Stevenson thinks that it is his oil, I assure him that it is wir oil first.

Mr Stevenson has just excluded Shetland. I cannot wait to get my press release out on that one—SNP policy now to exclude Shetland. More seriously, I understand that the SNP back benchers all have to attack the UK Government, no matter what the debate or what the subject is, but I found the argument that everything is awful and it is all London’s fault a bit puzzling, not least because of the commendable list that Mr Ewing, the minister, read out at the start of his speech. He pointed out, amongst other investments, that Statoil is investing £4.3 billion in the Mariner field and that Dana Petroleum is investing £1 billion in the Western Isles field. I do not think that he mentioned JX Nippon but I am sure that he would recognise the point that JX Nippon, a Japanese company, is buying Eni’s stakes in 20 fields on the UK continental shelf.

I will just make these points—actually, Mr McDonald did not choose to take any interventions in his speech so I will just leave him in his place. TAQA and SSE plc have bought £1 billion of North Sea assets from BP, so if it is all the UK Government’s fault—and it was of course every Government’s fault from 19-oatcake on—why is all that investment taking place? Maureen Watt gave the game away, although she comes from the north-east and therefore genuinely reflects a strong sense of how important the oil and gas industry is—a view that I share. She said, however, in the context of talking about tax resources, that we look forward to “recouping the benefits” of that resource. I hope that I have quoted her correctly; I am sure that I can check the Official Report tomorrow. In the context of an independent Scotland—if that were to happen—the central belt would not do anything other than use the oil and gas industry as a cash cow.

No, thank you. Judging by his contribution, Mr MacKenzie has the disadvantage of having written his speech before he came to the chamber. I will move on to the rather more positive issues that many members have mentioned, rather than all that constitutional stuff. No wonder the oil industry simply yawns at that debate. A number of colleagues have mentioned the ownership of fields. Something quite important is going on in that respect, not just in the North Sea, but worldwide in oil and gas. Even on our continental shelf, there have been 43 changes of ownership. Many of those changes have been small and less significant, but Chinese state-owned companies and a number of other companies—from the middle east, for example—are buying more and more North Sea assets and taking stakes in west of Shetland developments. That pattern is happening across the world, not least in the tar sands of Canada. It is important to look at that in the context of what would happen if some of the left-wing ideas that Mr Harvie put forward on public ownership of the oil industry or the renewables industry were implemented. I am not quite clear how that would happen. Where the argument absolutely fell down was that some in the environmental movement who make that case never put any details behind what they describe as the transition over the next 40 years. We should be rather more optimistic about what is happening on renewables, not least because the development of power sources for cars, buses, boats and other forms of transport will change the high—indeed, leading—level of emissions from that particular source. Patrick Harvie rightly highlighted that.

To say that nothing is happening is unfortunate and simply wrong. I want to pick up on the safety points that Lewis Macdonald made in respect of Piper Alpha. I seem to recall that Mr Macdonald opened the debate in Aberdeen back in 2002—I believe that he was the minister at the time, to spare his blushes on that—and that Brian Adam spoke very knowledgeably in it. The two helicopter ditching incidents are possibly the most important issue that the industry is currently dealing with in the context of the safety of men and women who work offshore, not least because, as it explained in the cross-party group on oil and gas, getting that right involves a fix that has the confidence of the industry and of the men and women who use helicopters into and out of Aberdeen on a daily basis. The most important message should be that that fix needs to happen.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its reasons are for not changing the regulations governing new pharmacy applications to allow a national health service board to consider any applications submitted, rather than applications in sequence. (S4O-01619)

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for his reply. However, will he consider changing those regulations? I am sure that he has constituency examples from around Scotland of those regulations not allowing a health board to consider a range of applications at the same time, so as to come to the best decision with regard to taxpayers’ money and also the best clinical decision for people in a particular area. The cabinet secretary will know from the case involving the pharmacy in Scalloway in my constituency that the process needs to be seen to be fair—currently it is not seen to be fair.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement and I welcome his active involvement in the matter. Is he aware that a Shetland family who contacted me today now face £1,000 of extra costs because they were due to travel on one of the strike days? Does he understand the need for him to assess his role in the contract given that, at the time when it was signed, there must have been some indication that Serco costs were going to reduce and the potential therefore existed for the islanders to be held to ransom in this way?

I reassure Rob Gibson that the Scottish minister, far from being asleep, “worked tirelessly, including several times through the night, professionally and expertly across the range of issues, ensuring the UK played a leading role in delivering the outcome.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 11 December 2012; Vol 555, c 27WS.] Ed Davey, the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, sent me his statement last night. I pay tribute to Paul Wheelhouse for playing what was clearly a constructive role. I hope that Mr Gibson will give credit to the Green Investment Bank, which is already making investments in Scotland and across the UK and which is a massively important commitment to the renewables industry across the entire country. I hope that it will be a powerful body that can achieve much for that industry, which Malcolm Chisholm rightly mentioned as being one of the few economic growth points, not just in Scotland but across the UK. As Stewart Stevenson rightly observed in his 448th speech in Parliament—

I apologise—I got mixed up between yesterday and today. He mentioned the issue in his most recent speech in Parliament. I join in the tributes to Stewart Stevenson for taking through the climate change legislation and ensuring that it was fit for purpose. I have two points on the overall climate change approach. Rob Gibson rightly mentioned the Nicholas Stern report. For me, that was one of the most pioneering bits of work. I absolutely accept what the minister and Claudia Beamish said about climate justice and phraseology and how we present the arguments at school level and to other audiences—Alex Johnstone talked about the different audiences to which we present. However, at the crux of the way in which the world tackles the issues is ensuring that the argument on the economics of tackling climate change is understood and therefore accepted by policymakers and legislators in our Parliament and in Parliaments around the world. No doubt Mr Wheelhouse encountered some of them in his ministerial role in Doha. For me, the case that the Stern report makes for Governments of all political persuasions and none to ensure that changes to programmes are made to deliver sustainable economic growth while tackling emissions still has enormous power. My second broad point is on the importance of education at school level. Members have rightly referred to the eco-schools programme and the awarding of flags. That programme is just about one of the best things in schools. I take Alex Johnstone’s point about going back to schools that have been awarded a first flag and are then awarded a second one and so on. I hope that the Scottish Government plays an increasing role in encouraging that to happen through the curriculum for excellence. The programme ensures that the younger generation, who have an understanding of the environmental arguments and are intensely committed to them—frankly, they sometimes make them better than we do—never lose sight of them. Malcolm Chisholm talked about requirements on the minister. The gap that we must all deal with is between the climate change legislation that we all agreed to and passed, and making it happen. It is all very well passing legislation, but what are we doing to make it happen? Malcolm Chisholm’s fundamental point about transport is right. I speak as a former transport minister, so I know that we all dash for more roads and that kind of thing. The minister and his colleagues need to get the right approach to what we put on the roads. Some in the environmental movement rightly have a target of there being 100,000 green cars—for want of a better expression—on Scottish roads by 2020, and I hope that that target can be achieved. Perhaps the policy mechanisms that are talked about in the RPP could be taken up in that area.

In the cabinet secretary’s discussions with the NFUS, will he take up the matter of the inspection regime and the penalties that apply under the integrated administration and control system? At this point in the agricultural year, can he tell Parliament how many farms and crofts are being assessed for potential penalties under that regime, given the intense financial burden that that can place on farms and crofts?

The cabinet secretary presumably shares the industry’s concern about the number of data-deficient stocks. Although the ICES’s advice on the stocks that he mentioned is correct and helpful, does he have any view on how to address the data-deficient stocks, which are still a very important part of the Scottish white-fish industry’s catch?

John William Simpson tweeted me last night—that is the way of the modern Shetland fisherman—that he had landed 450 boxes on the Lerwick market yesterday and grossed £29,000. He said: “We certainly can’t land our expensive quota allocation and keep a viable business going in this climate.” I am sure that many of my colleagues in the chamber will recognise that comment from their own areas. Indeed, that is my main point in this very welcome parliamentary debate on fisheries—our white-fish fleet does not have the time at sea to catch the amount of fish that it was allocated in 2012, yet the European Commission wants to make that position worse, as the cabinet secretary rightly pointed out. The Commission wants a further 18 per cent cut in days at sea in the North Sea. Some white-fish vessels had only 90 days at sea this year. Ninety days less 18 per cent is only 74 days at sea. No business that I know can survive by operating on only 74 days out of 365. The industry is at a tipping point. If the December fisheries council agrees that cut, the financial consequences for Scottish vessels are simply enormous. The cabinet secretary was right in pointing out that the EU-Norway fisheries negotiations in Bergen last week broke up without agreement on mackerel, herring, cod or, crucially, effort in the North Sea. Those talks are due to reconvene in January, but we should ask ourselves why the talks collapsed for the first time in modern times. They collapsed because the European Commission is in a legal hole that is entirely of its own making. The cod recovery plan commits to cut upon cut in effort—in the number of days for which our boats can fish. After last year’s fisheries council, Commissioner Damanaki promised that that would be sorted during 2012. The Shetland Fishermen’s Association, the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation and many more have lobbied the Scottish Government throughout this year for a fix, but that has not happened. Fishermen wonder why a promise that was given by a fisheries commissioner at last December’s European Council meeting has not come to pass. Now, the European Commission, the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament are in a legal dispute over who makes decisions. Fishermen do not care, I certainly do not care and I rather suspect that the fisheries secretary does not care, either. What we care about is getting an EU presidency compromise that removes articles 9 and 12 from the cod recovery plan, which would allow a rollover on days and agreement to be reached on cod quota in the North Sea. Leslie Tait, who is the chairman of the SFA, met the cabinet secretary yesterday. He tells me that the intelligence on other member states is that they support that position, but fishermen know—the cabinet secretary is fully aware of this, as his earlier remarks indicated—that support now is one thing, but when the European Commission tries to buy off a member with a grubby little compromise at 4 in the morning next week, anything can happen. Were one member state to drop out of the arrangement, the deal would be off. As I understand it—I would be happy to be corrected—there needs to be unanimity before the legal challenge can be overcome. In short, the process that we are discussing is an internal EU institutional arm wrestle. It must not be allowed to destroy an industry. The lawyers must not be allowed to win. After all, when the Germans need the EU to rip up European law to save the eurozone, no lawyer stands in the way. What is good enough for the eurozone should certainly be good enough for the cod recovery plan. The European lunatics should not be allowed to take over the Brussels asylum. The European Commission still wants further conservation methods to save the cod. I think that that shows a grotesque lack of awareness of how strong cod stocks are across the entire North Sea. As we know, fisheries science can lag two years behind the reality of what is happening. Our boats have obeyed cod avoidance areas where no fishing takes place—except that fishing does take place in those areas: French, English, Spanish and Norwegian gill netters fish in areas that have been closed by the Scottish Government as a conservation measure. Surely “closed area” should mean exactly that—an area that is closed. I suggest to our minister that if the environmentalists and the scientists want closed areas, they should agree on them, but on the simple condition that they are closed for all boats, not just for Scottish or Shetland white-fish vessels. I conclude by talking about mackerel. My understanding of the EU-Norway arrangements is that the EC is again reneging on the agreement on sanctions that should be imposed on Faroe and Iceland for illegal fishing. The Commission is now saying that 25 per cent of the international mackerel quota should be left unallocated for now. In other words, it wants it to be available to be traded in the future. As Stewart Stevenson—who, like me, represents a pelagic port—might observe, that is equivalent to running up the white flag on the flagpole. There would be dancing in the streets of Tórshavn and Reykjavik were that to happen. Illegal fishing would have won. I expect our cabinet secretary and the UK minister, who have been on the right side on the issue, to keep it that way and to ensure that no such arrangement is allowed to happen. I very much support the tenor of the cabinet secretary’s remarks, and the amendments of Claire Baker and Jamie McGrigor, to whose knowledge on prawns I would always bow. I look forward to the rest of the debate, which will ensure that the minister has a very clear understanding of the strong feelings that we share on the future of the industry at this crucial time. I move amendment S4M-05172.1, to insert, after “mixed species fisheries”: “; notes that the European Commission wishes to reduce days at sea by 20% in 2013 as part of the legally binding Cod Recovery Plan; recognises that all member states neighbouring the North Sea agree that days at sea should be frozen at current levels; deplores a legal stand-off by competing parts of the EU that could leave Scottish fishermen with a damaging cut in their ability to prosecute sustainable fisheries, and calls on the Presidency of the EU to bring forward measures that put fishermen, the industry and their future before bureaucrats;”

That is typical of Alistair Carmichael.

Praise, indeed.

This has, on the whole, been an extremely positive debate; I cite Dave Thompson’s speech as an example of that. However, there was one discordant note. To attack, as Richard Lyle did, the UK fisheries minister, Richard Benyon, was wrong on two accounts. When Richard Benyon was recently in Shetland meeting fishing skippers, he not only praised Richard Lochhead and the work that he had been doing, but he made a particular point of saying—in front of the president of the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation—that the Scottish and UK Governments are working hand in hand to get the cod recovery plan because it is so important to our fishing interests. When some back benchers stand up and have a go at a UK minister, for goodness’ sake they should have facts to support their argument. That UK minister recognises the importance of the Scottish minister and is working with him. The two of them will achieve a lot for the industry. We should all support that rather score political points as Mr Lyle chose to do.

I will come to Angus MacDonald in a minute because he said something that I entirely agreed and disagreed with. I can only praise Stewart Stevenson’s 442 speeches in Parliament. I cannot say that I count my speeches; most of them are probably instantly forgettable, but that is not a charge that we can ever levy at Mr Stevenson. He mentioned Franz Fischler. My goodness me—that is a name from the past that I rather wish I had forgotten all about. Neither was I hugely grateful to Mr Stevenson for reminding me about 2001. I thought that the comment made by Alistair Carmichael that Stewart Stevenson quoted was a considered remark in the context of some of the things that he says, although now that he is in Government he is not so keen on having remarks such as that played back to him. That point proves the adage in politics that what goes around comes around—which is something that I may just pray in aid from my colleagues on the nationalist benches. I assure Mr Stevenson—I know that he did not make this point—that the Advocate General in the UK Government has not yet been reshuffled. I thought for a moment that I had missed a reshuffle this afternoon. Mr Stevenson is a lawyer and therefore it is important to move seamlessly into talking about lawyers and the law. I take in general good spirits the point that SNP members make about independence; they are, of course, entirely entitled to make that argument. However, when I see the French, the Dutch and particularly the Spanish nations looking at the potential Scottish independence, I see them rubbing their hands in glee. Our chances of holding on to the Shetland box and relative stability and holding out against individual transferable quotas in the face of the Spanish, who would just love to see negotiation on Scottish fishing quotas, can only be imagined. I am more than happy to debate the independence of fishing any time that the SNP wants because there are some severe dangers in it. It does not matter what I think but, believe me, Scottish fishermen across our ports think the same, too.

Mr Stevenson might concede—although probably not in public—that the real point is that, whatever the negotiating priorities of any state seeking membership of the European Union, the negotiations would be the most difficult aspect of whatever happens in the future. At the very least, there is a deal of uncertainty about how our industry would come out of the process.

No, I want to move on to the substantial issue. In fairness, this has been a pretty positive debate on the issues that confront the minister. We have, of course, touched on independence; I am not in any way denying the importance of that to some members, but let me deal with what I think are the rather more fundamental arguments. The minister, Stewart Stevenson, Angus MacDonald and others all made entirely the right observations about the benefits that can flow from regionalisation. Stewart Stevenson and I have made that argument for many moons, as has Richard Lochhead. When we were in Brussels a few weeks ago, Liam McArthur and I met the aforementioned lawyer from the fisheries commissioner’s cabinet, Maja Kirchner—she is still there. For the first time, she advanced a proposition that I agreed with, which is that Brussels should let go of fisheries management and that it should be devolved to the North Sea. That would mean that the fisheries ministers from Scotland, Denmark and all the member states around the North Sea would have the operational and management responsibility for sorting out the science, the fish stocks, the effort, the quota and so on—which they would do in conjunction with Norway as a non-EU member, as I heard Stewart Stevenson suggest from a sedentary position. That is the right approach. That is what should be happening, and we should ensure that the European Parliament delivers that. That is all that I would say to members such as Angus MacDonald who cited certain MEPs. Believe me: if I could do something about some of my MEPs, I would be a very happy man, but that is not within my gift. In the same context, Mr MacDonald might wish to be slightly careful about the group that his colleagues are part of in the European Parliament. We all have such problems. I turn to some of the other points that have been made. I appreciate that Claire Baker made her point in all seriousness and that she has a lot of knowledge of the issue, but I counsel against sending any signal to Iceland and the Faroes that the position on mackerel is open to negotiation. If we give way on mackerel—I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has not done that and that he is working with the UK Government on the issue—Iceland will move remorselessly on to white-fish stocks. We are talking about a country whose economy, after the financial crash, is based completely on fisheries. Iceland needs mackerel for currency purposes. Someone—it might have been Claire Baker—mentioned what Angus MacNeil said in last week’s Commons debate. The point about the white-fish industry is that it is possible to source 1 million tonnes of cod from the Barents Sea. There are therefore other ways in which the processing industry could source white-fish stocks—in this case, the Grimsby processing industry, but Scotland is also affected. They do not need to come from Iceland. We need to extremely careful about sending any signal to Iceland and the Faroes that they can get away with illegal fishing.

I certainly will, Presiding Officer. On the cod recovery plan, Mr Lochhead rightly made the point that fishing effort has been cut by 63 per cent in Scotland in the past decade, and yet the Commission says that that is not enough. If there is one message that the cabinet secretary will want to take to the negotiations, it is that we have played our part. Let us hope that we get a good deal out of the December negotiations.

I thank the minister for early sight of his statement. I agree with his point about the importance of the discussions that should have taken place between his Government and the UK Government prior to the statement that was made in the House of Commons earlier. Does the minister accept that the Scottish Government consulted on ending the Highland sleeper service to London 12 months ago, following which the UK Government offered him and his colleagues £50 million to replace the Caledonian sleeper fleet, on the basis that funding would be provided jointly by Holyrood and Westminster? Does today’s statement mean that that welcome investment has now been agreed, to the great benefit of overnight passengers between London, Inverness, Fort William and Aberdeen?

Presiding Officer, I apologise for not being present during the opening words of Mr Lochhead’s statement. I am grateful to him for an advance copy of that statement. The cabinet secretary talked about the cod recovery plan in his statement. Is it the case that the Euro lunatics have absolutely taken over the European asylum? Is the cabinet secretary arguing that the proposal is that our fishermen need more days to catch their quota, but that a new internal European row could achieve exactly the opposite: a cut in days and, indeed, further quota cuts? Does the cabinet secretary accept that, just the other day, the Shetland white-fish boat, Arturus, with a Marine Scotland scientist on board, caught 360 boxes of fish and that only one box was of unmarketable size, which proves that conservation mechanisms are working? Does he accept that, when he comes back from Brussels, what we absolutely need for our industry is a rise in quotas that matter financially and a rise in days at sea, too?

Will the First Minister give way?

If the principle of what the First Minister says is that we could end up with two separate systems across the UK—I am sure that he accepts that newspapers cross all boundaries—who would pay for the separate system in Scotland? Surely victims and taxpayers would not pay for that.

Tonight, I should go home to an ailing wife via the childminder—or I could incur the wrath of that spouse by going to a concert: Kevin Henderson’s new band, Aamos, is mixing all that is good about Shetland and Norwegian music, and I can commend a good night to the Parliament. I should probably start by agreeing whole-heartedly with Iain Gray’s central contention that music is a central part of schooling. It is not an add-on but is at a school’s core. The playing of the traditional fiddle is part of Shetland’s DNA. The islands’ international reputation rests on the playing of reels and slow airs—on the playing of something that is uniquely Shetland. However, generations of local fiddlers have stretched Shetland’s musical expertise by listening to, learning from and adapting to the local genre the moods and swings of international music. Aly Bain, Chris Stout and Maggie Adamson—a two-time winner of the Glenfiddich fiddler of the year award—are widely known and admired. There are few better nights than the Shetland folk festival, Shetland night at Celtic Connections in Glasgow—indeed, every night is Shetland night at Celtic Connections—or the recent Anderson high school centenary concert at Mareel, which featured pupils past and present in a musical tour de force. The stars that night were Vair. Jonny Polson, Lewie Peterson, Ryan Couper and Erik Peterson all have music in their blood, but the point is that they all came through the Shetland school system. As an international supporter of Shetland fiddle music has observed, “There is no other island community in the world that can boast of such a high concentration of musicians grounded in a tradition that captivates all who hear it.” Much of that starts in Shetland’s schools. Musical abilities learned at a young age are retained through life; people keep playing. Thousands of Shetland bairns have learned the fiddle—although, thankfully, I am an example of a much needed quality control check in primary school. Today, 200 pupils take traditional fiddle lessons in Shetland, but the sort of financial pressures that colleagues have already explained exist and I am very concerned that the limits applied in many other local authority areas—aptitude tests, cutting the ratio of children receiving musical tuition and, indeed, cutting everything other than fiddle and piano—could happen at home as well. Such a move would affect 280 Shetland pupils who are being taught cello, accordion, drums, trumpet and other instruments. Fees for lessons are difficult enough for many parents but, as many pupils and music teachers have made clear, a lesson lasting only 25 minutes does not work. Overall, even with the financial challenges that Shetland Islands Council faces, I trust that the current review of music tuition—the second in two years—will create a bedrock of support for music in Shetland’s schools. A letter from the adjudicators to the Shetland young musician of the year and indeed the schools festival held every year on the island best proves the case. It says: “In Shetland today you have a very high standard of musical achievement that enhances the life and culture of the islands.” In that respect, Iain Gray’s comments and observations about Scotland hold for individual parts of Scotland such as the island. With regard to the schools festival, I ask the minister to clarify the funding situation with regard to Creative Scotland’s very welcome youth music initiative, which, as Iain Gray rightly pointed out, was introduced by a previous Government. I understand that the funding has been cut for the future, which will certainly have an effect in Shetland. I must point out that the benefit of the schools festival is that it involves children from across the islands. Playing before a large audience at primary school is about self-confidence and ability; it should also be about fun, although try telling that to yourself before walking on to a stage in front of 600 parents. The event builds Shetland itself, not just its musical future. As Iain Gray said in the context of Scotland, this is about our culture, our place in the world and showing what we are. It is not just about fiddle but about instruments that are central to an outward-looking vision. All I can do is urge my council at home to make responsible decisions that reflect music’s role in 21st century Shetland and, in that, I am with everyone in the chamber who wants the same for Scotland.

On the cabinet secretary’s point about the wider view, given that he now admits that his budget was cut in last year’s negotiations with his Cabinet colleagues, what is his strategy for this year’s budget negotiations?

Will Mr Gibson take an intervention?

Will Mr Gibson give way on that point?

Mr Beattie is a thoughtful and intelligent member of the Public Audit Committee. As Audit Scotland presented its report to him and the rest of the committee, he knows that college funding has been cut by 24 per cent. Does he want to comment on that figure?

I agree entirely with Mr Brodie’s final point about the importance of business tourism being spread rather more widely than just Glasgow, Edinburgh and Gleneagles, good as they are. I will give the minister a concrete example of an action that his Government could take that would help not just Shetland, but Orkney, the Western Isles, the Argyll islands and Wick and the far north—all areas with which he is familiar. That is to reintroduce the business component of the air discount scheme. That was a good scheme that was introduced some years ago by a previous Government and continued by Stewart Stevenson, the first SNP transport minister in 2007. It is to Mr Stevenson’s great credit that he ensured that the scheme continued. It was approved by the European Commission and provided a 40 per cent discount on what I am sure the minister will recognise are pretty high fares across the Highlands and Islands. I was grateful to Mr Stevenson for continuing the scheme. His decision was eminently sensible. However, since then, the Government has changed its position on the business component of the scheme. Had the Government cited finance as the main reason for that, I would have had some sympathy. Although I might not have agreed and might have argued for a different set of priorities, I certainly would accept any minister’s right to make that judgment call. However, what I found somewhat difficult to take was the use of the European Commission as a convenient way of saying that the scheme had to change. That is not the case now and it was not the case then. Perhaps I could gently ask Fergus Ewing to bring his considerable talents to bear on his colleagues in another part of Government to see whether that scheme could be reintroduced, as it would make a considerable difference to the areas of Scotland that I have mentioned and would be in line with the point that Mr Brodie and other members have made about ensuring that the conference and business tourism market can develop not only in our great cities and resorts such as Gleneagles and St Andrews but in other parts of the country. I commend Mr Robertson’s remarks about what the oil and gas industry means for business tourism. I share his perspective, not only about Aberdeen—although it is close to my heart, as I have spent years going through it in order to catch a boat or a plane—but about other places that are involved in the industry. Certainly, it brings a huge amount of business tourism to Shetland. Mr Robertson might agree with those who note that getting a taxi or, more to the point, a hotel bed in Aberdeen during a normal working week is nigh on impossible. Occasionally, when I have been trying to get home and not managed it because the flight has been cancelled, I have been put up in all parts of Scotland instead of close to Dyce, in order to catch that hellishly—excuse me, Presiding Officer, that ghastly—early flight home on a Friday or Saturday morning. I bring to the minister’s attention the advertising industry’s increasing use of locations in Scotland. I confess that I was pretty ignorant of that until Friday night, when I found out that a major mobile phone company had been filming an advert in Shetland for the past week. Some 45 members of the production crew had been staying in three hotels in the north of Shetland, bringing six trucks of kit with them from London. I can only guess at the spend that that represents—not only in the pub in which I met them on Friday night but in hotels and restaurants and with local people who provided everything from quad bikes to trailers to take the kit around the west of Shetland. Apparently, all that is to produce something that will last less than 30 seconds and involves ponies breakdancing. That is not a concept with which I am familiar, and I can only recommend that members check YouTube when the advertisement appears. However, believe me, if it brings money into my community, I am allowed to endorse ponies breakdancing. More seriously, I commend the minister’s use of statistics, particularly the point that he made about 40 per cent of business tourists returning. The other numbers that jumped out at me—they were either in the report that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee published on Monday or in a report that I had something to do with five or six years ago, when the previous Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee conducted its inquiry into tourism—were that 28 per cent of all international association conferences that are held in the UK are hosted by Scotland and that Edinburgh and Glasgow are second only to London in the UK in terms of the number of international association conferences. As the minister said, that suggests that there is a huge potential for growth for Scotland. Of course, that relates to transport. I was taken with Ken Macintosh’s observations about the air route development fund, which has been used by Glasgow City Council and which Mr Ewing will remember from a previous iteration of his career. I appreciate that there were European challenges to the use of the fund but, in fairness to Glasgow City Council, if it has found a way around that, I can only commend it, because the argument that has been used for years by business lobby organisations—indeed, by the kind of companies that Mr Brodie mentioned—is that direct air links into Scotland, avoiding the hubs of London, Amsterdam and Frankfurt, would be enormously beneficial for the development of business tourism. Finally, I ask Mr Ewing to ensure that, the next time he comes through passport control at Edinburgh airport, he thinks about working hard on the point that Mr Macintosh made about a nice welcome to Scotland.

Is the First Minister aware that the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers is balloting the crews who serve on the Orkney and Shetland ferry service, that the islands potentially face industrial action over the Christmas holiday period and that that would have a devastating impact on families and students returning home for Christmas, on the goods and perishable products that need to move into the islands and, in particular, on the salmon, mussels and white fish that are exported from the islands at that key time for those industries? Will the First Minister undertake to ensure that the Government looks into the issue, and makes sure that the strike does not happen, so that we can look forward to a Christmas without disruption?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to support an independent Scottish office of budget responsibility. (S4O-01401)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that reply. I hope that what he is driving at is that the commission will ultimately be independent of Government. Does he accept that Robert Chote, the boss of the Office for Budget Responsibility down in London, is able to give an independent, respected and authoritative assessment of Government finance and growth figures and other figures that are produced for the benefit of assessing the state of the economy? In that light, does he accept that, if the commission is to be meaningful and valuable not just for him but for future finance secretaries of whatever political persuasion, the important aspect is that it is independent of Government?

The Government has accepted only one of 18 amendments; let me give it the opportunity to turn that record into two. Amendment 2 seeks to extend a transitional agreement between the Scottish Government and the Shetland Islands Council—the only local authority in Scotland that receives housing support grant—before the grant is abolished, which is what the bill intends. I accept—the minister will no doubt remind me of this—that a similar amendment was not supported at the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. However, to a large extent, the committee’s decision was based on a ministerial assurance to the committee that negotiations with the council about the housing debt incurred in the 1970s would continue. Every Scottish Government up until 2007 retained a budget to write off that debt—Shetland Islands Council’s past and present finance directors have confirmed that to me. At committee, I asked the minister to work on a transitional scheme to help the 1,800 tenants who otherwise face a rent increase of £8 a week. I did not ask the minister—nor should I—to specify what that transitional agreement would be. I did not, and nor does amendment 2, lay down the conditions of that agreement. Those issues are very much for the Government to negotiate with the council. Sadly, I must report to members that no such effective negotiations on a transitional scheme have taken place. The Government appears to have decided that it is a matter for the council to resolve without any assistance whatsoever.

No—I want to make my argument. Today, I ask the minister to reflect on the impact that the rent increase will have on housing tenants and the problems that will be incurred if there is no support for the amendment and if the bill is passed in its current form. Housing support grant paid to Shetland Islands Council—I stress that it is the only local authority in Scotland to receive the grant—is £800,000. That money is transferred from the Treasury to the council; the Scottish Government is merely the middleman, as it has been for a long time. The convener of Shetland Islands Council has written the most polite and reasoned letter—if I may say so—to Highlands and Islands list MSPs of all political parties in support of the amendment. The council always welcomes discussion of housing support grant and other matters with members of the Scottish Parliament who represent the area. Today, Shetland will wonder what those members will do on a measure that directly affects the lives and livelihoods of 1,800 SIC tenants. I particularly commend the amendment to Highlands and Islands members and to our two new independent members, who are now free from the nationalist shackle. Let us hope that they will be brave today. I move amendment 2.

You never know the power of an amendment when it comes in front of a Parliament. I commend and thank the minister for making that phone call; perhaps it was Mr Mackay who made it. Ministers will forgive me if I wait to hear the details of what the Government’s offer will mean for tenants, but—believe me—if the leader of Shetland Islands Council has accepted it, that is good enough for me. I seek to withdraw my amendment. Amendment 2, by agreement, withdrawn.

You never know the power of an amendment when it comes in front of a Parliament. I commend and thank the minister for making that phone call; perhaps it was Mr Mackay who made it. Ministers will forgive me if I wait to hear the details of what the Government’s offer will mean for tenants, but—believe me—if the leader of Shetland Islands Council has accepted it, that is good enough for me. I seek to withdraw my amendment. Amendment 2, by agreement, withdrawn.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what provision has been made in the schools building programme for artificial full-sized sports pitches. (S4O-01370)

Will the minister and the Government ensure that part of the provision for the new Anderson high school in Lerwick, which I welcome both as a parent and a former pupil, will be a full-size artificial sports pitch? Is he aware that I have spoken to the chief executive of sportscotland and that I understand that additional funds are available through a number of its programmes to ensure that such provision is available? Surely during the time leading up to the Commonwealth games and when Scotland has so many other positive sporting aspects, we should ensure that not just Anderson high school but schools across the country benefit from the kind of provision that is desperately needed?

I am in agreement with most of the priorities that have been set out, but does the minister take on board the need to ensure that the penalty regime that will, no doubt, continue under the new CAP is fair and proportionate? There are concerns about that in Scottish farming today.

In his discussions, has the cabinet secretary been aware of the growing concern about the manner in which the eligible land penalties are being applied to crofters and farmers? Is he aware that 23 more crofters and farmers in Shetland will be inspected this year and that 1,000 more units across Scotland will be a part of his department’s work in that area? Does he recognise that the European Union has not changed the underlying basis for the regime but that, between 2008 and 2012, his department changed how inspections are done? Will the cabinet secretary undertake to look into that regime and see whether there is any way whatever in which it could be made fairer? Most crofters and farmers think that the current mechanisms by which they are being penalised are grotesquely unfair.

Given the lack of detail that the minister has mentioned today, will he inform the Parliament whether it will be able to amend the national planning framework when it comes forward? On planning fees, which the minister referred to in his statement, is his policy objective full cost recovery or is he planning to cap planning fees according to the size of the development? I would be grateful for some detail in that respect. Finally, the minister will be aware that the strategic environmental assessment scoping paper that he published today with his statement contains 80 separate key environmental objectives. What does he expect developers to do about SEA when potentially they will face having to deal with 80 separate objectives?

Will the member give way?

I agree with the cabinet secretary’s observations and objectives on regionalisation: it is the right approach. On quotas—because they, rather than discards, are the point—will the cabinet secretary ensure that boats are not hit financially by measures that might sound sensible but which do not work in practice? Does a landing obligation on all boats mean an end to the cod recovery plan? Finally, on the science, whose science will underpin the announcement that the cabinet secretary made this afternoon? Will it be that of Marine Scotland or of other science bodies? On the concept of science, does he recognise that quite a number of the stocks on which our boats depend have no underpinning science whatsoever?

Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge that during the past five years the European Commission’s regional management has meant nothing to fishermen, in practical terms? Therefore, in the reforms that he is striving to achieve, which I endorse, does he agree that regional management must mean that local fisheries are involved in negotiations and in the detail, so that the whole lot is not determined—as usual—by Brussels in a top-down command structure?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what map scale is used to assess land eligible for agricultural support under the integrated administration and control system 2012. (S4O-00940)

Is the minister aware that a Shetland farmer faces potential financial ruin because of the IACS penalty regime? The National Farmers Union Scotland has told me that that farmer is not alone, and the union is in active discussions on solutions to the issue. Will the minister ensure that his department and the industry agree on the scale of maps to be used on an individual farm or croft? Will the Scottish Government, until that agreement is in place, consider introducing a moratorium to stop the unfair and entirely disproportionate penalties hitting crofters and farmers, not just in Shetland, but across Scotland?

Does the minister accept that the current contract for emergency vessels is a great deal for salvage companies but absolutely terrible for Scottish taxpayers? Does he therefore recognise that the pursuit of the shared use of an alternative vessel is a sensible and constructive way to keep the seas safe, as Lord Donaldson originally wished? Does the Scottish Government plan to work with Scottish local authorities, the UK Government and the oil and gas industry to ensure that we achieve that shared objective?

I apologise for having to leave the chamber before the end of the debate, due to a meeting. I confess that I welcome the fact that we are debating the importance of local government in Scotland now and in the future and of localism, if we must call it that. “Localism” seems a ghastly word to me. However, I sense that this is a slight sideshow to the events that are taking place in other places—not perhaps in the court down in London, where Leveson is hearing Rupert Murdoch for the second day, but probably more those that are taking place in the First Minister’s office. It is almost one of those days on which I think that there should be a fly or camera on the wall. Can members imagine the scene? There is an hour and a half to go before First Minister’s question time. How many advisers have been thrown out and how many mobile phones have been chucked across the room as the First Minister tries to figure out a way to answer the questions that he will be asked about the lobbying that he has been doing for Rupert Murdoch and News International? Kenny Gibson, Paul Wheelhouse and Liz Smith have mentioned The Scotsman—I refer members to my entry in the register of interests. I thought that The Guardian’s leader today was better. Perhaps members who quoted The Scotsman—nationalist members in particular—might want to look at The Guardian, which says that, “Yes”, Rupert Murdoch “liked Alex Salmond, the SNP leader, and, yes, the Scottish Sun was swinging towards endorsing him. And, yes, Salmond had offered to help out News Corp. But these were all unconnected.”

I was just going to come on to a point about the election, about which Mr Mackay made a point in his opening line. He did not make a point about localism; he made a point about the election. I presume that he made his comments in his capacity as the local government minister—or did he do so more in his capacity as the SNP’s election campaign chair? I wonder which is the case. Perhaps he could reflect on that in his closing remarks. When Mr Mackay wants to reflect on the election, he might also want to reflect on the fact that many people in Scotland will reflect on the past three days of nationalism more than anything else when they vote. On localism, Mr Mackay has been keen to defend his police proposals. [Interruption.] I hear Kenny Gibson having a go at me from a sedentary position. If he wants to stand up and explain his boss’s relationship with Rupert Murdoch, I will be more than happy to take his intervention. [Interruption.] That is the subject that everyone in Scotland is talking about right now, and he does not like that.

Kenny Gibson really wanted to get that off his chest and he looks so much better for having done so, so I will leave him to cogitate on that fact.

I have just been told that I cannot give an answer. On the subject of localism, I want to focus on police reform, which Mr Mackay was so keen to tell us was a great thing. As Sarah Boyack rightly said, ministers will be in control and will appoint the chief constable. [Interruption.] I see Mr Mackay shaking his head. He should read his own bill—it is right there. Ministers will appoint the board that will appoint the chief constable. The senior tier of the police, which I used to believe were independent from Government, will be appointed by ministers. It does not matter which Government is introducing it—it is an appalling principle to establish in Scotland and I cannot believe that nationalists support it. Sarah Boyack was also right about the local police plan. Senior police officers in my part of Scotland have told me that the idea that any council will be able to do anything about the proposed plan is neither here nor there; the reality is that it will be a take-it-or-leave-it proposition.

If Mr Mackay can show me the section in his bill that suggests otherwise, I will be very happy to take his intervention.

The minister just made my point for me when he talked about “the Government direction”. If the chamber needed to know any more about the Scottish National Party and its approach to local events, Mr Mackay just gave it away with that phrase.

I am just about to deal with the area that the member represents. I believe that Liz Smith mentioned Mike Russell, who, according to the Scottish Government website, is in Budapest today

We cannot keep up with Mr Russell, but he is in Budapest today, presumably because he did not want to talk about Rupert. However, I point out to Mr Mackay that, in The Herald the other day, Mr Russell attacked Strathclyde Police for cutting police officers in Mull. On the one hand, we have statements from Scottish nationalist ministers that there will be no cuts or changes as a result of the move and great protestations about how wonderful it is that they have put these extra bobbies on the beat. On the other hand, we have in Tuesday’s Herald Mr Russell, a Cabinet minister in this Government, slamming Strathclyde Police for cutting police officers. It is no wonder that he is in Budapest. I will briefly mention local government finance, which, after all, is the minister’s responsibility. I thought it very brave of Mr Mackay to mention the historic concordat; Mr Salmond gave it an outing at every question time for three years but we never hear about it any more. The reality of local government finance is very simple. There used to be a principle that local councillors were financially accountable; indeed, the nationalists used to believe as much. Now that they have a majority, they could implement local income tax, a move that I would strongly support, and reintroduce financial accountability for local members. The fact that they do not do so says everything that we need to know about the SNP.

Oh, no! You have not!

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its policy is on the location of public displays of significant historical artefacts found in Scotland. (S4O-00892)

The Scottish Government, the cabinet secretary’s predecessor, the local Scottish National Party MP and the First Minister have all called for the Lewis chessmen to be removed from the British museum and returned permanently to the Western Isles. As that is her Government’s position, what is the difference between the Lewis chessmen and the St Ninian’s Isle treasure, which sits not in the Shetland museum in Lerwick but in the national museum in Edinburgh?

Does the minister recognise that one of the deep concerns is that large renewables businesses in other parts of the United Kingdom are arguing against any reform to the process that could assist renewables developments in the northern isles and Western Isles? What is the minister’s best measure for dealing with the companies that are arguing with Ofgem about the change that we need?

I thank David Stewart for securing the debate. I share his appreciation of the sterling work that the House of Commons Scottish Affairs Committee has done on what is an important issue for many of us who represent coastal communities around Scotland. The debate is particularly important now, because the current constitutional debate provides an opportunity to make the case for further devolution. Although I do not necessarily agree with every word that Mr Thompson uttered, I share the sentiments expressed in the debate by him, Jim Eadie and Alex Fergusson. At the start of the debate, David Stewart mentioned the visits that the Scottish Affairs Committee paid to many coastal communities around Scotland, not least Shetland, to take evidence. When the committee visited Shetland, it heard from a great raft of organisations—professional and otherwise—and companies that have faced the Crown Estate tax collector for too long. The committee’s recommendations show that Ian Davidson, the chairman of the Scottish Affairs Committee, and his colleagues on the committee grasped that point fully. For as long as I have been either a councillor at home in Shetland or an MSP, the salmon farming industry, the mussel farming industry, marina users and the harbours—the council-owned harbours and the trust port at Lerwick—have looked for change. In a previous incarnation, the minister opened a pier extension at Lerwick. He will remember that, when I was chairman of Lerwick Harbour Trust, the Crown Estate charged us, first, to dredge the area where we improved the quay space and the ability of deepwater ships to access our port and, again, for dumping the spoil further out to sea. If ever there was an illustration of a need for change in a body, it is surely an organisation that seeks to improve an asset to further the economic interests of a community, which is what trust ports do the length and breadth of Scotland, being held back by that kind of approach. I support strongly the cross-party arguments for change and for further devolution. Nevertheless, I will push the minister on the Scottish Government’s approach, because although I very much agree with SNP members who have called for devolution, I am concerned about what comes next. I do not want to see only devolution to Edinburgh; I want to see decentralisation to local areas. However, I can find no precise illustrations from the Scottish Government of what that means. If the minister could clarify that for Parliament this afternoon, he would do us all a considerable service. Believe me: I would strongly support him on this matter, because I think that it is very important. When the then acting director of Marine Scotland gave evidence to the Scottish Affairs Committee, in an evidence session that I think was held in the House of Commons, it was suggested to her that “you want the role of the Crown Estate devolved to the Scottish Parliament and then you will decide what to do with all the functions.” She answered, “Yes.” I hope that the minister might reflect on the fact that, for many of us who want to see these responsibilities held by either the local authority or, in Shetland’s case, the local authority and the trust port, it is not good enough to say that the responsibility should come to Edinburgh; we need detail of how devolution to local areas would take place. If he will forgive me, I say to the minister that the last thing that we want in the islands is for tax collection in London to be replaced by tax collection in Edinburgh. Instead, we want these financial responsibilities and powers to be at a local level and therefore able to be properly used to further the needs of our community. Secondly, on the point about money, if there is to be an interim period in Edinburgh, what rates would the Scottish Government levy on salmon farms, harbours and other areas? It is not good enough simply to say that that is not known, because again the evidence in the report is that it is important to set those details out. I hope that the minister finds the time in his closing speech to deal with both of those points.

I absolutely agree with the point that the minister just made but, given that he cannot—I understand this—set out the detail of how he would achieve devolution to a local level, will he set out even a timescale? Has the Government given any thought to how long that might take so that we can give some comfort to the coastal communities?

10. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on devolving the marine estate to local authorities and harbour boards. (S4O-00858)

I urge the cabinet secretary to take a one-phase approach rather than a two-phase approach. Businesses in my constituency do not want a tax grab by the Crown Estate in London to be replaced by a tax grab by the Scottish Government. Does he accept the argument that the decommissioning industry, which will be significant for Shetland and for Scotland in the coming years, should be helped by the marine estate powers being held locally by local authorities and harbour boards instead of being held by the Scottish Government?

I associate myself with Sandra White’s comments in her eloquent introduction to the debate. I thank her, Margaret Mitchell and Patricia Ferguson for their understanding of my presence at board meetings, given that I am the only member of the weaker sex who is present during their esteemed considerations of the issues that face us on behalf of the Scottish CPA branch. As Sandra White and others have said, the theme for this year’s Commonwealth day and Commonwealth year 2012 is connecting cultures and promoting understanding of peoples across the Commonwealth, including in Scotland. That is about an understanding of the diversity that makes the movement so strong. This morning, I was taken by an interview that I heard on the radio in which an American commentator argued that we should stay the course in Afghanistan and that Obama is showing no leadership, and then sabre-rattled on the potential war in Iran. I disagreed with his analysis and his argument about Obama. He did not even mention Syria and what the world is not doing about the humanitarian disaster and catastrophe that unfolds further there every day. However, as I listened, I reflected on what the Commonwealth has done over many decades, and which I have no doubt it will continue to do for many years to come: the binding together of peoples and the upholding of the rule of law, of freedom of speech and of respect for human rights and parliamentary democracy, which is occasionally an unmentioned—or ill-mentioned—concept in how we look at the Commonwealth. As World Bank figures show, there are still too many people—a majority across the globe—living on under $2 a day. Where education, literacy and good standards of health cannot be guaranteed, never mind taken for granted, we have much to do. In the Queen’s diamond jubilee year, her Commonwealth day message highlights the power of musical composition as a medium for bringing peoples together. As Sandra White said, Parliament is honoured to have Annie Lennox as our special envoy. In passing, I should say that I made the usual phone call to my 11-year-old son last night and he said, in his usual way, “So, are you meeting anyone famous tomorrow?” I said, “Annie Lennox” and—I hope that she will forgive me—he said, “Who?” He is 11 years old. His mum said, “No way!” I guess that that just goes to show that some of my generation who grew up with the Eurythmics still, and always will, remember them. The way in which Annie Lennox advocates for a wide range of people—particularly women and children in situations that we can hardly describe or understand—and her ability to make Governments listen, understand and do things, are incredibly important and valuable. For me, those who had the foresight to recognise the part that she could play not just for Parliament, but for the United Nations and the other roles that she undertakes, recognised the power of an international star who brings force of personality and campaigning zeal in a very positive way to the challenges that many nations face. I also share the enthusiasm that exists for the Commonwealth games—I was grateful for the very good briefing that the Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport gave to some of us earlier today—and the excitement that is being generated around that event. The theme of using sport as a medium to bring peoples together is, for me, at the heart of the Commonwealth. Whatever is the essence of the Commonwealth in this year of cultural connections, let us ensure that the Parliament plays a constructive and positive role in strengthening and appreciating diversity not just here in Scotland, but afar off as well.

Last night, at the Scottish Tourism Forum dinner, the minister made a good speech, none of which I could disagree with. It was witty, urbane and very Fergus Ewing. He highlighted two or three issues that have been raised today, particularly his point about growth being fuelled not only by optimism, of which the minister recognises that he has plenty—that view would be shared across the chamber—but by other factors that will drive forward the industry, which is so important to the future of Scotland. Mr Ewing’s speech was second only—and only slightly—to that of Stephen Leckie, who made an excellent speech, which, as the minister will recall, was mostly an attack on those of us who wore dark suits. He had no criticism of the other gender—the fairer sex—but he was harsh on those of us who do not wear tweed. I encourage the minister, at his next outing to the dispatch box, to sport a little Leckie tweed. We shall see. Last night, I had an entertaining discussion with Shirley Spear, who runs the fantastic Three Chimneys business in Skye. Those who have never been there should go. Not only is the food wonderful, but everything else about it is wonderful as well. It reminded me of the inquiry that was conducted by the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee—not under Mr Fraser’s convenership, but in the previous session of Parliament—to which Shirley Spear and other able and articulate contributors from the world of industry gave evidence about the particular challenges that they face. Her main point then was to do with the importance of the college sector and how it responded to the needs of the industry. Last night, Shirley Spear said to me that one heck of a lot of progress has been made, but that the minister and his colleagues might want to take further action to ensure that the college network in the Highlands and Islands and across the country recognises the industry’s importance to Scotland’s ability to grow its way out of the current economic situation. The minister and others have mentioned international sporting and cultural events and spoken about the range of those events that we will enjoy in Scotland and the UK over the coming decade. As a passionate golfer, I believe that the fact that we have not only the open at Muirfield but the Ryder cup is a great challenge for Scotland and a great opportunity to sell ourselves as a country and as a destination. At the table that I was fortunate enough to join for the forum dinner last night, we discussed the idea of marketing golf in Scotland and Ireland jointly. Many of the Irish golf courses have exactly the same characteristics as the links golf courses for which Scotland is undoubtedly famous. The idea that VisitScotland and VisitIreland could look at that jointly in future is a reasonable one to put to the minister and to VisitScotland. No one would be better for that job than someone such as Tom Watson. He has been five times open champion, is an honorary Scot if ever there was one, and exemplifies all that is good about sport. He also exemplifies why people would wish to come to play golf in Ireland or Scotland. Such positive approaches can be taken in the Chinese and Indian markets, where many people in the aspiring middle class have more money than was the case previously and can use it to travel worldwide. We must ensure that they come to Scotland. With regard to VisitScotland, I believe that the current chairman and chief executive deserve considerable credit for some of the work that they have done, particularly around destination marketing organisations. At one time those organisations were not too popular with VisitScotland, but there are now 80 or more of them throughout the country. They are important local initiatives that provide drive, strength and energy in their local tourism markets, and I strongly support VisitScotland’s work in enabling their continuing success. Murdo Fraser’s committee has in its report concentrated on one of the strongest and most important areas of the industry: our connections both within and outwith the UK. The takeover of BMI by British Airways is not good news for the important links to Heathrow. We all wish for more direct business links and other links from Scottish airports to points around the globe, but Heathrow remains an important hub. We need competition on that route, and the takeover does not help in that regard. I encourage the minister to work closely with the Government on credit card charges, about which he made a good point in his speech. We all pay those charges when we leave Scotland and people pay them when they visit Scotland. Airlines frankly rip off most people through their charges, and I hope that the minister will support the Government in London when it introduces legislation to deal with that and make such charging utterly transparent. I will finish with my constituency of Shetland. We always have three things in our punchlines—I suppose for Shetland it would be Vikings and voes; I could not think of a third one. The King of Norway will open the Scalloway museum in May. That illustrates the deep Scandinavian links that are common to many parts of Scotland, and to Orkney and Shetland in particular. It also indicates the importance for VisitScotland of marketing our country to Scandinavia as well as to America and other parts of Europe. The point about cruise ships is perhaps not so relevant to some of us—it is certainly relevant to Greenock, but possibly not to Paisley. This year, 59 cruise ships will call at Lerwick, and 36,000 people will disembark to tour the islands. That is a huge market for Scotland, and it is relevant to Mr Ewing’s part of the world. It is an important and growing worldwide market to build on, and I encourage the Government to follow that up.

I support Elaine Murray’s motion, which is sensible and constructive, and I cannot for the life of me see why the minister is against it. When a minister has to start by spending three or four minutes attacking the Opposition, we know that his argument is not particularly good to begin with. Actually, the Scottish Government has a perfectly good story to tell on investing in the islands, so I would have preferred it if the minister had spent time doing that rather than attacking everyone else for reflecting the serious concerns of hauliers and other people in the islands about the current schemes. Those concerns are not just in the islands that Elaine Murray rightly mentioned, but in others as well. As the minister rightly said, the schemes are important because they are about investments in the islands and in the economies of those diverse parts of Scotland. That is what the Government should concentrate on. I appreciate that this is a Parliament and that, therefore, all the politics have to happen, but Elaine Murray set out some pretty reasonable facts and figures behind her arguments. The minister should have responded to those, rather than talk about things that happened in 2007—believe me, we could all do that. My amendment simply asks for the constructive approach that is suggested in the Labour motion to be extended to include other ferry routes, because of the further shipping problems that impact on island communities. I am absolutely not clear about what the minister said but, if I got him right, he might have talked about another study that might look into all those issues. If he set out the proposal in detail in his winding-up speech, rather than just attack everyone else, we would all be genuinely grateful. It is important to recognise the reality of the policy in relation to the Western Isles. Before 2007, volume hauliers from those islands received a 25 per cent discount to travel to and from the Hebrides. That was Government policy. The new Government added 15 per cent to that discount and called the entire package the road equivalent tariff. That is the reality of what happened. I welcome the fact that the new Government did that, as it was a good thing to do as a further investment in the economies of those islands. Frankly, however, the measure had little to do with road equivalence. The extra 15 per cent helped local hauliers and the wider economy, as the Scottish Government’s recently published ferries review paper makes clear, but that Government support was not dissimilar to the support for islands from the previous Government in which Elaine Murray and I served, which also supported shipping services on which the islands depend.

No—I want to make progress. The nationalists have moved the policy forward, which is good, despite the fact that they ran the longest trial in political history, between the 2007 and 2011 elections. I see that Mr Neil is gracious enough to smile about that—he was probably responsible for it. I am genuinely puzzled as to why the problems that have emerged were not spotted in that longest possible trial for which Mr Neil’s Government was responsible. That is one issue that could have been dealt with.

I want to finish a couple of points. I do not normally get telephone calls and representations from people in other constituencies about shipping, although I get plenty from my own, but a Lewis haulier, David Wood, has been in touch with my office overnight. He says that the new prices that he has been quoted are the pre-2007 prices plus 50 per cent. In specific cases, he thinks that his freight bill will rise by 60 per cent. That is why the motion and my amendment are necessary. I appreciate that the minister is in a difficult bind. He would be well advised to accept the fact that his officials do not know the answers to all the issues and, frankly, neither do we. That is why Elaine Murray is correct to call for a full socioeconomic study. Local hauliers as well as the Western Isles Council—as I invariably do, I met the convener and vice convener of that council at Edinburgh airport the other day, waiting for planes to our respective islands—make exactly the same point, as has the Outer Hebrides transport group, which Elaine Murray mentioned. I genuinely do not know what the minister has to fear from the kind of study that is being asked for. It would help evidence-based Government decision making and would therefore be a credible and sensible way in which to proceed. When I was the minister, I used to be constantly advised, “If you’re in a policy hole, stop digging.” To me, this looks like a policy hole. The Government and the ministers would be well advised to find a sensible and constructive way forward on which we can strongly agree. The minister mentioned the £2.5 million transition fund that he announced last Monday and he said that it had been properly assessed. Liam McArthur and I, like everyone in Orkney and Shetland, know that he did not ask the Western Isles to contribute to the fund. I agree with that and I think that he was right not to ask the Western Isles to contribute. However, what is good policy for the goose is certainly good policy for the gander. Shetland’s ferry services have been further disrupted this week. That was an entirely predictable disruption that was caused by weather and operational factors.

Last night I asked the minister to meet the local industry and the council to find an immediate solution, and I reiterate that request today. The Government needs to understand the impact of its changes to RET in the Hebrides and in the wider context, for example in Orkney.

I am just finishing this point, Mr Scott. The debate is an opportunity for the minister to be constructive and to listen to local representations. I urge him to do so.

I am happy to do so. I move amendment S4M-02087.1, to insert at end: “and that such a moratorium should apply to all fares on all island routes under the responsibility of Scottish Government tenders to allow a full and independent assessment about how RET or an appropriate fare reduction mechanism can be rolled out on an equitable basis to the benefit of all Scotland’s islands.”

I suspect that Dr Allan’s constituents and mine are not too bothered about the mechanism; they are bothered about fare levels, which are the heart of the matter for any of us who care about ensuring that we invest properly in lifeline ferry services and that the islands have a viable economic future. I, therefore, become a little puzzled when I hear from the nationalists all the criticisms of other parties that have proposed different ways of dealing with fare levels. I am sure that Mr Brown has the same overall objective as I have, which is to tackle fares and keep them moderate in the context of the financial challenges that any Government would be facing. That is what I think he is driving at in his ferries review. Mr Brown—I am sorry; it was Mr Stevenson, his predecessor—chose to introduce the pilot on the road equivalent tariff. It was perfectly fair to do that, because RET is a mechanism to tackle fare levels, but to attack everyone else who had a different idea about how to achieve the same policy objective is barking politics. Maybe that is the Scotland that we are now in.

No. I am dealing with the fares point. Mr MacKenzie omitted to mention in his speech the fact that most of us across the chamber believe very strongly in investing in the islands and in finding the right way to do that; it is not about just RET. As David Stewart rightly observed, RET is but one mechanism. It works beautifully in some parts of the country, as the minister rightly reflected, but it does not work in all parts of Scotland—never mind in all parts of the world. There is no such thing as a “pure RET”, so instead of having an obsession with one three-letter word, let us concentrate on finding the correct way to deliver the fares structure as—whatever Government is in power—we must.

Mr Brown used the phrase “professes to be concerned about”, so is it his contention that I do not care about the hauliers? The partisan nature of the way in which Keith Brown behaves says it all. Let me deal with the point. [Interruption.] Mr Brown should listen. The fact is that the Chief Secretary to the Treasury is dealing with the issue. That is on the record and it is what is happening. Instead of attacking the UK Government, maybe Mr Brown should stand up and praise the fact that every constituent in my constituency and in Mr Allan’s constituency will get a 5p discount on their fuel. He should applaud that instead of attacking it.

The hauliers point is being dealt with by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury. Mr Brown nods and shakes his head—that says it all, for me. Let us find a diversion, let us blame London and let us do everything else. Mr Gibson had the gall to talk about London. This policy is the Scottish Government’s; it is its alone, so it should deal with it and stop blaming someone else all the time. I will make one other point about investment in the islands’ future. When I was Minister for Transport and Telecommunications, we introduced an air discount scheme for all the islands. It was not based on how the people there had voted. When this Government realises that the economic future of our islands is based on those islands being there, not on how they vote, it will have a transport policy worth supporting.

We have heard again the nationalists’ broken record. Many of us have listened to it for four years and we will no doubt have to listen to it for a further two and a half years before the referendum. They tell us that everything down south is bad and that everything will be all right when Scotland votes for independence. The nationalists are playing the game, day in, day out, of intimidating, blaming and threatening any organisation or individual who questions the purpose. It is a purpose with a capital P, judging by all the lectures we get. The purpose, of course, is not economic growth—no one who wants to think about the future of Scotland should be in any doubt about that—but independence. We know that, because of the permanent secretary’s contributions in public to our understanding of what is going on in the Government. Everything and anything that this nationalist Government does is about that purpose, and spin, spin and more spin will be deployed on the economic and financial future of Scotland to paint a separatist picture on a nationalist canvas.

No, I will not. Let the Parliament consider the nationalist spin and look for an alternative way of conducting good government in an objective and reasoned fashion, although I fully expect such a solution to be entirely rejected today. The nationalists claim that an independent Scotland would, under the OECD yardstick, be the sixth wealthiest nation in the world. We heard more of that guff during First Minister’s question time earlier. That position, however, is based on oil prices, which change, and, therefore, on the oil and gas tax revenues. There are two big dollops of nationalist spin in that approach. First, as the OECD itself has shown, such a scenario is only accurate if the assets of the North Sea are held by the Government. The second and more important point is the complete absence of any statement from any minister in the nationalist Government, or from any other proponent of independence, on oil and gas tax revenues. Tuesday’s Scottish Council for Development and Industry conference—Maureen Watt was right about this—was the First Minister’s big opportunity. He was, after all, making a speech in Scotland, which does not happen every week, but instead of setting out his tax proposals to the entire UK oil and gas industry, he treated us to a polemic on what the UK Chancellor should do on 21 March. I hope that the UK budget delivers fiscal certainty until 2015, with a commitment to consultation, which is what the finance secretary did not do when he introduced new business taxes this year. Fiscal certainty from the UK Government would mean that the nationalists would have to commit to a higher, lower or the same regime before the referendum, and on tax, that would be a first. Neil Findlay received no answer to his question about corporation tax earlier, although every time I hear nationalist ministers reported from boardrooms, they say that corporation tax is going down. It is a pity that they are not so keen to say that in the Parliament. The uncertainty that pervades every corporate boardroom in Scotland is the responsibility of the nationalists and the nationalists alone. Renewables project offices are being set up throughout Scotland. There is much collaboration with universities, and the scoping and detailed design work of renewables projects is under way. That is welcome and I applaud the Government’s work in assisting those commercial developments. However, as representatives of a major renewables business told me this week, there is a quantum leap from a project office to a massive capital expenditure decision. The representatives told me—these are not my words—that the sanctioning of tens or hundreds of millions of euros will only happen when the fiscal and regulatory regime is clear. The industry has no idea what MacOfgem would look like in an independent Scotland. Neither does it know what the nationalists’ fiscal regime would look like, because they have not outlined any of that either, or how UK electricity market reform would work when there is no such thing as the UK. Businesses throughout Scotland—the men and women responsible for jobs and economic growth—want answers and an end to that uncertainty, not the spin that the nationalists emit in a ray of taxpayer-funded mushroom clouds.

I find that intervention puzzling, because I sat in at a meeting, to which Mr Swinney’s ministerial colleague Mr Fergus Ewing invited me and Liam McArthur—it was good of him to do so—at which Mr Ewing rightly described the proposals from the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets and the UK Government in relation to project transmit on the Scottish mainland as a positive step forward. Mr Swinney should spend a bit of time talking to his ministerial colleague, because on that issue the situation has been sorted. The renewables industry told us that day that clear progress had been made and that it had got the certainty that it had been asking for. I am not sure that Mr Swinney is quite up to speed with his ministerial colleague. Bill Howat conducted a review of Government expenditure five years ago and concluded that the Government needs an independent financial check—a tartan Office for Budget Responsibility, in effect—which would independently check the spin and say objectively what is growing in the economy. The OBR does that in London and makes assessments that are uncomfortable for the UK Government. I think that that is a very good thing; we should have that good thing in Scotland, too. The finance secretary has so far resisted having such an independent check, but I hope that he will consider it for the future. I hope that we could have such a body now, because it would provide exactly what is needed in Scotland in this crucial period for the future of our country: a series of independent assessments of what is happening in the Scottish economy. That matters particularly because this year’s budget and the lamentable partisanship of the Finance Committee mean that few people will believe nationalist spin on finance without there being an independent check. Scotland needs the MacOBR.

I thank Jamie McGrigor for securing the debate and support him and the other members who have built a reasoned case around their concerns and the concerns of the local community. Jamie McGrigor raised three points that I will address. To some extent, the independence of SNH is at the core of the debate, in terms of how the issue has been handled. When the SNP Government came into being in the previous session, Mr Russell, who was then in the seat that Mr Stevenson now occupies, made much of declaring in this Parliament that he would bring together all the external agencies, including SNH, to operate as a whole—that was absolutely Government policy. I am sure that Jamie McGrigor is aware that the idea that SNH operates as an independent agency came to an end when Mr Russell made that statement, changing the relationship between those agencies and the Government. Jamie McGrigor made a point about Marine Scotland that is important in understanding the concerns of the community that we are speaking about tonight and others across rural Scotland. Marine Scotland is not some separate Government agency; it is part of Mr Stevenson’s department. Mr Stevenson can shake his head, but that is a fact.

I concede that the minister was not shaking his head. He was looking quizzical—I will leave it at that. As any whitefish trawlerman will say, Marine Scotland is the Government and delivers Government policy. It is important to recognise that. I have a lot of sympathy for Dr Allan. I appreciate how difficult these issues are for ministers who are constituency members. I must confess that I always thought that the convention was that, if a Government minister did not agree with the Government, they had to go. However, if Dr Allan has found a way of describing the issue that we are talking about as a decision rather than a policy, I can only applaud that. That was not an option that was open to some of us previously. If that is now how the Government operates, it is different from what has happened in the past. I commend to members Lesley Riddoch’s compelling piece in Monday’s Scotsman. On the principles of government, she wrote: “In top-down Scotland ... Barra folk will only see the consultation written ‘on their behalf’ after a ministerial decision has been made.” That encapsulates what is wrong with the way in which such decisions are made. I hope that ministers will reflect on the views of the communities and individuals who are deeply concerned about how top-down such nature designation is. The fact that the situation has been going on for as long as Jamie McGrigor has described is indicative of the problems with that approach. Jamie McGrigor mentioned another strong point. The Scottish Association for Marine Science, which is based in Dunstaffnage, has looked into the human ecology and socioeconomic concerns and has said that they can lawfully be considered under the European Union habitats directive. To pick up the points that were made by Jamie McGrigor, Rhoda Grant and Dr Allan, those of us who are concerned about other developments—salmon farming, mussel farming, shellfish farming, whitefish trawling and all the other marine activities that take place, to say nothing of the renewables industry that will continue to develop in all our constituencies and areas in the coming years—believe that it is vital that the EU habitats directive is used in that way. I hope that, when he winds up, the minister will give us some comfort by saying that, instead of using the EU directive to impose designations on communities around Scotland, he and his department will interpret it in a way that will enable them to take into account the socioeconomic factors that island and rural members are well aware of. Finally, I want to pick up on the point that Dr Allan made—if I caught him right; I will stand corrected if I caught him wrong—about the proposals being the only ones from his Government for further marine designations. I fear that that is not the case. There are others. I know of some that the Scottish Government is introducing in my part of Scotland, as I have a letter from the chief executive of Scottish Natural Heritage. SNH is proposing a new network of marine nature designations around Scotland’s coastline. I will quote from its chief executive’s letter.

I will finish on this point. The chief executive of SNH referred to “a project being led by Marine Scotland”. I hope that the minister will reflect on that and ensure that, when he deals with the issue, he will deal with all the other issues that are coming in other areas of Scotland.

Presiding Officer, you might recall, as I do, debates all the way back in 1999 rather than in 2006. If my memory serves me correctly, you took part in some of them. Murray Tosh used to lead for the Conservatives, Kenny MacAskill used to lead for the Scottish National Party, and Sarah Boyack was the transport minister. I think that the general view across all the parties, including among the nationalists, was that, if we shut Murray Tosh and Kenny MacAskill into a room at the back of the chamber, the rest of us could have got on with a pretty decent transport debate. Time has certainly moved on, but the debate about quality partnerships or regulation versus competition has not. It is clear that the current minister is dealing with that in the same way that all his predecessors did. What works and what does not work has been referred to; George Adam was interesting on his council’s experience of that. I recall Elaine Smith making a strident speech, which was entirely justified, on that issue many years ago and members of other parties making exactly the same arguments. I also recall that, even in those days, the big bus companies, which have been broadly attacked throughout the chamber, used to get it in the neck about profiteering, cherry picking, which Paul Martin has just spoken about, and other things. They are still getting it in the neck in 2012. The conundrum for the Government is where it should or should not legislate in seeking to discover the right balance between regulation and competition. Does competition work? As Elaine Smith and Paul Martin illustrated—Bob Doris hinted at this—there is considerable competition in Glasgow and the west at certain times of the day, but there is not the breadth and depth of services that many members want. That is the challenge that the minister has to consider and find a way through. Has the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001, which was passed by those of us who were members in that session, worked? On the basis of George Adam’s evidence, if there has been only one statutory quality partnership in Scotland since then, it is clear that that legislation has not provided the fit-for-purpose model that is needed. If Patricia Ferguson, members of other parties and, indeed, the Government are going to bring forward new thinking on the matter, I welcome that, as I recognised in the role that I had, which Mr Brown now has, that there are no perfect answers. That is why the complexity of the issue is challenging. I do not think that there should be a one-size-fits-all policy throughout Scotland. As other members have mentioned, there are different circumstances in rural and urban areas and also within cities that do not lend themselves to having one binding piece of regulation. We need a system that recognises the different challenges in different parts of Scotland.

I am happy to commit to reading whatever proposed legislation members bring forward. I recall Patricia Ferguson taking me to her constituency to show me the challenges that she and her colleagues in all parties faced on the issue. I would therefore be happy to look at any proposed legislation. In concluding, I want to make a point about the concessionary transport scheme. I see that there is a clear requirement for a review after seven years. I am sure that Mr Brown will tell me if I am wrong about that, but that is my recollection of the system. The benefit of a review is that it allows the Government of the day to consider carefully not just the eligibility points that Elaine Murray and other members have rightly raised but the whole basis of the scheme. I hope that there is a review, as such reviews are the purpose of good government.

The roadshow that his officials conducted in Shetland was extremely helpful, but the statement that there would be little or no change to the bureaucratic impositions on crofters and farmers right across Scotland somewhat filled the room with gloom. Does the minister have any better news for us? Such a change would be a welcome reform of the common agricultural policy.

The other day I went to the Scottish national portrait gallery in Queen Street with my children. I alighted on a rather splendid painting of what I think were the first world cycling championships, which took place in 1897 at Celtic Park, which Mr Mason mentioned. A striking aspect of the gallery, which has been wonderfully refurbished, is the portraits of famous Scottish football stars, such as Kenny Dalglish and Sir Alex Ferguson. Would it not be nice if, after the Olympics, the Commonwealth games, the Ryder cup and all that will happen in sport generally during the next 10 years in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom, a number of the people who we hope will win in those events took their places in our Scottish national portrait gallery? Sport inspires, which is why the next decade is crucial. It inspires the current and next generations. When we read about the importance of events, their value to the economy, which the minister was correct in mentioning, and all the other aspects, we can see that it is not just one event but a series of events that creates legacy, by changing behaviour. The minister and other members were right to talk about the lack of fitness and sporting activity in this country, and it strikes me that the Commonwealth games, considered in the round with other international events, such as the Olympic games and the world athletics championships, which will come to London later in the decade, are part of what will make the message work over time. I am sure that that is very much the Government’s thinking. If we are to work constructively for the future and ensure that there are behavioural changes, we must ensure that the Commonwealth games add to the overall encouragement to future generations to take up athletics or indeed just a healthier lifestyle than people might currently have. Golf is my sport, so the Ryder cup will be my biggest highlight of the next decade without a shadow of a doubt. I take Neil Bibby’s point that, after people see sport, their participation can rise, but I have to confess that participation in golf at my club falls through the floor when the Ryder cup is on because everyone is watching it. However, I take his point that the next generation will participate as a result. I took up golf after watching Tom Watson win the open at Muirfield in 1980. Many young Shetlanders took up cycling or athletics after seeing Chris Hoy cycle or Allan Wells win the 100 metres in 1980, all those years ago. Sport inspires. The minister touched on that, and I am sure that she could talk for a whole 18 minutes on it. The elite athlete programme and all the work that is being done to encourage and push brilliant young men and women into potential medal-winning roles in the next couple of years will be very well rewarded in terms of what they bring back to Scotland. The minister mentioned the Commonwealth games portal. I agree that it is an extremely useful source of information for those of us who are trying to understand what is happening. To make one small point, I hope that she will get the map on the front page right because, at the moment, Shetland is to the east of Orkney. The last time I flew home, we were a bit north of Orkney, so I would be very grateful if, tomorrow morning, the website could reflect the true geography of Scotland. I appreciate that that is a minor point to some, but it is a pretty major one if you happen to live in the islands. I was encouraged by the statistics that the minister outlined on the number of contracts and subcontracts awarded through the games portal. Of the 171 contracts that have been awarded so far, the bulk are in Scotland, although I note that the bulk of those are, I suppose understandably, in the Clyde valley. It would be useful if, once the tender period has ended and the contracts have been awarded, the names of the successful companies could be listed. That should be a positive aspect of the games, both for those companies and for the economic argument that the minister and other members have rightly made. Will she consider that suggestion? It would also be helpful and welcome if, on the website and in other public information areas, the Government could pick up how many jobs have been created by the games at this point and roll that forward, because it is important for the public to see the economic benefits to the country of the investment that our Government, Glasgow City Council and the other partners are making on their behalf. This is a tough time for taxpayers’ money, after all, so making the positive argument about the number of jobs and long-term training opportunities that have been created, and other such benefits, would be very helpful in dealing with the one or two sceptics we all come across who say, “Why are you spending any money on sport? You don’t spend enough on the arts, or on other areas.” Those would be strong, positive economic arguments and numbers that would help us all to deal with that. Will the minister pick up a couple of figures that I found on the website? If I read the forecasting correctly, capital development funds are down in the current six months—I am sure that there is a good reason for that—and some of the spend on planning and preparing for the games has gone up by £16 million in the past six months. I am sure that there are good explanations for all that, but it would be very useful if the minister would touch on those issues.

Indeed, Presiding Officer. I finish by mentioning the Scottish sports alliance briefing, because I believe that its points on volunteers and coaches, in particular, are important.

One of the most important aspects is encouraging coaches right across Scotland and I hope that the minister will deal with that as well.

Is the cabinet secretary pushing the European Commission to produce a legal document that can allow the automatic cuts in days at sea that he mentioned in his statement to stop, which is what all member states want? What additional restrictions will be placed on our white-fish vessels this year so that they do not fall foul of a regime that will allow them to fish only four days in a fortnight?

I take Fergus Ewing’s point about the cases he has highlighted, but when did he change his mind to not being in favour of the one in, one out approach, given that he stood in 2007 on exactly that commitment?

I thought that Mark McDonald was very unfair to Gavin Brown when he suggested that Mr Brown does not do his own homework, especially given that I thought that Mark McDonald read his civil service brief very well in his own speech. I congratulate Professor Russel Griggs and those who sit on his panel on their work. I do not know whether Professor Griggs is here today—he probably has more sense, given where he lives and the weather forecast. Like Mr Ewing, both as a minister and as an MSP, I have enjoyed many useful and varied discussions with Professor Griggs over the years. The work of his panel is extremely useful and important for Government and I hope that, as the minister said, its recommendations will continue to be taken forward. The minister started by quoting Ronald Reagan, which I thought was only fair, given that they are ideological soul mates. He went on to call regulation a “perception”. I am sure that he did not mean to say it in that context. The reality is, after all, contained in the excellent briefing that the Federation of Small Businesses in Scotland sent, which other members have mentioned, which states: “62% of FSB members have seen the cost of regulation increase in the last four years.” I am sure that, given the spirit in which Mr Ewing introduced the debate and given that he said that he was looking for areas that he wishes to address, he will want to address that statistic. Mr Ewing has had a number of representations from his back benchers calling for new bodies, such as a compliance body, and for a firm hand on local government. It all sounded like a lot more centralised, top-down government to me, so I will be intrigued to see how he responds to all those requests. I am puzzled by the change of tune from the Government on regulation, particularly because just this morning I found John Swinney’s job description from 2007. Members might remember that he had many responsibilities; indeed, there was not really anything in the Government that he was not responsible for. In 2007, the First Minister gave him responsibility for the economy, the Scottish budget, public service reform, local government, public service delivery, deregulation, cities and communities. Let me repeat that he had responsibility for deregulation. I am not quite sure what happened to that or why Mr Ewing was so disparaging about those who made observations on that earlier, given that his own boss has, or had, that responsibility. Presumably Mr Ewing can clarify in his wind-up speech whether that responsibility is still part of his, or his boss’s, job description. We are all agog waiting to find out.

No. I will make some progress. I want to comment on the entirely predictable attacks on the UK Government from Mr Ewing and his back benchers. No doubt Mr Thompson was going to make exactly such an attack—he does little else in this place. Given what they said, I presume that the Scottish Government is against a strategy to “remove or simplify existing regulations that unnecessarily impede growth; reduce the overall volume of new regulation by introducing regulation only as a last resort; improve the quality of any remaining new regulation; and move to less onerous and less bureaucratic enforcement regimes where inspections are targeted and risk-based.” Mr Ewing is shaking his head. Why then did he spend 10 minutes of his speech this morning attacking the UK Government? I thought that one of his back benchers made an eminently sensible series of suggestions about cutting regulation. Mr Ewing might want to sort out exactly what his position is. The other thing that the minister did not do today was take the opportunity to mention a significant report that was published this morning on public procurement in Scotland by the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland entitled “Building a Better Future?”. I hope that he has read and considered that report, because it makes some quite profound remarks about the manner in which the Scottish Government is now procuring everything from the smallest primary school or small fire station to the very large civil engineering projects that were announced to the press earlier in the week. I totally accept that those very large projects will be tendered and will therefore ultimately be built by larger international consortia or individual businesses—we have seen that over many years of public procurement in Scotland—but I think that the minister needs to respond properly to the RIAS’s concerns about the disproportionate nature of Government procurement policy. Possibly the most important point here, which he must not be allowed to dodge, is that this is not London or Brussels; it is absolutely the Scottish Government’s own procurement policy and is nothing to do with anyone else at all. The Government’s policy of having five hubcos—five massive corporations that will be in charge of all procurement right across Scotland—means that small businesses, such as electricians, plumbers, architects and small building companies, do not have a prayer of getting much of the work, if any. That is profoundly wrong. Mr Ewing is shaking his head. I will happily give way if he can tell me how what I say is wrong. He does not seem to want to explain the policy, but he needs to explain how the policy will work. Let me give him two examples. First, the RIAS report says that—this is important as to what he can do as a minister—the Public Contracts (Scotland) Regulations 2006, which were brought in by this Parliament, specifically state, on the issue of proportionality, that “smaller projects should not be unduly burdened by considerations more appropriate for use in relation to major construction projects.” Mr Ewing and his Government have in their hand, under existing measures, ways of assisting small business, but they are choosing not to use them. Instead, they are setting up a huge structure that will choke small businesses out of the supply chain. Secondly, I would have more sympathy with Mr Ewing on the point that he rightly made about bureaucracy if he would deal with this point from the RIAS report. Why is it that, in the hubco concept that the Government is driving forward in Scotland, the standard pre-qualification questionnaire—he can read all this himself in the RIAS report, so he does not need to believe me, which I am sure he will not—runs to 66 pages, with 118 questions for bidders, including 12 on environmental management? I do not know too many three-man architect practices or small building companies that have time to deal with that kind of bureaucracy imposed on them by the Scottish Government. There is time for a lot more action from the minister on this. If he did that, and sorted out some of the issues that I have raised today, he would have my full support and I look forward to his winding up on that basis.

Does Mr Lochhead believe that the current contract for the ETVs is as it should be?

Ours is a maritime nation, rich in the heritage of the sea and of seafarers from the Vikings to the modern superstructures that float across the globe. But so, with the passage of international trade that is moved by shipping, go the ravages of accident, weather and incident that can put the lives of those at sea at risk. There was no coastguard when 58 men were lost in the 1881 Gloup fishing disaster, a tragedy that left 34 widows and 85 orphans. Shetland had coastguards when the Braer oil tanker went aground at Garths Ness on the south coast of the island on 5 January 1993. Out of the Braer disaster—in which, thankfully, no loss of life occurred—came the seminal study of safety at sea in modern times. The late Lord Donaldson’s “Safer Ships, Cleaner Seas” is still compulsory reading for this generation of seafarers, as it should be for every policy maker and legislator who is interested in nautical matters. Since Donaldson, UK waters have witnessed the Napoli and HMS Astute incidents, which others have mentioned this morning, and there will no doubt be more. Safety around our coasts needs an inclusive UK approach—gales, radar outages and wrecks do not obey constitutional referendums or overblown ministerial pronouncements. This Parliament should consider carefully what is being proposed for the country’s essential coastguard services and the role that they play in relation to the emergency services across Scotland in co-ordinating rescue, where that is needed. The original UK Government proposal would have seen either Stornoway or Lerwick coastguard station close, with the other being downgraded to a 12-hour operation. After Tuesday’s House of Commons statement, both will continue on a 24-hour basis. That is the right call. I want to thank and congratulate the campaigns that were persuasively conducted across the islands. People from all walks of life, with islanders’ connections to the sea, along with many who have been part of the voluntary coastguard network for generations, won the argument. This is their win. The changes are difficult and I regret the closure of the Forth and Clyde stations. I well understand why local members are angry about that—I would be, if I were them. However, the savings that are being ploughed back into the service achieve a significant and positive improvement to the terms and conditions of employment for the men and women of the coastguard service. Just two years ago, they were on strike. The then UK Government imposed a pay deal. Today, instead of taking strike action, staff will rightly gain improvements, which they have long deserved. It is a matter of regret that the minister and his Labour shadow could not bring themselves to mention, either in their speeches or in their motions, the terms and conditions of the staff for whom we work.

The unions are rightly up in arms about the proposed closures, not about the changes in terms and conditions; they sought those changes, and Mr Lochhead should welcome them. Many of those members of staff in my constituency have approached me because they have been calling for changes to their conditions for some time. I dare say that if Mr Lochhead had listened to their counterparts in Aberdeen, he would have heard the same. They have got what they wanted, which is a significant improvement in their terms and conditions. Instead of denigrating that, the cabinet secretary should welcome it.

I accept that and stand corrected on Mr Macdonald’s point. I am disappointed that the Scottish Government motion is factually inaccurate on the issue of ocean-going salvage tugs. If the contract had ended as the motion says, how come the Anglican Sovereign is in Orkney coastal waters at this very moment, and the Anglican Monarch is in the Minch right now? People want salvage capability for the future and they are working hard on that. The cabinet secretary was gracious enough to accept the Scottish Office’s role in that. However, it is unfortunate that the Scottish Government has brought nothing to the table. It wants to control everything but it never wants to work in partnership with local interests, industry and the UK Government to achieve a better outcome for the taxpayer than the terrible deal that we get at the moment.

I will finish my point first. I would think a lot more of Scottish ministers if they could bring themselves to support a sensible contract that helps mariners around our coasts instead of showing their desperate need to grandstand constantly.

If Mr Lochhead wanted to illustrate his approach to the relationship between his Government and any other Government, he just did so. We have just seen a classic example of Mr Lochhead’s attitude. It is no wonder that his officials are behaving in the way that they are in the negotiations. Our coastline needs rescue services that work, that stand up to modern challenges, and that use modern technology to deliver a modern service. We need salvage tugs around the Northern Isles and on the west coast of Scotland where the shipping market will not deliver a commercial alternative. We need the men and women who work for the Maritime and Coastguard Agency to be properly treated and given better terms and conditions. That is the future that I want for the next generation of shippers, fisherman, salmon farmers, the oil industry, and people who just like mucking around in boats, and that includes me. I move amendment S4M-01408.2, to leave out from “with concern” to end and insert: “that the coastguard modernisation proposals announced on 22 November 2011 are fundamentally different from the original proposals; welcomes the retention of the coastguard stations in Shetland and the Western Isles, one of which would have been closed under the previous plans, and that coastguard staff will now benefit from enhanced terms and conditions of employment; regrets the proposed closure of the Fife Ness and Clyde stations; recognises the importance of retaining the Emergency Towing Vessels in order to provide ocean-going salvage capability off the west coast and Northern Isles, and calls on the Scottish Government to play a constructive role in that provision.”

As I said in my speech, I entirely appreciate the concern that is being expressed by members, including Alex Fergusson, about the loss of coastguard stations in their area. However, Stornoway and Shetland are staying open on a 24-hour basis and the terms and conditions for staff are being enhanced rather than cut back. None of those positive steps is in the Government motion. If Mr Hepburn’s position is that he wants no change, that is fair enough, but if his position is that he wants an improvement on what we have got, he must acknowledge those positive steps.

Although Dave Thompson has temporarily left the chamber, I assure him that the next time that I meet Angus Robertson down in the lobby of the Parliament—he is often here—I will not tell him about Dave Thompson’s suggestion that Mr Robertson and his SNP colleagues at Westminster are second best to all the SNP members here when it comes to representing Scotland. It is very important that I help Dave Thompson out with regard to what will be a tricky internal SNP argument.

The member is absolutely right; my comment was disingenuous—indeed, it was deliberately so. I completely apologise for that. Further, because Mr Thompson is not here, I cannot make more fun of him, so there we are. With regard to the broad theme that emerged during today’s debate, I understand absolutely those who, like Duncan McNeil, wish to present the argument that, if something terrible happens and, in the worst case scenario, there is a loss of life, that will be a direct consequence of the decisions that have been taken or will be taken. I made that argument myself earlier this year when Shetland was under pressure. However, I counter it with a point that a couple of coastguard station staff made to me when I was on a visit to another part of Scotland during the election campaign. They reminded me that whichever coastguard deals with incidents, it will do so with the utmost professionalism and dedication. They gently asked me not to run the other services down when making a wider argument. In retrospect, I thought that that was entirely fair. I suspect that we all have to tread glass on the issue, and we recognise that the proposals are by no means perfect. That is why I have repeatedly acknowledged the arguments of a number of members about Clyde and Fife Ness. I particularly recognise the local knowledge argument. Of course, the local knowledge argument was every bit as relevant when Oban and Kirkwall were closed last time round. Claire Baker rightly mentioned the 344 miles of rugged coastline—forgive me; that might have been Rod Campbell. The point is relevant and entirely fair, but the Parliament should look at some of the things that Mike Penning said on Tuesday. The argument is now being made that the investment in the local voluntary networks and the staff who support them will increase under the proposals, so a greater onus is being put on the local knowledge that I fundamentally believe in and that will support the response to the kind of incident that we all want to be tackled with the greatest professionalism.

As Ms Urquhart should well know, the local knowledge that they listened to was that of Alistair Carmichael, who has been the local member of Parliament for the Northern Isles for a long time. He has made the case for the services, which is why Shetland will continue to have a base. [Interruption.] I hope that members are not running down an MP who knows his constituency. That is exactly what Jamie Hepburn was doing—talk about disingenuous. That speaks for itself. Jean Urquhart was right to raise the issue of the tug. It is a really important issue and her arguments were correct. However, I believe strongly that it is not in any Scottish taxpayer’s interests to have a shockingly badly drawn up contract that costs a huge amount of money and serves only the interests of the salvage tug companies. If Ms Urquhart and others look closely at the contract, they will find out that the way in which it is drawn up does not mean that the salvage tugs will undertake the range of activities that could be achieved under a new and proper contract. I hope that Ms Urquhart and the Scottish Government will recognise that. An improved contract would gain much for the serving of the Minch, which Jean Urquhart rightly cares strongly about, the Western Isles, and the Northern Isles that Liam McArthur and I have the honour of representing. I will also take up the point about Aberdeen. The minister and Lewis Macdonald made two or three eminently reasonable points about the importance of Aberdeen. First, my understanding is that, far from a diminution of the watches, the current watch structure will be maintained on a 24-hour basis. The minister and Mr Macdonald recognise that. The minister and Mr Macdonald will know better than I do that the two oil and gas experts will be retained in Aberdeen. I appreciate that that is not as good as we might all wish, but surely it is positive that those two staff will still be there.

I have a little difficulty with that argument, because the recent BP exercise west of Shetland was co-ordinated from Shetland. If Maureen Watt had had her way, the Shetland station would have been closed—in effect, that is what she said—and all the staff would have been transferred from Shetland down to Aberdeen. That might have been great for her constituency, but it would not have been good for mine. The serious point about that exercise is that it showed that some future oil and gas incident—which, by definition, we would wish to avoid—could be co-ordinated out of Shetland. It is important to recognise the ability of the Shetland and Aberdeen stations to work in harmony on such incidents, albeit that we would not wish that eventuality to arise.

Unlike some others, I had every faith in my MP to get the job done. [Interruption.] SNP members whistle and boo, but Alistair Carmichael said that the Shetland station would stay open and it did. That is what is called doing your job as a constituency MP. Maritime safety is an important issue. [Interruption.] SNP members can barrack as much as they like, but I will not accept Keith Brown’s inference that I do not care about the sea. I have lived in the islands all my life. I do care about the sea, and I want the best solution for our seafarers.

2. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy last met NHS Shetland and what matters were discussed. (S4O-00400)

I acknowledge that the cabinet secretary understands the concerns of Scalloway residents regarding the loss of the pharmacy from their general practitioner practice, given our earlier correspondence, for which I am grateful, regarding NHS Shetland’s actions on that matter. Is it the Scottish Government’s position that there is no legal reason that prevents a health board from considering all bids to provide pharmacy services at the same time and therefore to make an objective assessment for the area concerned? Although I appreciate her former profession, will she do her best to prevent lawyers from running local healthcare and instead ensure that local people have confidence that decisions about local health services are taken for the right, logical and health-related reasons?

Will the minister give way?

I am Tavish Scott, not Liam McArthur. Does the minister recognise that one of the major economic opportunities over the next 15 to 20 years will be in decommissioning? In particular, Shell is now actively considering the decommissioning options for the Brent field. What assurances can the minister give me that his Government will consider carefully the potential to ensure that the massive installations come ashore at the deep-water facilities in Shetland, which are closest to the Brent field?

A number of weeks ago, Oil & Gas UK and the French company Total organised a parliamentary visit to the Elgin-Franklin field, which is east of Aberdeen. In order to take part in that visit, we were taken through RGIT offshore survival training in Aberdeen. I confess that when Lewis Macdonald was describing his friend in the Piper Alpha events, some thoughts about that went through my mind. I was upside down in 3m of water and strapped into a seat, and was told to count to eight before I got out through the window of the mock-up helicopter. I commend the experience to Mr Ewing. I do not know whether he has had the opportunity to undertake the RGIT training yet, but it is advisable for ministerial life to do such things. A person thinks of lots of things in such moments: their friends, enemies and even people in their own party. Given that men and women who go offshore have to undertake that training every four years, it is useful for those of us who have exciting opportunities to learn more about the industry to undertake that course. I agree with much of what the minister said at the outset. He mentioned that confidence is fairly high in the continental North Sea and west of Shetland, and that capital expenditure is strong. I agree with those sentiments and share that sense of where the industry is. I also agree that there was no consultation on tax changes with the industry. I think that he used the word “regrettable”. I entirely agree with that, but say gently to him, particularly in light of the previous speech, in which we heard calls for statutory consultation periods, that it is important that the Scottish Government is consistent on that principle when it introduces tax rises to businesses in Scotland. I commend a statutory consultation period to the ministerial front bench.

I will finish my point. If the minister’s Government is proposing a statutory consultation period, I agree with it, but let us see it also applying that approach to tax changes in Scotland.

I am not sure that we saw much consultation before that measure was announced. Mr Ewing might wish to reflect on that with his ministerial colleagues.

I would like to make some progress. I want to say something about the importance of the oil and gas industry now. In very difficult economic times—these are economic propositions, not political propositions—with the euro zone in utter crisis and meltdown, the oil and gas sector, which members have eloquently described with statistical evidence, is one of the few areas of growth in the UK and Scottish economies. As a result, it needs the support of Governments across the country. As the minister pointed out, BP and its partners are to invest £4.5 billion in the Clair Edge developments, which will extend the field’s life past 2050, and in the past six to eight weeks £8 billion has been announced for investment in continental shelf exploration. Those staggering numbers are on top of Total’s £3 billion to £3.2 billion investment in the Laggan and Tormore fields. I know of no other industrial sphere in the UK that is seeing that kind of investment and the industry deserves no little credit for the work that it is doing and the investment that it is making. Nevertheless, we should all be mindful of Sarah Boyack’s powerful argument about the environment. Indeed, those of us who lived through the Braer incident in Shetland will know that we are never far away from the consequences of what can go wrong. It is important that the highest environmental standards are maintained. I have seen with my own eyes the weather conditions to the west of Shetland when one moves over the edge of the continental shelf and into intensely deep waters; those conditions will certainly be a challenge to a civil engineering project that is unlike any we have undertaken in UK waters up to now. In recognising the economic importance of oil and gas, I commend to the minister and his Government three very brief suggestions for achieving the kind of growth in our economy that we need to keep people in and to grow work. First of all, I agree with Lewis Macdonald and other members about skills and I hope that we can help and support the minister in seeking to reverse the cuts that will be made to further education. He will know from his constituency, as we know from our own patches, the impact that such a move will have on college courses and on what can be achieved for the industry. As the Oil & Gas UK briefing for this debate points out: “Earlier this year, an ... Industry ... survey found that more than half of firms in the oil and gas sector warned that skill shortages are their number one challenge. The survey estimated” that if these things could be sorted over the next five years “the prospects could mean 15,000 more jobs”. That presents a great challenge for the Government. Given that responsibility for skills and education is devolved, the minister and his colleagues are in a very good position to take up that challenge, plug those skills gaps and create 15,000 more jobs that the Scottish economy desperately needs. We need to do everything we can in that respect and if the minister can find some way of addressing that 27 per cent real-terms cut he will have my full support. After all, it is a very important consideration for the industry in taking these matters forward. Secondly, given that this is one of the few industrial sectors in Scotland that is growing and has the potential to grow even more, I suggest that the minister realign the enterprise agencies, which obviously have a role to play in the oil and gas industry, to ensure that there is a firm concentration on it. Finally, on overseas work, the minister rightly mentioned the work that Scottish-based businesses are doing right across the globe. When, this week, I visited Kurdistan with the Westminster Foundation for Democracy, I found that the Wood Group was there. In fact, in the past six months alone, British exploration companies have spent £3 billion in that country, which has the fourth richest reserves in the world and represents a potentially huge area for Scottish business. I hope that the minister can find space in his busy diary to undertake visits and lead delegations to those parts of the world, which have huge potential for the Scottish businesses in this sector and where we might build on the enormous success that we have seen over many years.

I am sure that Mr Stewart will be gracious enough to agree that £1 billion of investment was available but that the industry had to meet certain criteria to obtain it. Is that not an appropriate way for the Government to behave?

Kurdistan.

The psychological and emotional turmoil of those who have served and fought and seen the unspeakable is, above all, where wider society must provide assistance and support. This debate, the minister’s strong introduction and contributions from across the parties all demonstrate the commitment of Parliament and the Government to work with veterans across Scotland. I thank Alex Fergusson in particular for mentioning the work that my good friend, Jeremy Purvis, did in the previous session through the cross-party group and in highlighting the issues that veterans face, and I am grateful that the minister mentioned the cross-party work that has been done. The cross-party group that Alex Fergusson chairs and others are strongly committed to, and the minister’s personal and worthy commitment to this area, show Parliament and Government in a good light. I want to concentrate on the mental turmoil of ex-servicemen, which shows why the next generation must learn, inquire and study these issues—as Liz Smith and others have mentioned—if only to try to avoid the terrible mistakes that history tells us we repeat again and again. Like most—if not all—primary schools across Scotland, in its teaching of aspects of what has gone before, Bells Brae primary school encourages its youngsters to look at areas of war. Inevitably, children who are brought up in an island community learn about the sea and the Royal Navy in particular, but they also look at the interaction between the Royal Navy and the other forces. A few years ago, that manifested itself in a great project that the pupils did on the D-day landings in Normandy. When my son, who was then in primary 6, came home from school one night, he spoke to me on the phone—as has often been the case for the past 12 years—and demanded that we go on a family visit to Normandy to see the site itself. I thought that that was a pretty brave thing for a 10-year-old to want to do. We went there, and I have two abiding memories of visiting Normandy and the landing beaches. The first is of the British cemetery at Bayeux, which cannot fail to move anyone who sees it. Carved on the grave stones are not only the soldiers’ names and the insignia of regiments from Scotland and across the country but the ages of the individuals, the majority of whom, with the exception of some older officers, are 16, 17 and 18 years old. Walking around those serried ranks of grave stones with one’s children has an impact—of that there can be no doubt. As Richard Simpson and other members have said, every family—and mine is no different—has a connection back to times when we were at war or, sadly, to a current war. My second abiding memory relates to my great-uncle, who was a British Army surgeon. He crossed gold beach on the afternoon of 6 June 1944. On D-day plus 2, he lost his arm just below the shoulder to a German mine and was inevitably invalided home. He often remarked to my grandmother, “I’m one of the lucky ones. In those few days of intense initial fighting, I lost something, but I did get home.” We took the kids down to gold beach. It was a beautiful July morning, the sun was shining and it was warm. We walked out across the sand from the beautiful French village of Arromanches and looked back. It is at that point that one is struck by what it must have been like to have been pitched out of a landing craft onto those beaches, with everything that was going on. We have all seen the movie. To imagine the shellfire, the extraordinary weight that the soldiers were carrying, the rifles, the adrenalin and—yes—the fear and then to imagine the charge up that beach to the pillboxes and the German defences along the beach, some of which remain to this day, is incredibly and powerfully moving. If we want to ensure that the next generation understands what happened and learns from it, we can do no better than to take them to some of those sites and ensure that they see what young men—and, indeed, women—had to put up with in those extraordinary initial hours of freeing Europe from tyranny and all that went with it. The best ministerial visit that I ever undertook was to Telavåg, on the west coast of Norway. I went there in 2005 with the British ambassador, some pupils from Scalloway junior high school and the convener of Shetland Islands Council. I was there to represent my constituency and the Government on the 60th anniversary of the Shetland bus. For those members who are not familiar with the extraordinary bravery of those who were involved in the Shetland bus, I should say that it is simply how we ensured that commanders in British forces were able to get into Nazi-held Norway and, at the same time, were able to ensure that Norwegians, who were under enormous pressure, were able to leave Norway. Telavåg was devastated by war. Its men were marched off to a concentration camp and its women and children were interned in Hardanger because of the shooting of two Gestapo officers by some Norwegian resistance fighters who were shipped into Norway from Shetland. However, the next generation got it, and they got it mostly because they sat down with some old men in the museum in Telavåg during the lunch that was laid on for the visiting party, and those men, who are all in their 80s now, described what happened when the men were marched off and taken into internship. I can tell members that one could have heard a pin drop when the youngsters were listening to those stories. We can reflect, we do reflect, and we do learn. That is very much part of ensuring that veterans of today and yesterday know that this generation and coming generations care deeply about what they did and what they fought for, and that in the future we will not forget.

Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge that the Commission is proposing that quotas should automatically be cut by 25 per cent for stock for which no science is available? Given the massive implications for the Scottish industry of that proposal becoming a firm decision, how will he approach the matter?

I broadly agreed with the minister’s introduction this morning. I strongly agree with many of the points that he made about the industry. Mr Lochhead mentioned in his opening remarks the changes to the fleet that have happened under successive Governments. Since 2007, we have seen the number of white-fish trawlers greater than 10m—in other words, the majority of the fleet—fall by 17 per cent. As I am sure the minister was reflecting in his remarks, the changes have happened under successive Governments, and it is important to remember that in the context of our debate. For me, and particularly for the islands that I represent in Parliament, the main requirement of the minister is that, in considering common fisheries policy reform, he ensures that the financial viability of our fleet is paramount. For men and women, families and communities in places such as Whalsay and Burra, and right across Shetland, what happens with the policy and how the minister negotiates on behalf of this Parliament and his Government are fundamental. Their livelihoods depend on it. In his own way, the minister reflected that argument in his opening remarks, with which I agree, but I hope that, in everything that he does on the issue, he concentrates absolutely on the financial viability of the boats.

As Mr Lochhead made clear in his opening remarks, as a party arguing the UK case he should be comfortable arguing the whole of the UK case. If he was confident in his facts and figures—which I am sure Mr Lochhead is—he would have no problem dealing with the Wash, the Irish Sea or other areas. Mr Thompson should have a little more confidence in his minister instead of running him down so much. I want to make three points in what is an important debate for us all: on regionalisation, aquaculture, and discards, which have had a good airing already. On regionalisation, Graeme Dey got it right and made a very reasoned argument. As far as I can tell, the Commission envisages a system in which decisions on objectives, targets, minimum standards and timescales continue to be taken at European Commission level. It sees a greater management role for producer organisations—a point on which I would like the minister to reflect, as there can be some advantages in that. However, I recall Richard Lochhead, in an earlier life, describing the regional advisory councils as “toothless talking shops”. Whatever comes out of this particular proposal, if those advisory councils—I believe that they will no longer be called regional—continue to be of that ilk rather than proper bodies with management structures that can work with the industry and Government to achieve the reform that we need, I suspect that what Richard Lochhead said may continue to be the case. There must be a strong drive to achieve more in that area. On aquaculture, I agree strongly with my good friend Alex Fergusson, who was in dangerous territory in linking himself to a celebrity chef, although he added the caveat about him being the best man of some relation of his. The point that he, Elaine Murray and one or two other members have made this morning is fundamentally correct. Celebrity chefs have a lot more power than we do—certainly individually, but probably collectively as well—but there is no need for them to go on television and present classically simplistic solutions as being the ultimate idea in constructing the future of a policy that is, by definition, complex and difficult. I strongly support the members who made that argument this morning. I hope that Mr Lochhead, who will be much more able than the rest of us to do so, will hold discussions with that one celebrity chef in particular and will take him to a Peterhead trawler to point out the reality of his suggested policy, so that it can be seen for what it is, even if it makes for good television. Mr Fergusson made another point about aquaculture. He will recall, from the visit that we paid to Norway back in 2002, when he was the convener of the Rural Affairs Committee, that Norway is very good at pushing its trade interests at the European Union level. Not that long ago, we had a major trade dispute with Norway over salmon farming and the EU absolutely caved in. That was not in the Scottish interest at all. No matter what the Scottish or UK Government did on that issue, it was the Commission that caved in. Therefore, I would be reluctant to see the European Commission take a big role in aquaculture. Frankly, the industry is getting on fine without the involvement of the European Union. Many members have made strong arguments on the proposed discards ban; however, what is proposed is akin to banning the symptoms of an illness rather than treating the illness and addressing its causes. That is the challenge for the minister and the people who work under him, and I ask him to clarify the position on the science behind the proposal. I asked him about the science earlier and I welcomed his response. Although page 157 of the budget document shows that the level of funding for Marine Scotland is falling—inevitably, given the position that we are in—the narrative beneath the figures states that the Government plans to continue to strengthen funding in the area of sea-fish research. Given the threat to our fish stocks of an automatic 25 per cent cut in quotas, it would be helpful to those of us who are concerned about how science funding will be allocated in future and, more to the point, to the industry if the minister could clarify—not today, but in the coming weeks—what his department plans to do to ensure that our science is as good as it can be to help our industry to confront what, in my view, is a serious threat to the economic viability of the fleet, as I mentioned at the start of my speech. In conclusion, I ask the minister to ensure that, in his negotiations on the common fisheries policy, the Shetland box—which is important to my constituency as well as to the industry—is protected. It is not mentioned in the reform proposal. I would be grateful if he could establish what the position is and ensure that the protection of that designation is maintained.

If Mr Swinney is going to produce more police forces, let me be the first to offer Shetland as an example of an area that would happily take one. Given his confidence about his figures, is he prepared to give an assurance to my constituency that the same number of police officers will be in place after his single police service is created as are in place today?

First, I apologise to Parliament for not being able to stay to the end of today’s debate. I have been wound up by many of Mr Swinney’s speeches, but he will have to forgive me on this occasion. I have to fly back to Shetland tonight to meet local businesses, including salmon farming businesses, which are worried about the Government’s handling of the tender for our lifeline ferry services. Indeed, so worried are businesses in my constituency, they have asked me to ask when the Government will get it sorted out and when they will know what fares are going to be next year and when they can make a booking, which they cannot do at present. I hope that the cabinet secretary might reflect, when he is going on about his Government’s competence, that businesses in my constituency are rather more interested in how things are done and in the Government’s performance on tenders than they are in the glossy documents that we are debating today. Mr Swinney mentioned unemployment in what I thought was very careful language in his opening speech. That was not, of course, quite the case at a press conference at Bute house this morning, when the First Minister gloated about people in England, Wales and Northern Ireland who are losing their jobs. When unemployment falls in Scotland, the Scottish Government is responsible. When job losses rise north of the border, it is not a First Minister’s press conference but a Government statement saying that it is because Scotland is not independent and it is all the UK Government’s fault. I accept that this Government’s purpose—I see that it is spelled with a capital P throughout the economic strategy document—is independence.

I accept that every statement, position, cheer from Mr Gibson and utterance is remorselessly aimed at winning independence. I am just surprised today that Purpose with a capital P and Independence with a capital I did not make the ministerial speech. New members will not remember the purpose of the SNP’s first economic strategy. In 2007, the cabinet secretary said: “We are focused on achieving the impressive and ambitious targets that we have set in the economic strategy. We aim to ensure that we increase the growth rate in Scotland to match the United Kingdom level by 2011.” He also said: “The Government has said consistently that it is committed to abolishing the unfair council tax.” However, in today’s document and, indeed, in today’s speech, there is no mention of growth rate targets. I rather suspect that, in the spending review next week, there will be no mention of local government reform either. Our First Minister said on the economic strategy in 2007: “We aspire to join that arc of prosperity around our shores ... These independent nations are successful because they benefit from swift decision making and social cohesion.” This new economic strategy today has not one mention of any arc, biblical or otherwise, and not one target on growth, nor does the section on what has happened since 2007 mention banks, which is frankly unbelievable. The economist who wrote that should be sent back to school. The major economic and financial happening of the past four years has been airbrushed out of history. I wonder why. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will explain. We did not learn from the cabinet secretary’s speech exactly what role Scottish Enterprise is playing in lending. On Monday, we learned from the press—not in Parliament, as is so often the case with the Government—that the cabinet secretary has involved Scottish Enterprise in commercial lending decisions. At least, that is what one is led to believe from press reports.

I will be happy to give way if the cabinet secretary can clarify the role that Scottish Enterprise is playing. That is what Parliament is for.

I certainly welcome it, but Mr Swinney should recognise that he should announce such matters to the Parliament and not to the press. If there is a change in Scottish Enterprise’s approach to business lending, why not announce it to the Parliament instead of just at a press conference, as happened on Monday? There was another omission in Mr Swinney’s speech. There was not one mention of the Council of Economic Advisers, what it is doing and what its role is. That is particularly important because the council has not met for an entire year and it is not clear what economic evidence the Scottish Government is using. In the strategy document, it says of bodies such as the Council of Economic Advisers: “These bodies will hold the Government to account”. If we do not know what the advice is and the council does not meet, what is the point of it? Last autumn, the First Minister announced with much fanfare that Annabel Goldie’s favourite economist, Joseph Stiglitz, was to advise the Scottish Government. Will the Council of Economic Advisers meet? What will it achieve? What did it provide to inform the updated economic strategy? What has changed since the council’s advice was provided? I assume that it provided some advice. The Parliament should be told about such things. There is an area of industry to which the cabinet secretary should give attention and considerable encouragement. A £36 billion market will be available for Scotland and Scottish businesses between now and 2040 and beyond, as some 940 oil wells are decommissioned on the continental shelf. The Shell Brent network programme alone will involve four major platforms, 1 million tonnes of concrete and 100,000 tonnes of topside steel. Some of the members who were at the Offshore Europe exhibition last week—Mr McDonald and a number of members from other parties were there—heard Shell’s presentation on how important the industry will be. There is to be a 10-year programme on that network alone, which will involve billions of pounds of investment. I hope that the Government will play a constructive role in assisting the programme, through its ports policy. However, there is no mention of the issue in the economic strategy. Lerwick, in particular, is well placed, given its deepwater access, but there will be work for every port in Scotland in that enormous industry. There are new horizons for the oil industry, but the old horizons offer a huge challenge, which I hope that the Government will meet.

First, I apologise for being late. I was at the Royal Highland Show, where I listened to the First Minister, if that is any consolation to the Minister for Housing and Transport. I apologise to Stuart McMillan for missing his speech, which I will read carefully. From what Duncan McNeil said, it must have had a slight frisson, so I look forward to clarity on that when I read the speech. I will make three brief points to support the debate’s general tone, and particularly what members have said about the select committee report that was published this morning. I hope that that report will firmly block proposals that would be damaging, as members from every political party that is represented here have said. There are many and varied reasons why the proposals are flawed—the select committee said that they were “seriously flawed”—but I will describe two reasons. The first relates to the important point that was just made about local knowledge, which was excellently illustrated. I can think of several comparable examples, although they are not quite as dramatic as that in the distinguished speech that was just made. The Transport Committee’s report should leave us in no doubt as to how seriously it took the point about local knowledge and how flawed the proposals are in not understanding that, in relation to the communications technology that supports the use of local knowledge and the pressure that the proposed approach would put on volunteer coastguards, who are the cornerstone of much of the work that goes on in many of our coastal communities—certainly in my part of the world. I am pleased that the select committee has done a very good job on that point. The select committee also did an excellent job on emergency tug cover, which members mentioned. The issue is increasingly important, given the diverse nature and increasing scale and size of the shipping in our coastal and international waters. The committee said that the Government should either extend the emergency towing-vessel contract, if it cannot secure an alternative before the end of September, or find a different way to procure the service. The point is extremely important to me. Long before I was involved in politics, the Braer disaster happened to my community. I have too many memories, as most of Shetland does, of the three weeks after the disaster and of the impact of the Braer oil spill on the south of Shetland. Donaldson produced his report after the Braer disaster for a very good reason—I do not know whether the minister has had a chance to read the report or to be briefed on it. What stood in the Donaldson report then stands to this day. Since the moment when the current proposals were published, I have been at a loss to understand how the UK Government could not have simply gone back to Donaldson and recognised the need to continue tug vessel cover. I hope that the UK Government will not only accept the case that the Transport Committee has made and follow its recommendations, but will rip up the proposals and accept that they were seriously flawed from day 1. The Scottish islands were not going to be divided and ruled on the issue. I made a case, as did Alasdair Allan, Liam McArthur and Scotland’s First Minister, for the Stornoway and Lerwick coastguard stations to remain open on a 24-hour basis, all year round, because that was the right argument to make, based on the shipping concerns and the needs and requirements of the oil and gas industry—and the renewables industry as it emerges. In one of the many submissions that were made by the save Shetland coastguard campaign, whose petition attracted 13,000 signatures—the highest-ever number of signatures to a petition in support of a campaign in Shetland—Simon King, the wildlife cameraman, author and presenter, made the environmental argument and went on to say of the coastguard stations: “If they were to disappear, the safety of all who live on or visit the isles would be threatened.” That was right then and it is right now, and the UK Government needs to listen to that.

14. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth last met the chief executive of Skills Development Scotland and what matters were discussed. (S4O-00045)

When the cabinet secretary next meets Skills Development Scotland will he raise with it the bureaucratic hurdles that many training providers feel it puts in the way of their performance? Many believe that the SDS is a middle man that gets in the way of delivering the vocational training that this Parliament wants to be delivered. In particular, will he look into the case that train Shetland raised with me concerning its 2011 marine vessel deckhand apprenticeship programme, which is being stopped by Skills Development Scotland and is therefore stopping two school leavers getting into jobs?

I want to widen the debate geographically and in terms of the bank’s role. First, however, I congratulate Marco Biagi on securing this debate and encourage him and the other Edinburgh and Lothians members who have pushed the argument today to continue to make it. Marco Biagi said that Vince Cable’s civil servants had a default position that everything had to be located on the Thames. I see that Fergus Ewing is to respond to the debate. He and I cheerfully jousted in previous parliamentary sessions on Edinburgh civil servants’ default position about where they wished organisations to be located. That position is no problem for Mr Biagi, who would like all organisations to be in Edinburgh. However, as Sarah Boyack will well remember, several pretty vigorous debates took place about where certain large organisations in Scotland might be located. Believe me, the default position was Edinburgh and not anywhere else. Mr Biagi makes a point about London, but it is equally applicable to how we do such things in this country, too. The arguments are well made, and members from across the chamber have eloquently described them. Mr McDonald made a fair point about the north-east and Aberdeen. Robert Carr, the president of Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, which Gavin Brown, Sarah Boyack and others have mentioned, said that if the bank came to Scotland—as I and my party hope—Edinburgh would become “the renewable energy capital of Europe”. That would, of course, be news to Aberdeen. I suspect that a fairly lively debate will continue about that—indeed, I stood next to Alex Salmond at a hustings in the recent election campaign when he made rather that point about Aberdeen. However, I hope that Mr McDonald—and, in fairness, others—will reflect on the bank as a prize for Scotland and will put aside all other debates about the competing cases of cities, because the prize is worth winning. On the wider point, I will reflect on what the bank must do. We can argue on a cross-party basis in the Parliament for the organisation to be based in Scotland but, in a week when Scottish Power has increased energy prices by 19 per cent and when utility prices are at an all-time high—the average cost is £1,162 per annum per household in Scotland—consumers will ask us, no matter who or where we represent, what the bank will mean for them. I suspect that the wider and stronger argument will be about what clean, green power will mean for energy prices that our constituents pay, whether they pay business or household bills. In my part of the world, the argument is about the percentage of household income that is spent on keeping the home warm. I suspect that the green investment bank will play an enormous role in energy policy in the future. The direct question will be about what energy policy means for consumer prices the length and breadth of Scotland. If truth be told, not too many politicians are answering that question. The remorseless increase in price that we and our constituents face has not yet been answered by the whole green energy movement—by every business from the Scottish and Southern Energys and Scottish Powers of the world right down to the smallest and most innovative new energy businesses that are producing incredible pieces of engineering kit that are being placed around our coasts or in other areas. Consumers will ask us not only whether we will keep the lights on but how power will be produced and whether prices will reduce or continue their remorseless rise. That fundamental issue for investment policy and energy policy will have to be considered for the future. Our constituents feel the economic pain of ever-rising utility prices. In bringing the green investment bank to Scotland, that is the bigger issue that all of us—no matter what party we are in—will have to confront.

One of the delights of being relieved of some other responsibilities is the opportunity to speak on areas that have always interested me but on which I have not had the chance to contribute before. I begin by congratulating Shona Robison on her elevation to her position in representing sport in its entirety by herself. I seem to remember the aforementioned Scottish Sports Association making that case to us all during the election campaign, and I see that the Government has met that election commitment. I am sure that Ms Robison will go on to tell me how many more it will meet in the coming years, but I certainly welcome this one now. I should also pay tribute to Liz Smith, Patricia Ferguson as a previous sports minister and Margo MacDonald, who have spoken in sports debates with considerable eloquence and ability over the past few years—albeit that I have read the Official Reports of the debates rather than noted them in person. To Humza Yousaf I say: “If that is the standard of your first speech, I cannot wait for the next one, the next one and the next one.” The mark of a good first speech in this place is the ability to hold members’ attention, not just because they feel that they have to pay attention because someone is making their first speech but because the member is saying something serious, responsible and important about the future of Scotland. If I may say so, Humza Yousaf did that today. I will pick up a number of points that the minister made in her opening speech. I agreed with her—or, at least, with what I think she was going to say—on broadcasting. I have sought to propose an amendment to the same effect and, while I may have caught the minister’s eye in what I want to say on that issue, I was not so fortunate with the Presiding Officer. I also take the minister’s point on school awards, and I look forward to the detail that I am sure she will place in the public domain on that. From my many discussions with headteachers the length and breadth of Scotland—I am sure the minister has had similar discussions, as Liz Smith and colleagues on other benches have—I know that the issue depends so much on leadership and the leadership that headteachers of both genders provide. It is through that leadership that progress will be made in schools. We can do what we can in Parliament, the Government and local authorities, but unless the process is led by able men and women it will not happen. My own limited sporting success would certainly accord with that. I took, too, the minister’s points on sectarianism, which is probably the most serious element of her job. In my view, it is certainly the most serious element of what her Government will have to deal with in the coming five years. A sustained, firm and consistent political approach needs to be taken to the issue. Getting the approach right is one of the great, shining challenges of our politics and of our time, and to make progress on sectarianism and achieve something for Scotland will be well worth doing. The Scottish sports alliance, which includes the Scottish Sports Association, asked us all during the recent election campaign to be champions for sport and to endorse the vote for sport campaign. I believe that we all did that to a greater or lesser extent, although I was a bit taken aback to find out that, following the elections, we have apparently all pledged to become Scottish sporting champions. I look forward to the minister challenging us all—we will perhaps challenge her—on quite how we will do that. For my part, it involves playing a bit of five-a-side football on Wednesday night, which is something I have not been able to do for the past three years, and a great return to Scotland’s greatest golf courses—sometimes with colleagues in the chamber, although the less said about that on the record the better. I will make two points that are vaguely connected to my constituency of Shetland. One is on widening participation, which the minister and others rightly talked about. For someone such as me, who represents a rural constituency—in my case, the islands—widening participation is about how we get the best, brightest and most able kids to sporting events in the first place. We can compete ably against Orkney. My good friend and colleague, Liam McArthur, is not here so I will not embarrass him by saying how frequently we beat Orkney at swimming and athletics, and, as we will next week, football. I have an ulterior motive in saying that, as my son will play in central midfield in that game. However, apart from that, when our impressive young men and women want to compete nationally, they face challenges of distance, money and the need to take their mum or dad with them to those sporting events, whether they are held in Glasgow or in other parts of Scotland. Just the other day, Amy Harper from Gulberwick, a district of Shetland, took part in the east district open at the Tollcross leisure centre in Glasgow and won a variety of swimming events—notably the 50m freestyle, which she won in a time that qualified her to travel to Sheffield to take part in the ASA national championships. That is a pretty serious and notable achievement for a young Shetlander. Similarly, the other week, triathlete Lynsey Henderson took part in the British championships down in Leicestershire, which was a qualifier event for the 2011 world championships in Beijing and the 2012 European championships in Israel. We also have three fencers from Shetland in the top 50 in Britain. That is to name but a few. Members throughout the chamber will have constituents who would make the same case. All that I ask of the minister is that she consider how we can best ensure that young athletes of whatever sporting discipline can compete. I have had that discussion with sportscotland and some of the governing bodies, but the minister has more power than I have to ask those bodies to give those young people the chance to compete and become the Olympic or Commonwealth athletes that we want them to become. I finish with the point that the minister made about rugby. There is a strong case for BBC Scotland taking rugby more seriously and broadcasting it. The Welsh Rugby Union receives £4 million from BBC Wales. I am sure that the minister has had the same discussion that I have had with the Scottish Rugby Union at Murrayfield about the importance of that support. Given that STV does its bit, there is an onus on BBC Scotland to do its bit, too. The other morning, on “Good Morning Scotland”, was there any coverage of the rugby sevens at Murrayfield? No—no coverage at all. BBC Scotland needs to do a bit more, given what STV already does.

3. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2980)

As happened eight years ago, the parliamentary session ends with men and women from our armed forces in conflict. This time, however, the war is not illegal but is based on a United Nations Security Council resolution. That is the difference between what is happening now and the illegal war in Iraq that the previous Labour Government prosecuted, which split the nation. This week, the First Minister issued a Government statement on Libya. Will he tell us his position on the Scottish military bases?

I support those words on the legality of the current position and I will continue to make that case. There is broad cross-party agreement about the importance to Scotland of our soldiers, sailors and air crew, and about the military and support jobs that are important to many Scottish communities. The First Minister will know that a Royal Navy Trafalgar-class submarine has launched cruise missiles at anti-aircraft defences in Libya this week. Trafalgar submarines and their successor Astute-class submarines are to be based in Scotland, at Faslane. Does the First Minister welcome and support those submarines and all the associated jobs being based on the Clyde?

I, too, support the motion on behalf of my party. As one former sheep farmer to another, I say that I have appreciated Mr Fergusson’s management of our parliamentary flock—which has not been the easiest of tasks, not least today. I suspect that, when you have lunch with our distinguished visitors who are in the VIP gallery, explaining today’s behaviour will be an interesting exercise in studies of politics. [Laughter.] I also acknowledge the roles of your deputies, Alasdair Morgan and Trish Godman, and all that they have done for us, not just in the past four years, but in their 12 years in the Scottish Parliament. We have shared many exciting parliamentary moments and they have undoubtedly added to our deliberations and thoughts. [Applause.] I thank our Presiding Officer for his work not only in Scotland and in our Parliament, but internationally. He has led many of us on international visits on international occasions, and he has done that with great distinction and value. That has been helpful both to our Parliament and to the way in which we present our case around the world. That is a valuable role that all Presiding Officers play, and Alex Fergusson has played it with considerable skill and determination. I recall a fact-finding visit that he and I went on to Bergen some years ago, when he was convener of the Rural Development Committee, on which we were accompanied by Robin Harper. Robin was—if I remember correctly—wearing the same tie. [Laughter.] We were looking at salmon farming. There is a picture on my office wall of a number of us from different parties standing at the top of the funicular railway on the mountain in Bergen. We look incredibly cheerful but I cannot remember why—and I do not really want to remember why. Along with the other party leaders, I express my best wishes for all the members who are leaving the Parliament, although not politics, at this time. From the Liberal Democrat benches, the loss of Jamie Stone, of a former Deputy First Minister in Nicol Stephen, and of John Farquhar Munro will be keenly felt. John Farquhar Munro’s leaving will be felt not least because I will no longer have to ask my press secretary what John Farquhar Munro said on Gaelic radio the night before, which will be a relief. [Laughter.] I would like to share an observation. Mr Fergusson is standing for Parliament again. I believe that we should not have too many conventions in a young Parliament and the breaking of convention to ensure that a Presiding Officer can leave that post and stand again for his or her party is an important step, which is good to see. I look forward to an exciting battle in his constituency, in which the Liberal Democrats will do very well. I also commend your accessibility to members, Presiding Officer. Being around and always available in his or her parliament is perhaps the most important part of the job of a Presiding Officer. Your availability to members, on the purchase of a judicious glass of red wine in the parliamentary bar, in order to explain your decisions has been one of the most important parts—possibly not the wine, but the other part—of your job. For that and for many other reasons that other members have eloquently described, I thank you for all that you have done. [Applause.]

3. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2947)

Does the First Minister accept that the most recent reorganisation of Scottish local government cost between £375 million and £720 million? Does he also accept that the previous UK Government, to its credit, abandoned an enormous reorganisation of the police in England because it would have cost at least £400 million? The First Minister said today that he wants decisions on the police and other matters to be based on evidence. If he questions those figures, when will he publish his own?

My argument is that the Government must have a case that is based on evidence, and it has not produced any. The real question is why the Government cannot produce any figures to support its own consultation. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice promised them in January and again in February. Two weeks ago, the First Minister told me that they would be published “shortly”. The Parliament could have been given the figures today, but no. The chief constable of Lothian and Borders Police says that the consultation that the Government is responsible for is “inaccurate and potentially misleading”. The First Minister is going to the councillors conference this afternoon. They will have to pay for any changes. If he will not tell the Parliament how expensive his plans will be, will he tell local government? Why is he withholding that evidence?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2934)

The Parliament’s Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has produced a strong report that says that the quangos Scottish Enterprise and Skills Development Scotland are not working. The report says that there is clutter and confusion. Scotland’s economy needs to grow, so what is the First Minister’s response to the widespread concerns about that clutter and confusion?

Our freedom of information requests show that, in the past year, Skills Development Scotland and Scottish Enterprise spent another £4.5 million on public relations consultants and marketing. However, the committee’s report says that people still do not know what Skills Development Scotland is supposed to do, and it does not even seem to have responsibility for the Government’s skills strategy. Does the First Minister think that the agencies should spend even more money on advertising next year to get their message across, or is it time for different choices? Would not the £4.5 million have been better invested in an exports plan to drive an export-based recovery or in an internship programme with Scottish employers so that young graduates could get their careers started? Would those not be better solutions for Scotland?

3. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2915)

This morning’s audit report on the First Minister’s local police force says that Grampian Police “has a track record of strong financial management and ... has reported efficiency savings in excess of targets.” When do ministers plan to publish the costs of their national police force?

I think that the figures will not be available until the end of this session of the Parliament. If the First Minister corrects me on that, I would be delighted to be so corrected. Why have ministers decided to ensure that they never have to answer a question on the numbers? They have left it too late to give an answer. Is the First Minister not aware that the last time the Government tried to take calculations to the national policing board, the numbers were thrown out by everyone from chief constables to local government? Does he not recognise that his national police force will cut local policing across Scotland? All bar one of our chief constables are against it. Why does the Government want to spend money that it does not have on a proposal that simply will not cut crime?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2899)

The national centre for excellence in traditional music, which is based at Plockton high school, provides many talented children with an opportunity to build a national and, indeed, international career in music. It is surely the embodiment of Scotland’s education system and the curriculum for excellence. It builds young people’s talents and skills and their belief that they are Scotland’s future. The centre opened in 2000 with direct Government funding, which was initially continued in 2007. A year later, Highland Council had to assume complete financial responsibility, and it now faces agonising budget decisions. Will the First Minister consider how best to fund the national centre for all? We all want to secure its future.

It is a big step for a 14-year-old to leave home, live in the Plockton school hostel and attend classes in a new place. Young people who make that decision show their commitment to Scotland’s traditional music. The First Minister’s Government is assisting in other local authority areas. For example, travel to the new Burns museum in Ayrshire is being supported by the Government, not just the local council, and Stirling Council, rightly, is not expected to pick up the cost of a makeover of the battle of Bannockburn site. Does the First Minister therefore accept that the national centre should be funded by the Government, Creative Scotland and the local authorities, such as Highland Council and Shetland Islands Council, that place children at Plockton to further their musical development and careers? Will he ensure that his Government now takes the lead in organising that financial package?

3. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2875)

Yesterday, the Scottish Government said that it would transfer social workers to the national health service under Government direction. The Government also plans to scrap local fire and police boards and to put them under Government direction. Council tax levels are directed nationally, school buildings have been given to a quango under ministerial control, and even local salt stocks for our roads are now decided nationally. Will the First Minister tell us whether there are any other areas of responsibility that he plans to remove from local government?

I thought that I was asking the questions, not being asked them. Surely, even after that question, the First Minister will concede that there is an element of chaos in the Government’s plans for elderly people. Yesterday, Lord Sutherland, who reviewed free personal care a couple of years ago, said: “The time for talking is over”, but in the same press release the Minister for Public Health and Sport announced the setting-up of a new group as a first step to beginning discussions. As we know, elderly people are still waiting for the care that they need, but today 38,000 social work staff who look after elderly people across Scotland cannot concentrate on their jobs because yesterday their futures were thrown into doubt by a footnote in a Government press release. When are those hard-working local staff going to get answers about their futures?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2859)

Last week, I informed the First Minister that the high pay bill for the public sector had increased by £53 million in just one year. Does he know what the bonus bill is for the same period?

That answer was utterly dreadful. It had nothing to do with the question that I asked. The First Minister’s answer needs to be clearer, because the bonuses were signed off by his Government—they are the First Minister’s bonuses. It was his policy that promised punitive action on high pay, so why have bonuses gone up by 50 per cent at Scottish Water, Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Prison Service? Bonuses are up to £48 million in the public sector and high pay is up £50 million. Will the First Minister tell us what has been cut to pay for his bonuses and high pay?

The Maritime and Coastguard Agency’s proposals to close coastguard stations are fundamentally flawed and should be withdrawn. The Braer oil tanker disaster, numerous maritime incidents around the coast of Shetland and today’s Tornado crash near Gairloch demonstrate the role that our coastguard stations play. I am in no doubt that the proposals will make local, national and international seas more dangerous. As a constituency member I have met local staff—watch staff and volunteer team leaders, just the other week—and union representatives at home in Shetland. The most recent of those meetings was on Tuesday, which was Up Helly Aa day at home. Lerwick’s guizer jarl, John Hunter, took time out of his rather busy day to sign the petition against closure, which now numbers some 5,000 signatures. Shetland is certainly united in supporting its coastguard station, and I reiterate my support for not only Shetland, but Stornoway. The case for both island stations to operate on a 24-hour basis is strong, and I very much support Alasdair Allan’s motion and his advocacy of the main arguments tonight. Just last Thursday, a Cunningsburgh fisherman was reported overdue. The Lerwick station was alerted that evening when the boat did not return. Local officers know local fishermen and other mariners, and if they do not know where a fisherman is likely to have gone, they will generally know who will. The Lerwick station will always be better placed than Aberdeen to know where to start searching, as they did last Thursday night, and where to send the lifeboat and the rescue helicopter. That is what happened: that search proves the overwhelming case, as other members have mentioned this evening, for a 24-hour co-ordinating local service. Last week’s search also made the case for the role played by local volunteer coastguards. Volunteers stress the importance of using their local knowledge to work with locally informed, full-time officers. That is at the heart of the current service on which so many people depend. That search also makes the case that, in Shetland—and in other areas, as Alasdair Allan pointed out at an earlier meeting—the coastguard is equally as important an emergency service as the police, fire and ambulance services and, I would argue, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution and other essential services. The local knowledge of Shetland staff is vital. They play an essential role in co-ordinating Shetland emergency planning and ensuring that it is a reality. That is what happened when the Braer went aground. The situation was managed by an emergency planning operation in the islands. That point is especially true, given the oil and gas developments that are happening to the west of Shetland and those that we have had in the North Sea for the whole of my life. Total, which is building a pipeline between Sullom Voe and the Laggan gas field, is so concerned that it has written to the Secretary of State for Transport, as has the Shetland fishing industry, which has expressed the same concerns. The MCA has failed to answer basic concerns about communications. When lightning struck Orkney earlier last year, many of the communication links to and within Shetland were entirely cut. Some say that that has a number of advantages for those of us who then escape the mobile phone, but the important point was that the local station could link up with its volunteers to provide cover on the emergency frequency. Needless to say, on that occasion, there was a local emergency and that cover was needed. How could an Aberdeen co-ordinating centre cope if its links to Shetland were cut? There is nothing in the consultation document that deals with the resilience of the communications system. Members have mentioned the length of coastline. To an extent, that is neither here nor there, but local stations know where the coastline runs to and they know all the inlets, voes and geos. As Alasdair Allan rightly said, different pronunciations of names can cause chaos if people do not understand where the places are. Scotland has well over half the UK’s coastline, and some of the most complex, so it needs full-time stations—of that there can be no doubt. The MCA has simply got the issue wrong. It should say so and withdraw these flawed proposals.

3. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2840)

Next week, the Parliament will debate the budget. I accept that choices will have to be made to allow any new spending. A year ago, I asked the First Minister about high pay in the public sector. What progress has his Government made since then?

A year ago, the First Minister told me that high pay had already been dealt with. We asked the same 160 public sector organisations how much they are spending to pay staff more than £100,000 per year. They told us that last year they spent £281 million and this year they are spending £334 million, so spending on high pay has gone up by £53 million in one year. I am puzzled because, although the SNP Government’s pay policy promised punitive action on high pay, spending is rising quickly. Does the First Minister still believe, as he has just said, that those who have the broadest shoulders should carry the biggest burden?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2820)

The Scottish Government has withdrawn all figures to support its assertion in favour of a national police force. Will the First Minister therefore guarantee to publish robust and validated new figures, which show the full cost of setting up a single police force, including costs of a new headquarters, enhanced redundancies and information technology?

I agree with the First Minister that it is an important debate, but he surely needs to accept that Labour's police reorganisation in England was cancelled because it was going to cost £500 million. Has he not read the papers on his own Scottish policing board? The Government's own Improvement Service said that "supporting evidence is caveated almost to the point of parody" and that "the analysis ... is an abuse of evidence". David Strang, the chief constable of Lothian and Borders Police, said that the figures in the draft proposal were "irresponsibly misleading and not supported by the evidence". As Mr Salmond knows, the chief constable in his area, Colin McKerracher, said there was not a "shred of evidence" to support a single police force. Is it normal for the First Minister's Government to make an assertion first and to look for the evidence afterwards? What evidence can he produce to show that his Government has the slightest clue about how much the centralisation will cost?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2802)

This morning's news of a serious accident on the A9 reminds us of the human tragedy that cold weather has the power to bring. Reports from Scotland's hospitals show that three times more people are suffering from broken and fractured bones from falls, which is putting the service under the same pressure as a single major emergency would. The report of the Scotland-wide Scottish salt group says that councils have requested the release of 20,000 tonnes of the 25,000 tonne strategic stockpile. Is the Government directing which parts of Scotland are given priority?

I am grateful for that, and I would be grateful if the First Minister could make the information available to all members about the councils that are receiving grit and those to which it is being directed.  As the cold temperatures continue, does the First Minister recognise that thousands of people in all parts of Scotland are worried about the heating oil supplies? What assurance can he give about that? What action can be taken to help people who are not on the official list of vulnerable people but who are on the verge of having no heating on Christmas day? How can people get on to the list of vulnerable customers? Does it include families with new-born children? What should people do if they are not on the list of the vulnerable but they still have no oil for their heating?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2783)

As temperatures plunge again, is the First Minister aware that four in 10 Scottish householders, especially older people, are worried about the cost of heating their homes this winter and another third are already struggling with their bills? As people face eye-watering hikes in their heating bills, will he tell me how much his Government will spend on the home insulation scheme and the energy assistance package?

Does the First Minister recognise that the average household energy bill is more than £1,200—nearly double the bills that people were paying five years ago? Four of the big six energy companies have announced price rises averaging 6 per cent, double and treble the rate of inflation. That energy cartel is blaming a 25 per cent rise in wholesale gas prices since the spring but, as the First Minister knows, the big falls in wholesale prices before May were never passed on to customers. Is this market not rigged? Is it not big business versus the consumer? The First Minister knows that the energy regulator, the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, is investigating the prices that all of us pay. It says that energy companies have increased their profit margins from £65 to £90 on every home—[ Interruption .]

Will the First Minister prepare evidence to give to Ofgem about the extra costs that Scottish households are facing?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2764)

I am sure that the First Minister now appreciates the frustration and anger of  hundreds of Scottish motorists and truck drivers who have been trapped for long periods in snow and ice on central Scotland’s road network this week. Scottish drivers expect him to learn what went wrong and to know that his Government is putting it right.  Yesterday morning, the First Minister said on Radio Scotland that the “forecast ... told us it would be a normal winter day in Scotland”. Why has the Met Office stated that it gave his Government further updated and more severe weather warnings on Sunday evening? He has just stated that his Government received severe weather warnings at 8.40 and 8.49 on Sunday evening. Why did the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change’s statement to the Parliament yesterday not include those significant facts?

Members had an expectation that we would be told those figures and that they would have the information that has now come out about the Sunday evening weather warnings. Does not the First Minister appreciate that the forecasters were trying to do their best to help the Government and motorists with accurate forecasts? Alex Hill from the Met Office said:  “The forecast was right in timing, the forecast was right in location and we upped the amounts as we went through the entire period ... We got the information to them.” Is it not clear that the Government received a great deal more information about severe weather the evening before it hit Scotland than it has said until now? Should not the Government’s contingency planning have ensured that those warnings became clear, unambiguous motoring advice overnight on Sunday and early on Monday not to travel in central Scotland? So that Scottish motorists know for next week, when winter weather is set to return, how deep does forecast snow have to be before the Government will act on a severe weather warning?

The First Minister was a little unfair on colleagues from across the parties who are not in the chamber today. Their not being here says rather more about the transport system of Scotland than about anything that we are debating this morning. Scotland has had 10 years and more of devolution—10 years and more of its own Parliament. Even in a week when our current Government has struggled with snow, weather forecasts and the First Minister’s Christmas card, it is right to look ahead. The Scotland Bill is an important step forward. It will improve the next session of Parliament and the one after that. MSPs will be more accountable to the people of Scotland and to individuals, organisations and Scottish business. The bill will strengthen Scottish democracy for the future. Surely that is good. I watched, as I am sure other members did, the First Minister attack the bill on its launch, and we have heard him do that again in the chamber today. There is a taxpayer-funded party political broadcast on the Scottish Government website that explains the SNP position. The nationalists say that they welcome the bill, but—as the First Minister showed again in the chamber today—they speak against it. The nationalists should support improving the accountability of our Parliament and MSPs’ accountability to the people of Scotland. I believe that members of our current Government never thought that they would see this day—the day when the majority parties in Scotland put Scotland first by working together, creating proposals for reform and change, producing a bill and now enacting legislation.

I would always want to go further. The Steel commission that my party worked on was our contribution to the debate—a debate that was had among all the other parties. I wish that the Scottish National Party had played a role in it, as well. I hope that we all come up with a set of proposals that can be made to the Scottish Parliament and Westminster Parliament in the  coming days. As for Mr Salmond’s £8 billion figure, I do not recognise the numbers. As others have commented, if he can substantiate the numbers for the independent committee of the Parliament that will consider the matter, then that will be fair and good. That will be the proper test of the figures—

The First Minister can say “Ah!” as much as he likes, but that is how Parliament should properly do such things. We now have a UK Government whose ministers appear regularly in front of this Parliament’s committees to be cross-examined. That is a big step forward. We have a legislature in Scotland where the Parliament establishes the scrutiny bill committee and the debate is initiated not by the Government but the majority parties working together in Scotland’s interests. I say in passing, Presiding Officer: that is what people expect us to do now and again. We do not do it often enough. I am as guilty of that as anyone, in that sense. The final ignominy for the nationalists was that the Scotland Bill was launched on St Andrews day—a day that they have tried to say is just theirs. Thankfully, Scotland is bigger and better than that. My nation is no marketing product for one party—it is the country that all of us believe in, care for and passionately want to succeed. If Mr Salmond’s party would ever concede that, the Parliament would be a far better place. The Scotland Bill is not a panacea for all the challenges that Scotland faces. Many of the key responsibilities are already here and have been since 1999, but some are not. I genuinely look forward to a finance minister introducing a budget in which he or she must set out the tax rates that Scotland will have and why, with no more blame game—a little less of it, anyway—but a real debate in our Parliament here in Scotland about the right spending levels, about the taxes that are necessary to raise the money for schools, hospitals and possibly snow-clearing equipment, about a competitive business environment, about corporate headquarters and about new and dynamic industries that will create jobs. A decade on from that extraordinary day in 1999, which many of us still hold dear, the time was right for us to review our proceedings and the powers that we exercise on behalf of the Scottish people. The world moves on around us. I will give the chamber three examples. Last year, 103 Bentleys worth £200,000-plus were sold in Russia; a decade ago, none was sold there. In 2000, there were 22 million internet users in China; today the figure is 420 million and rising. Over the past 10 years, Indonesia’s CO2 emissions have risen from 267 million metric tonnes to 434 million metric tonnes—and rising. The last example illustrates the enduring challenge of climate change that must be confronted. The same is true of our challenges. This week’s Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development report on our education system must be a wake-up call that all of us should hear. Another challenge is the enormous impact of cancer on so many Scots: a family that is near and dear to me confronts that spectre every minute, every hour and every day. There is also a need to create jobs and to build a more entrepreneurial Scotland in which starting businesses and taking risks are supported and encouraged. We have responsibility for those issues. The big challenge is how we deliver effective public services to meet the needs of the people whom we serve. It is less about the Christie commission and more about local control versus central diktat. For Liberal Democrat members and, I suspect, for members of many other parties that are represented in the chamber, the approach should be about local control and ownership—what was once fashionably described as subsidiarity. For others, the instinct is to centralise. In their view, big is best and central Government is always the answer. That is an entirely healthy debate to have here in Scotland. We should and shall have it. The debate is here now, before the Scotland Bill becomes an act. The new ministers whom the Parliament will choose next May will have significant responsibilities. A responsible administration will be able to take on the challenges that I have described. A new Scottish Government must build with the UK Government a new relationship that benefits Scotland. Mr Salmond’s attacks on the previous and present UK Governments do not help Scotland or the Scottish people. All of us can play the “I’m standing up for Scotland better than you” game, but our politics will grow up when we aspire to, want and do rather better than that. A new Scottish Government will be able to use the commitment that immigration policy should reflect Scottish skills and demographic needs. The oil and gas industry is making a strong case for greater flexibility, so that men and women who make the developments in the North Sea and west of Shetland happen can work out of Aberdeen, Shetland, the Highlands or other parts of Scotland. No nationalist rant helps that vital, massive Scottish industry, but solid Scottish and UK Government work can. That is what we need for Scottish jobs. A new Government for Scotland will be able to use the new capital borrowing powers to develop the transport infrastructure that Scotland needs, borrowing from the national loans fund or the  private sector, if that is the best way of getting things moving. It will be able to consider how best to tackle environmental taxation in Scotland—through a landfill tax or by taking another approach that is more suitable to our country’s needs. A new Government will be able to use the powers that the bill will provide. A cross-party committee will scrutinise the bill. Robert Brown, who has kept me right on matters constitutional for more years than he cares to remember, will serve on the committee for the Liberal Democrats. Scrutiny should be vigorous and fair. I commend all the parties, including the SNP, on nominating solid and able parliamentarians to do that work. I acknowledge the role of Wendy Alexander, Annabel Goldie and my good friend Nicol Stephen in initiating the bill that we are debating today. Of course it was a response to political events, but what they started became the Calman commission, was taken forward by the previous UK Government and will be made law by the present UK Government. The bill is real and will change Scotland, our Parliament and our people’s involvement in the decisions that we make. That is good and it is worth having. That is why Parliament should back the motion today.

The single variable rate. What about that?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2749)

The First Minister will know that, this morning, the United Kingdom Government announced that there is to be a review of how transport operators are coping with the weather, which will report before Christmas. The weather was forecast—operators who are responsible for roads, railways and runways knew that snow was coming and that it would last. What action is the Government taking to consider how ready Scotland is to keep people, goods and emergency services moving?

Aberdeen and Dundee airports in the east of Scotland are open. They have had constant snow in recent days, but to the operators' credit they are open. The Highlands and Islands airports, which are owned by the Government, are—to its credit—also open. Scots fly to Oslo, Stockholm and Amsterdam in winter, and those airports are geared up for snow. Edinburgh airport, however, spends millions on drop-off charging lanes and ever more shops, but not enough on essential equipment. The First Minister's Government is pushing Scotland as a winter fun destination. That is good for tourism, the economy and jobs, but not if visitors cannot get here. What will the Government do to ensure that all Scotland's airports have appropriate winter contingency plans? Would not the best thing for Scotland be a capital city airport that operates 365 days a year and which invests in essential equipment—and especially in hard-working staff—to make that happen?

I agree with the minister's sentiment, but does he recognise that the concern of the pelagic industry in his constituency and in mine is that the Faroese are asking for double the percentage allocation that they had under the agreement that was in place before? That is surely not acceptable.

I am a bit surprised that so many members think that these debates are the same every year. They are not; that is the whole point. There is always something different going on—

There is that, but it is probably not a good thing. This year, Richard Lochhead is dealing with mackerel negotiations and something is going on with different management techniques. There is always something different. Therefore, while we may all be disappointed in a sense, the great thing about fisheries debates is there is always something new. However, I remember the speech that Robin Harper made in the winter of 1999—I think that he mentioned technology creep then, too. In fairness to him, he has gone on about that bit of jargon, which my good friend Mr Finnie had to deal with, for some considerable time. Many colleagues have made broad mention of the economic viability and importance of the industry. Some important things are happening in that regard. The Marine Stewardship Council's accreditation of many species is a positive step forward for different parts of our fishing and coastal communities. However, rising fuel prices and the employment statistics that were cited by Jim Hume and other members highlight how tricky the situation is. I will concentrate on the point that Dave Thompson, Alasdair Allan, John Scott and others have raised: the management of fisheries, whether on the west coast, the east coast or the North Sea. Colleagues from the different parts of Scotland have touched on their area. Dave Thompson called the 2009 management measures unfair. However, as the Scottish Fishermen's Federation's Bertie Armstrong, who has been much quoted today, and many other representative fishing organisations have made clear, those measures highlight why the changes that are being proposed build on what is already not working. That cannot be the best way forward. I think that we are all making a broadly similar point to the cabinet secretary on the pilots that he  has been running. I hope that he will define what is a successful pilot—what is working, as opposed to the many problems that are being brought to all members who represent fishing constituencies. As many have said, the issue of catch quotas is difficult. Bertie Armstrong said in the Fishing News this week: "Any suggestion that catch quotas are a single fix for the economic woes of the Scottish white-fish sector is wrong." I am sure that the cabinet secretary knows and believes that. That is why it is so important that catch quotas are not seen as a panacea for everything. I do not want to misquote Maureen Watt, but I think that she said that catch quotas are a win-win and that enforcing control measures is the right way forward. However, on 11 November 2009, when Maureen Watt's committee was taking evidence before the fisheries discussions last year, Bertie Armstrong said: "my main fear is that it could be the perfect control measure. If the perfect control measure is added to a very imperfect system, the impetus for changing the system is removed—we might simply screw down participants to the imperfect system."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, 11 November 2009; c 2079.] That is the central point of fisheries management, whether under Mr Finnie or Mr Lochhead. That is the difficulty that we all face. We must be alive to that in proposing any changes. I therefore hope that catch quotas, as they are currently proposed, are not what is taken to Brussels this year. I simply do not believe that they will make the future of our industry any better, nor will they end discards, as Robin Harper rightly said, given their current format. Ending discards is a shared agenda across all political parties that we all seek to achieve. I will finish with some questions that I hope the cabinet secretary will deal with. He mentioned his officials in Bergen. Does he recognise that many fishermen and, indeed, scientists are concerned about the current system whereby all his compliance, management and science officials are in the same organisation—Marine Scotland? Trust, which is the basis of the relationship between skippers and boats and those who manage the operation, is not all that it should be. Some consideration needs to be given to that. Will he update Parliament on progress towards what is euphemistically called the licence parking scheme? What impact does he expect the scheme to have on catching opportunities? Crucially, will funding remain in our fishing communities or will it in some cases return to the banks to deal with bank debt? This looks a very difficult year. I hope that the cabinet secretary can achieve much in December.  He must be very clear about the basis on which he is negotiating.

Liam McArthur is snowbound. There is no problem in Kirkwall or Sumburgh—it is the central belt airports that seem to be struggling with winter. As a result, though, I have the pleasure of contributing briefly to this debate and moving Mr McArthur's amendment. Given that fishing is worth a couple of hundred million pounds to my Shetland constituency and employs hundreds of people, no December for me is free of the agonising wait for the outcome of the EU fisheries council. In that sense, I want to highlight two points to the cabinet secretary. First, on the international mackerel talks that will resume next week, Iceland has, as he has pointed out, acted quite wrongly in prosecuting a fishery for which there is no agreed quota, to the detriment of the Scottish fleet. I understand that the Faroes is now demanding double its agreed 4.6 per cent allocation and I ask, and indeed expect, the cabinet secretary to confirm that there is no way that his Government will sign off any such figure. This very morning, the industry told me of its worries about the Scottish negotiating position and the precise percentage that is being considered. Pelagic boats from Shetland to Peterhead and Fraserburgh expect the Government to stand on their side, as do I and this Parliament, and there can be no deal that rewards Iceland and the Faroes for their irresponsible behaviour. Indeed, I recall that when the cabinet secretary's predecessor was involved in similar international discussions and negotiations over fishing stocks, Mr Lochhead constantly used the word "betrayal". It is obviously a case of what's good for the goose. Secondly, on the 2011 fishing opportunities for Scotland's white-fish boats, the cabinet secretary rightly mentioned the second round of EU-Norway negotiations, which got under way today in Bergen. The prospect for Scotland's white-fish fleet gives greatest cause for concern, and boats, processors and shore-side businesses face a truly awful 2011 if the European Commission's quota proposals are agreed. Like Karen Gillon, I find the cabinet secretary's tone somewhat different and  more encouraging than it was during his many years in opposition but, as he will certainly understand, at this stage any quota reduction is simply a negotiation or, as the Commission sees it, an opening gambit. Is he able to outline to Parliament the areas where he will argue for change and what those changes will be? Will the cabinet secretary also allay fears heightened by Commissioner Damanaki's comments last month about the Commission's scepticism over the Scottish Government's policy of introducing a new initiative every year? Fishing skippers around Scotland have pointed out that our boats have had conservation credits, cod avoidance trawls, on-board closed-circuit television and now catch quotas, each of which has been cited as a panacea for the industry's future. However, as John Scott rightly observed, 41 more Scottish boats are being decommissioned. Many skippers have asked me why, if these policies are working, we are losing men, boats and experience from the Scottish industry. If I understand him correctly, the cabinet secretary's Government is now basing its 2011 fisheries policy on catch quotas. He is right that we should tackle discards, but we say no to a so-called perfect fisheries control system that locks down an imperfect management regime. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation has said that without a fundamental overhaul of the single-species approach to mixed fisheries, catch quotas amount to a "suicide pill". I agree and I hope that the cabinet secretary does as well. Most of the 17 boats involved in the catch quota trial this year are now fishing only by renting extra quota. The system is not flexible and it cannot cope with in-year changes. The industry has also told me that it will not reduce costs to skippers and boats. Therefore, it must be reconsidered. That is why our amendment states that the catch quota proposals can be progressed only with full and active consultation with Scottish skippers and boats. The industry is concerned that Government policy is a one-trick pony—or possibly a one-net boat. Mr Lochhead rightly used to condemn the former European commissioner Franz Fischler for his obsession with cod, but the industry believes that Mr Lochhead is in danger of making exactly the same mistake. I urge him to drop the proposals unless he can change the management system. He and I agree that that system does not work. This year looks tough for Scottish boats. I urge the minister to look at the proposals, drop those that cannot work and work with those that can.  I move amendment S3M-7498.2, to leave out from "and urges" to end and insert: "; expresses concern at the significant cuts to effort and quotas for key stocks being proposed by the European Commission; urges the Scottish Government to take forward its catch quota proposals only with the full and active involvement of the Scottish fishing industry at every stage, and calls on the European Commission to support these efforts to reduce wasteful discards."

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2732)

After all the smoke and mirrors this morning, will the First Minister, on behalf of his Government, now tell Parliament exactly what Mr Swinney apologised for—[ Interruption .]

Will the First Minister, on behalf of his Government, tell the Parliament exactly what Mr Swinney apologised for, given the entire motion that the Parliament passed last night?

Parliament is asking Mr Salmond about things that he is responsible for, not other things. He has to decide how to repair the Government that he leads and for which he is responsible. Mr Salmond let his own independent budget review experts believe that "There is no reason, in principle, why the Scottish variable rate of income tax ... could not be used". Mr Salmond's Government implied in this chamber last week that it had considered whether to use the tax power from next April even though it knew  that it could not. Mr Salmond's finance secretary told Mr Harvie in that debate: "I do not think that there is a compelling argument in favour of using the tax-varying powers at this time."— [ Official Report , 17 November 2010; c 30477.]  Why does Mr Salmond not understand that Parliament passed a motion last night condemning his Government for misleading Parliament? Will he now refer that matter to his independent advisers on the ministerial code—the former Presiding Officers?

So it is okay then.

When this nationalist Government is in a hole, two things happen, as we have seen before. The SNP dissembles, shouts, screams, throws mud, makes it up and blames anyone else it can. Then it wheels out Alex Neil. I had thought that ministers had to behave, but not any more—not after last night. There is only one more step that the SNP can take: Mike Russell will be next. This morning, we were treated to the SNP's spin to the broadcasters. We were told that the nation would receive contrition about the process, not an apology. Today, we got no apology. We were told that the cabinet secretary could not tell us, because it would have meant putting the matter into the political sphere. The SNP did not want to put something into politics—what a joke that is! The facts of this disgraceful episode are simple, and they show either SNP deceit or incompetence. The first fact is that the Parliament was given the power to vary income tax by the people of Scotland in a vote. That power was given not to a party, a minority Government, a First Minister, or a finance secretary but to the Parliament. Mr  Swinney's speech today showed that he does not seem to get that point. Fact: there is a cost to retaining the mechanism to allow the tax-varying power to be exercised, and how much that is now is nothing more than a political slanging match on which Mr Swinney has poured smoke, smoke and more smoke. The point that matters is that the SNP has stopped that constitutional power being used not only now but by the new Government that will be elected next year. That was not the SNP's decision to make. Fact: at no stage since 2007 have Mr Swinney or any of his ministerial colleagues—most certainly not Mr Salmond—informed, debated or discussed the decision with Parliament. Was that deceit or incompetence? Fact: yesterday, Mr Swinney said that MSPs were "too busy" to be told about that 2007 decision. Since 2007, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has had 110 separate opportunities to present his position. He has presented four budgets, published eight budget revisions, participated in 15 budget debates, made 24 appearances in front of the Finance Committee, and delivered 29 ministerial statements to the Parliament. There have also been a debate on strategic budget scrutiny, two debates on the strategic spending review, and six debates on the Scottish Government's programme. There has also been a debate on improving accountability, but he did not take part in that one—too busy? Too busy to find ways to explain the Government's decision to the Parliament. Was that deceit or incompetence? Fact: when it proposed the local income tax, the SNP Government said that it would use the tax-varying powers to make it happen. The Government statements on how LIT would be implemented misled the Parliament and any voter who supported LIT on that basis. At no time when they were explaining why the SNP had dropped LIT did Mr Salmond or Mr Swinney explain that they could not implement it because the tax-varying power could not be used. On the day of the ditch, Mr Salmond looked me in the eye at the back of the chamber and explained why local income tax was being dropped. As always, Mr Salmond did not give the truth that day. Was that deceit or incompetence?

Fact: before the budget debate that was held exactly a week ago, the finance secretary's budget document said: "Our opportunities to vary taxes are limited to the Scottish Variable Rate, which no Scottish administration has chosen to use since Devolution, and some discretion  over non-domestic rates. We confirm that we will not use the Scottish Variable Rate power". When addressing the Parliament last Wednesday, the finance secretary implied that he had considered using the tax-varying power and dismissed it. If that is not misleading the Parliament, what the heck is? Was that deceit or incompetence? Are the Parliament's tax powers available to use? No. Was the Parliament told that in 2007, 2008, 2009 or this year? No. Can the local income tax be implemented? No. Has Parliament been misled? Yes. Has the finance secretary had 110 separate occasions to tell us what is going on? Yes. Has a minority nationalist Government misled the Parliament? Yes. Has the SNP treated with contempt the people of Scotland, who gave the power to the Parliament? Yes. Although Mr Swinney is put up today, the blame for this is not his alone. It sits next to him. We have had one sanctimonious lecture after another—[ Interruption .]

We have had one sanctimonious lecture after another from Alex Salmond on the respect agenda. Today defines Mr Salmond's respect for the Scottish people and the Parliament. Respect is something that one earns. No one will respect Mr Salmond again on the constitution, on Scotland's future and on the government of our country. After the way in which his Government has handled local income tax and after his finance secretary's speech a week ago, Mr Salmond expects to pass a budget and negotiate with other parties. There is no one else to blame. This is the Salmond Government, and it has shown its true colours today. What Mr Salmond and his Government have failed to do today is explain whether all this is mess, deceit or incompetence. Deceit and incompetence are the two words for which his Government will now be known. Respect? Not a chance. Imagine for a moment what would have happened if the nationalists had been in opposition. What would they have said about a Government giving up powers that people had given to Parliament? Many would have howled, full moon or not. Some would have shed tears. A few ambitious back benchers might have gone on hunger strike until the powers were returned. These are the people who make a constitutional crisis out of the museum that houses the Lewis chessmen, yet the SNP signs away the choices and powers of Scotland's Parliament. The wishes of 1.5 million Scots are discarded without a murmur. Some respect, that.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2710)

On Sunday, the Scottish National Party in Glasgow criticised the city's council for having the wrong priorities. Mr Salmond's party said that it was simply unacceptable that the council was increasing wages for those earning more than £80,000 a year. It said that that was financial incompetence. Does the First Minister agree with all that?

The First Minister needs to make sure that what is right for Glasgow on Sunday is good for the rest of the country on Thursday. I have here figures that show that, across Scotland in the past year, public bodies have taken on hundreds of new people who are paid more than £80,000 a year. The total increase in high pay in just one year is £33 million. I want a cut in the top pay in the public sector, to save money and to invest in jobs. Last January, I agreed with the First Minister when he said "those with the broadest shoulders should bear the heaviest burden".— [ Official Report , 21 January 2010; c 23007.]  That was okay for Glasgow on Sunday; is it right for the rest of his Government now?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2684)

NHS Education for Scotland is a quango that is responsible for training doctors and nurses in Scotland. Was it really a good idea for eight people to be sent to a conference in Miami in May?

I do not think that I did. The issue is what NES has been up to in this case. Six of the eight Scottish delegates to the conference in Miami were paid for by that NHS quango, but the other two were paid for directly by the Scottish Government at St Andrew's house. These are difficult financial times, and everyone else in Scotland knows that every penny has to be watched carefully, yet NES does not even know how much it costs to send all those people abroad, and it reacts to criticism by wanting to recruit more spin doctors to explain it all away. When will the Government get a grip on its responsibilities and tackle the foreign junkets, the spin machine and the obstruction of public accountability that we can see right before us?

That is the First Minister's standard answer to anything that I ever say in the chamber. I asked about the First Minister's performance and about his Government. The only thing that changes about Mr Salmond is the excuses, which get longer.

It is your scheme.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2672)

One of the issues that could be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Cabinet is the Government's responsibility for ferry services around Scotland. When the Scottish National Party was in opposition, it promised to cut quickly a pragmatic deal to give the people of Dunoon the ferry service that they need. Five years later, the people of Dunoon are still waiting. How long will they wait?

I am not asking for more money; I am asking the Government to do what it is meant to do. The new ferry contract must be in place by the end of next June, otherwise the directors of the existing service will find themselves forced by the Scottish Government to risk huge penalties. They may decide to cancel the ferry, so local people who were promised action by the SNP will have no ferry on that route. The truth is that the SNP has no intention of getting the tender out before next year's elections. It will put the ferry service at risk and leave local people in the lurch. We have had four years of the SNP doing absolutely nothing. What is more important to the SNP—securing that ferry service for local people or manipulating the whole process for electoral advantage?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2639)

The SNP has promised to cut senior managers in the health service over the next four years. Can the First Minister explain how much senior non-clinician pay has increased in Scotland since that sunny day in 2007 when he became First Minister?

None of that was an answer to the question that I asked. The accounts of Scotland's health boards show that in 2007, the number of non-clinical staff who  earned more than £50,000 a year was 617. Today, it is 1,790. Alex Salmond's army of NHS managers who earn more than £50,000 a year now numbers 1,790. The total pay bill then was £34 million. Now, it is £104 million. Pay is three times higher under the SNP and the number of health board managers has trebled. How has all that happened?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2619)

I entirely endorse those words and support the theme of the First Minister's acknowledgement of the Lord Advocate's contribution to her role in our judicial system. Today Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary said that the number of police forces in Scotland should be cut. At the same time, the First Minister's Government has been interfering in chief constable appointments—slowing them down, creating obstacles and getting in the way. The Northern Constabulary is just one example of that. In July Mr Salmond's spokeswoman said: "We have no plans to move away from eight police forces but neither do we have a blueprint for policing in the future." Three months on, a bit nearer the future, does the Government have a blueprint for policing in Scotland?

That is a pretty clear illustration of what will happen if the Scottish National Party continues. I do not believe that having a single police force for Scotland will reduce crime or improve the detection of criminal activity.  On the First Minister's point about delivery, Northern Constabulary solves two thirds of crime in its area, while some areas do not manage to solve half of the crime in theirs. A single chief constable for Scotland would know that he or she owes their contract and their future entirely to the justice minister. It will be a highly political post and a highly political appointment. Such a police chief would never be out of the justice secretary's office, and would never be in the local communities that he or she should be serving. The conveners of the police boards for Northern Constabulary and Grampian Police are against the centralisation. The north, the north east and the south west will not be well served if the police force is centralised and run from Glasgow. The First Minister is also a north-east MSP. Will he today rule out a single police force for Scotland, which his local police board opposes?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2600)

The First Minister lost hundreds of thousands of pounds of taxpayers' money on the gathering, which was the flagship for homecoming 2009. More than 100 private businesses are in court trying to get their money back. Today, we find that one financial disaster was not enough for him. He was, and is, actively canvassing for a second event, using even more taxpayers' money. What reason is there for him to refuse to appear in front of Parliament's Public Audit Committee to answer questions about his role in the gathering and the shabby way in which he has treated those Scottish businesses?

I think that that meant that the First Minister is going to appear before the Parliament's Public Audit Committee. If that is the case, all members will welcome that. The first gathering event took a £180,000 loan from the Government and lost it, losing the money of 102 businesses; now we find that the First Minister wants to start a second gathering event with another £380,000 of taxpayers' money, before he has cleared up the mess from the first. When I asked the First Minister about the mess in June, he asked me: "how on earth could we have known ... that the company would become insolvent?"— [ Official Report , 24 June 2010; c 27719.]  He knows now, but he is still offering money for a repeat event. Now that he is prepared to meet the Public Audit Committee, will he also agree to meet the small businesses who have lost money and answer to them?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2578)

I acknowledge that the First Minister chaired a meeting last night on the Commonwealth games in Delhi and I recognise, as I am sure we all do, the delicate and difficult balance between the safety and security needs of Scotland's athletes and the enormous damage to the games if countries choose, for whatever reason, to boycott Delhi 2010. We all united to support Glasgow 2014. Is it not in Glasgow's interest that Team Scotland competes in India? Can the First Minister tell Parliament what officials are in Delhi to give up-to-the-minute reports that will allow Team Scotland to go?

I certainly understand the duty of care to athletes, but does the First Minister accept that he has an enormous task to help to build confidence in the Commonwealth games to ensure that 2014 is as big as it can be? Usain Bolt will not be competing in Delhi because the games come at the end of a long athletics season. Our own Andy Murray will not be at the inaugural Commonwealth games tennis competition because of a clash with the Shanghai open. Scotland's most successful Olympian, Chris Hoy, will not be taking part because the games clash with another championship that awards qualifying points for the Olympics. Given the need to avoid huge sporting events taking place at the same time, is it not important that the First Minister now speaks with the international sporting bodies to clear the way for Glasgow 2014 so that we can have the best athletes available in the biggest games possible?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2533)

Yesterday, the First Minister highlighted the importance of creating jobs in Scotland's renewable energy industry and gave a guarantee of 20,000 apprenticeships. Is the new course for wind turbine technicians at Carnegie College in Dunfermline one of those that is to be guaranteed?

"It wasnae me" did not last long there. [ Laughter .]

The German company Siemens has worked with Carnegie College to create the first-ever four-year wind energy technicians course. The company wants to triple the numbers every year and yet it is made to traipse between the Scottish Qualifications Authority, Skills Development Scotland, the responsible Government department and the Scottish funding council. On its website, the SNP says that the Government has created a "more streamlined service for the Scottish business community" and yet there is still the mess of four Government quangos and departments passing private industry from post to post. That needs to be sorted. The First Minister needs to cut that bureaucracy. If he does not, Siemens tells me that the apprentices will be trained in Wales or Yorkshire or it will import the skills from abroad. Fife Council saved the course this year. Will the First Minister ensure ministerial time to bang heads together and get the course guaranteed for the future?

The First Minister rightly began by paying tribute to Edwin Morgan. Bill Millin also passed away this summer. He was the 1st Special Service Brigade piper who waded ashore on Sword beach on 6 June 1944. His pipes sang as Scottish regiments stormed the Normandy coast to liberate Europe. It is said that in politics there is no greater responsibility of leadership than to commit men and women to armed conflict. That is still with us—the UK is still at war. That power does not reside here, but the consequences do. A Royal Regiment of Scotland soldier lost his life just days ago. We are with those Scottish families who have loved ones in Afghanistan. As this Parliament considers the final months of its third session, particularly in the week of the 70th anniversary of the blitz and its impact on Scotland, a moment of reflection and support for those who serve in the Royal Air Force, the Navy and the Army seems right.  The armed forces rely on Scotland for men and women. The shipyards of the Clyde and Fife are building the next generation of aircraft carriers, and many a mile of Scottish runway provides for the strategic needs of our air force. Scotland is core to the UK's military responsibilities and many jobs, businesses and people depend on it. At this time, jobs must surely be the main objective of Government, which is the Government for all of Scotland. After three and a half years of nationalism, we can no longer have a Government that puts party before country. I want a Government for our nation whose approach is to put Scotland, not the SNP, first. Just this morning, Mr Salmond told radio listeners that today was about building a mandate for his party, a comment that was surely based on positioning, tactics and narrow nationalist interest. Today, he has again shown himself to be interested in his own job, not in those of the thousands of Scots who are worried about theirs. Under this nationalist Government, economic growth has gone nowhere. Mr Salmond has talked the talk—he always does—but there has been no real change and no fundamental move away from a stark record that stretches back too long. Scotland's economic growth rate has lagged behind that of the rest of the UK by 0.5 per cent for 20 years. We have the lowest new business start-up rate and research and development investment ratio in the developed world and Scotland's productivity levels are 15 per cent below the average productivity levels of similarly sized and developed countries. No one can accept that. There is another situation that no one can accept. Last month, a Dingwall businessman showed me a list of the 16 local and national bodies that take a close interest in his work. He employs people who spend money in the Ross-shire economy. He could do more and create more if we in this Parliament could do our bit by slimming down the bureaucracy, paperwork and sheer time that people like him spend on keeping bureaucrats in Edinburgh, Inverness and all points in between in jobs. I see no legislation in the Government's programme that would do anything on that.

I will not, at this time. There are areas of the nationalists' programme that we very much support. The First Minister is absolutely right to push hard on new renewables businesses; we can lead the world if we get on with it. We can use Scotland's engineering and manufacturing base to drive that industry forward, and my desire is for the seabed revenues of the  Crown Estate to be used to develop it rather than hold it back. The Deputy First Minister is right to promote measures to tackle the harm that is caused by the destructive use of alcohol. She is absolutely right to push that issue but, in my view, she is wrong to concentrate on just one measure. I warmly welcome Mr Salmond's ditching of the unnecessary, costly and unwanted referendum on independence, but my welcome is but nothing in comparison with my utter amazement that his campaign for re-election next May is now to be based solely on independence. To say that Scotland would be in the land of milk and honey if only we were independent is typically bombastic in a way that only Mr Salmond can be, but now that he has pinned his saltire to that mast, so be it.

Let me finish this point. I strongly welcome a debate every day from this day about what independence would mean. Would there be less MRSA in Scotland's hospitals in an independent Scotland? What would interest rates be and who would set them in an independent Scotland? In a nation of 5 million people, would there still be 500 statisticians in an independent Scottish national health service, as there are now?

Indeed. I would suggest that the saltire is the flag of all of us and of no party.

I agree with Mr Swinney; the finance secretary and I are at one on that issue. I will certainly use my powers to promote that argument in the coming months. The list in relation to the independence argument is endless—it will happily keep us going until next May. On election day, people can vote for independence by voting SNP. They will not, but at least they can. There will be no more clever Salmond tactic of telling people that the SNP was somehow safe, when we now know that its policies were in no danger of being delivered. No—this time it is a classic high-wire, total risk, all  or nothing Salmond gamble. It is independence or opposition. The past few months have provided an object lesson in the SNP running away from the responsibilities of governing. The next few months will be dominated by money. Before the summer, the nationalists, backed by the full intellectual ability of the civil service, published detailed reports that set out the UK financial position to three decimal places to the year 2027. They are world experts on everyone else's budget. The Government chants about £4.8 billion of cuts, but in respect of its budget—its responsibility—there is no detail, precision or expertise. There are still no draft proposals, no response to the independent review and no Government motion on tomorrow's budget debate, yet every day people tell me about SNP cuts happening now—on police, teachers and nurses—and, in recent days, about the utterly cack-handed handling of ferries. Every public sector boss whom I have met this summer has told me that their budget is being cut. They have shown me the cuts that are being imposed by this Government now, but they are under nationalist orders: say nothing in public or there will be a heavy phone call from St Andrew's house—all from a Government that has boasted, as only our First Minister can, that it had successfully deferred the cuts. The point is simple. If the SNP has nothing to offer and if it cannot govern now, it is time that it got out of the way. Scotland needs a Government for all of Scotland, determined to build and strengthen Scotland. Above all, it needs a Government that will put the long-term interests of the nation ahead of the short-term interests of the SNP. That is what I want for our country. There is no doubt that the First Minister loves the trappings of office, but the responsibilities of Government? I am not so sure about that. Other members have mentioned the arc of prosperity. The First Minister has gone off on a tangent of prosperity; the answer is now Australia. It is the new arc. However, Alex Salmond should be careful what he wishes for. We have watched Australia these past few weeks: a failing leader replaced by an ambitious and talented female deputy on the eve of an election. Surely an ominous political lesson for our First Minister.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2516

Everyone now knows from the independent forecast how bad the public finances are. Even if the Scottish Government refuses to show any leadership on the issue, we all know that public money must be spent wisely. We have heard again today about a £180,000 loan for the gathering without adequate checks. Last month, I told Mr Salmond about the spending of £400,000 by Scottish Enterprise on novelty golf balls and corporate gifts, but he did not seem that bothered. As nursing posts are being cut across Scotland's health service, is it the best time for the Scottish Government to spend an extra £1.2 million on patient rights officers?

I am asking Mr Salmond about his budget and his spending right now. As health boards are cutting the number of nurses across Scotland, the Government is to provide £1 million for patient rights officers for a bill with no rights. Is not the Government standing its health priorities on their head? When the number of medical staff is cut, patients will worry that they cannot see a doctor or a nurse, not about whether they can meet a Government bureaucrat. Will the First Minister show some leadership today and put that £1 million into health for the treatment of patients?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2498)

The gathering issue is about the financial behaviour and accountability of the First Minister's Government. Can the First Minister confirm that The Gathering 2009 Ltd went bust with debts exceeding £0.75 million? Can he tell the Parliament how many Scottish businesses, including a major catering company in Perth, are still owed money? Some told me this morning that they have had to lay people off. Why, in particular, did the First Minister give the impression—or allow the impression to be given—to all the Scottish companies that were putting money into the event that their investment was safe and that his Government would pick up the tab?

Mr Salmond just never answers a question. I asked three simple questions, but he does not want to answer any of them. Let me try some other questions. When Mr Salmond's Scottish National Party Government authorised the £180,000, did ministers know that The Gathering 2009 Ltd was on the verge of bankruptcy? Did ministers ask whether the company was trading from an insolvent position?  Does the First Minister recognise that that is a criminal offence? Does he recognise that any private business trading insolvently would be investigated by the tax man and could face legal proceedings? Does he accept that many Scottish businesses that are still owed money want a full regulatory investigation into not only The Gathering 2009 Ltd, but the conduct of his Government? Will he ensure that that happens, or will he obstruct an independent investigation?

The First Minister is right about the public sector and Audit Scotland, but not about the private businesses throughout Scotland that are still in debt. Will he block an investigation by an independent regulatory body—HM Revenue and Customs or the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills in Whitehall—into why those private businesses are still in debt?

He knows why.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2478)

It is an important step for our Parliament, Presiding Officer, that you are hosting a meeting between committee conveners and the Secretary of State for Scotland today. From independent economic forecasts, everyone now knows how bad the public finances are. Labour's former Chief Secretary to the Treasury admitted that there was no money left so, in Scotland, we must spend taxpayers' money wisely. However, last week's Finance Committee report says that the SNP Government's budget planning is patchy and lacks urgency and leadership. Given that, is this the best time for Scottish Enterprise to advertise the contract that I am holding up to spend £400,000 on corporate-branded gifts? That is £400,000 of taxpayers'  money on golf balls, stress shapes, hip-flasks and mouse mats.

Let me try the question again. Would not the £400,000 of taxpayers' money to which I referred be better spent by Scottish Enterprise on helping the people who are losing their jobs? Yesterday's figures show unemployment still rising at double the rate of the rest of the country. People who have lost their jobs will be asking why the Government's priority is corporate gifts, not protecting jobs. Is it not time for the First Minister to get a grip on every line of Government spending? Last week, a report put Scotland bottom of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries for business start-ups, yet our main economic agency is spending time peddling contracts for novelty golf balls. That Scottish Enterprise tender deadline was yesterday lunch time. Will the First Minister show some leadership today, stop that £400,000 contract and make the priority jobs, jobs, jobs?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2459)

Last week, the First Minister wrote directly to the councillor who is in charge of education in each of Scotland's 32 local authorities. There were lots of issues that he could have raised, including school buildings, places for probationer teachers, the curriculum for excellence, strikes in the classroom, teacher training and his broken class-size promise. Will he tell Parliament today what his letter was about?

So, it is Dennis Canavan's fault. Despite all the problems in Scottish education, Alex Salmond says that that is the "important matter" that merits a letter from the First Minister. It turns out that the SNP Government has written to councils about the matter before, without much luck. The First Minister's letter says: "I was disappointed to discover ... only four authorities actually got back to us with their views". Only four education conveners out of 32 replied, even though 12 of those 32 are paid-up, card-carrying members of the SNP. Not even they think that the matter is important enough. When will the First Minister write to education conveners about education? Does he not believe that his priority is just wrong? In August, 54,000 children will start a new curriculum and Scottish schools are not ready. Teachers cannot get jobs.  Why does the First Minister think that it is more important to write about a holiday than it is to sort out what is happening in our classrooms?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2445)

First, I associate my party with the sentiments of the Parliament on the terrible events in Cumbria yesterday.  The First Minister announced the start of the Scottish Investment Bank in April 2009, to the Scottish Trades Union Congress. He announced it again in April 2010, once again to the STUC. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth was asked by the Parliament's Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee in May about money in the Scottish Investment Bank for businesses, and he said, "It is available now." Fourteen months after the first announcement, is it available now?

The problem is that all of that was true 14 months ago. On Tuesday this week, the First Minister said that it is urgent that small and medium-sized businesses are able to get loans, but on the same day, the finance secretary had to admit to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that his bank is not available for businesses to access at this time. Announcement follows announcement, but not one Scottish Investment Bank penny is being invested in Scottish business and jobs. Fourteen months after the Government announced the bank, there are at least another six months to wait before any money goes out the door, although jobs are being lost every month. A hundred jobs have been lost this week in Peter Scott & Co in Hawick, hundreds more have been lost in the Royal Bank of Scotland, 50 have been lost in Dumfriesshire, and  90 have been lost in Midlothian. Small businesses and the wider economy need an investment bank lending. Is not the project just another Scottish National Party vanity project that is long on publicity, but very short on delivery?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2425)

Today in Parliament, the Scottish National Party Government, backed by the Tories, is trying to limit the real change that Scotland needs in tackling climate change. Every other party—[ Laughter .]

Every other party—and Parliament's Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee—believes that this minority Government should aim higher, tackle climate change with more determination and make a real difference. Will the First Minister's Government accept that it needs to be on the side of real change in tackling environmental emissions? Will he change his Government's current position on that matter?

Mr Salmond is not responsible for the UK; he is responsible for policy in this Parliament. That is what I am asking about. This morning, climate change groups said that there is much more that can be done, with regard to energy, to tackle climate change. In 2004, the SNP said that an energy efficiency plan was urgent. Six years later, however, there is no such plan. In opposition, the SNP promised 3 per cent  annual reductions in emissions, so the half of 1 per cent that it proposes now that it is in government is not good enough. When that figure was rejected by the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee, the Government's response was just another half of 1 per cent. Is it not time to follow up Scotland's cross-party legislation on climate change with cross-party action every year that will tackle climate change? If the First Minister flies to the Maldives in October with 1 per cent, having promised 3 per cent, he will not be speaking for Scotland; he truly will be a minority. Does the First Minister acknowledge that his current measure is inadequate, and will he ensure that his ministers open the books and help all parties to build the approach that Scotland needs?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2407)

The United Kingdom Government's programme contains many proposals that can help Scotland and the Scottish economy and, above all, create Scottish jobs. They include action to get banks lending to Scottish businesses; support for marine renewable energy; the creation of an offshore electricity grid; action on rural fuel prices; the provision of superfast broadband for the whole of Britain, not just the cities; an income tax allowance of  £10,000; and a significant premium for disadvantaged pupils at school. Which of those proposals does the First Minister support for the Scottish economy and for Scottish jobs?

I agree that we always find things that are unsatisfactory, such as broken promises on class sizes, teacher numbers, grants for home buyers and the abolition of student debt. For all the First Minister's talk about the economy, he needs to explain why unemployment under the nationalist Government has been rising faster in Scotland than in the rest of Britain. Why does he not agree that getting banks to lend to viable businesses and supporting renewable energy, an offshore electricity grid and superfast broadband are good for Scottish jobs? Will he not accept the need to work with the UK Government on tackling the recession and creating the jobs in Scotland that we need?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2388)

Yesterday, a new United Kingdom Government was formed. The new Liberal Democrat Secretary of State for Scotland's first call was to the First Minister, and the new Government has already announced that the shameful and unacceptable detention of children at the Dungavel detention centre will end. Labour had 13 years in which to do that, yet, as its term in office ended in March, we saw reports of six-year-old children being taken in their school uniforms from their Glasgow school to Dungavel. Was that not a shameful end to a Labour Government? Does the First Minister agree that, with the ending of the detention of children at Dungavel, the right policy change for Scotland is being introduced by a UK Government?

It makes a nice change to be asked questions. I am more than happy to respond and I am sure that Mr Salmond will look forward to his meetings with the Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills. Figures suggest that more than 100 children were detained at Dungavel last year. That is a year after Labour said that it would stop the practice, which has been condemned by HM chief inspector of prisons in Scotland, Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People, Scotland's churches and members of Parliament on all sides. [ Interruption .]

Now that the UK Government policy is changing and children are no longer to be detained behind razor wire at Dungavel—Liberal Democrats in government having made that happen—will the First Minister ensure that Scottish agencies and councils are able to work with the UK Government to educate, support and accommodate children? Is he ready to work for that fundamental change?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2375)

Tomorrow, people will have the chance to vote for something different—to vote for real change with the Liberal Democrats. Whatever people decide, the Scottish Parliament must tackle the country's financial position responsibly. Last week, the SNP's London leader read out the usual SNP list of cuts but said that it was only a start. "This is where we want to start", he said. He went on: "Beyond that, there have to be savings: of course, there have to be savings." Last Thursday, the First Minister duly announced a programme of 2 per cent efficiency savings each year for the next three years. How will he ensure that the impact of his Government's savings will be fair?

I am grateful to the First Minister for confirming that those are his plans. It was his announcement last Thursday; it is his Government. There will be 2 per cent cuts, then 4 per cent, then 6 per cent in the next three years, if the SNP has its way. That will take £3.5 billion out of Scottish public services, schools and hospitals. If anyone else proposed that, the First Minister would accuse them of living in London, but this Salmond slice is home grown. I want to know when the First Minister intends to publish the details. His economics paper last week included the admission that these were "back of the envelope" calculations. We applaud his candour, but can he assure us that the £3.5 billion Salmond slice is written on something rather more convincing? When will we get the details?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2357)

Last night, Alex Salmond was asked on television whether he supported splitting casino banks from prudent, solid retail banks. Speaking as leader of the Scottish National Party, he sat on the fence. Today, he is presumably back as First Minister—at least till 1 o'clock—so which side is he on: the taxpayers or the casino bankers?

That is certainly one interpretation of what the governor of the Bank of England said. This week, I met an oil and gas business in Aberdeen that has developed a tidal turbine. It has international interest, which would create jobs in Scotland. It wants to develop the turbine in the United Kingdom at the Orkney test centre, but that Scottish business cannot get the money because its bank will not lend. The financial institutions simply do not care. The Royal Bank of Scotland is 84 per cent owned by the taxpayer but admits that it has missed its £16 billion target for lending to business. However, such banks owe their existence to British taxpayers. Last week, the First Minister announced support from the Government for small and medium-sized businesses—that is one of the things on which he and I agreed in the Scottish budget this year—so will his Government work to get the banks back on the side of business in Scotland? What steps can he take to support their break-up to separate the safe, secure high street banks on which we all rely from the casino banks that gamble on the world's markets with other people's money?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2341)

The advisory board to the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is meeting this morning to consider whether the introduction of widespread and fundamental changes to the curriculum and exams in Scotland should begin at the start of the new school year, in August. Parents, children and schools across Scotland need to know one way or the other when the curriculum for excellence will start. Is the Government intending this afternoon to make a statement to Parliament on its decision?

We have been told that the Government will simply issue a press release at 3 o'clock this afternoon. Surely Parliament should have the opportunity to question the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. Will the First Minister ensure that that happens? Is the First Minister as concerned as every Scottish parent is at the talk today from teaching unions of potential strikes and working to rule? Parents can understand teachers' frustration about the lack of information, training and clarity and the inadequate resources that have been provided to schools; all those issues must be sorted out before the go-ahead for August can be given. Will the First Minister cut through the institutional mess of the different roles of Learning and Teaching Scotland, the Scottish Qualifications Authority and the Government, and guarantee that all those bodies will work together with schools to iron out the problems? A Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association survey shows that 86 per cent of secondary teachers are not confident that they can deliver the change in August. How will the Government respond to the views of Scotland's headteachers?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2322)

Today in Parliament an event will highlight the Cancer Research UK relay for life, an inspirational demonstration by many Scots of their commitment to cancer relief. The Shetland representative cannot attend the event, because his Loganair flight has been cancelled as plumes of volcanic ash drift across northern Europe. What steps is the Government taking to reinforce the advice that passengers should not travel to Scotland's airports and should instead contact their airlines? What steps is the Government taking to assess the impact on transport and to help forms of transport other than air to take up the burden?

I am grateful for that. I will pursue a couple of those points. Air transport is clearly the service that has been hardest hit, but there will be implications for other transport modes today and over the coming days. Has the Government contacted Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd? What steps are being taken to extend airport opening hours and to allow flights to catch up and aircraft to be repositioned once airspace is clear? Has the UK Border Agency been asked to take special steps should flights from overseas arrive in quick succession, once airports reopen? Are there any indications of disruption to mail delivery across Scotland, without Royal Mail flights? Edinburgh airport has a large mail operation. Have Network Rail and ScotRail been contacted to ensure that weekend engineering works are kept to a minimum so that people can use the trains with confidence? The challenge for Government is surely to clear the in-tray and to do all that it can to assist people at this time.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In the past, you have been keen to chastise some of us for talking about issues that have nothing to do with the Parliament. What Mr Brownlee is on about has nothing to do with the Parliament.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2303)

Yesterday's Labour budget demonstrates that we have an economy that is excessively dependent on the City of London, property, the service industries and debt, rather than on Scottish manufacturing, exports and fairness. The budget was bad news for the 2.25 million basic-rate taxpayers in Scotland. Thanks to Labour, people have had their tax allowances frozen, which will put their tax bills up. Although people will be able to do something about that on polling day, every part of Government needs to ensure that it is acting fairly. What is the First Minister's pay policy?

On pay policy, which is the First Minister's responsibility, when there is only a little money to go round, is not it even more important that it goes round fairly? The Scottish National Party pay policy imposes a limit of 1 per cent and means less than £150 a year to people on the lowest pay, while it means £600 a year to senior managers. Meanwhile, we know that Scottish quango chiefs are still pocketing tens of thousands of pounds in bonuses. In the interests of fairness, will the First Minister support the Liberal Democrat amendments this afternoon to change the law to stop those quango bonuses and reform the Scottish quango culture? Is not that a good way to find the money to give a fairer deal to everyone?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2282)

On the economy and Scottish jobs, the First Minister probably finds it as ridiculous as I do that Labour can gloat that one part of the United Kingdom is doing better than another, when the whole of the UK is doing worse than the whole of the rest of Europe—except Greece. The Prime Minister said in the House of Commons yesterday that unemployment is falling, whereas it has gone up by 16,000 in Scotland. What explanation does the First Minister have for the continuing rise in the number of Scots out of work?

Unlike the rest of us, Mr Salmond will be able to attend the presentation of the budget in Westminster next week, and it will be interesting to see whether he does. There are 67,000 more people out of work in Scotland this year than there were last year. Unemployment here has increased twice as fast as in the rest of the UK. Scottish retail had its worst month for more than 10 years. Yesterday's Scottish construction monitor shows that more builders expect to cut staff than expect to recruit them. People do not understand the fact that ministers hailed a recovery in December, nor the fact that the First Minister told me in January that he had "a degree of satisfaction". He has said again this afternoon that there is recovery. The First Minister invariably mentions his economic recovery plan, which was described by Mackay Consultants just this month as "a mixture of pseudo-academic jargon and a long term wish list". Does the First Minister have anything else to offer? When does he think unemployment in Scotland will stop going up?

The First Minister's letter to my colleague Vince Cable states: "The public sector must now prepare for several years of fiscal austerity". Those are the First Minister's own words. Would the First Minister like to lay out what that fiscal austerity will be?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2263)

The Scottish National Party Government announced a 4.2 per cent rise in CalMac Ferries fares on Tuesday. The increase will hit people in the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism's constituency, Argyll and Bute. However, the £7.5 million ferry fare bribe in Dr Allan's constituency, the Western Isles, remains untouched. How much of the extra fares that are paid in Argyll will go towards paying for that?

So the answer is, "Yes—people in Argyll will pay." The First Minister mentioned his manifesto. Let us talk about that. Putting up ferry fares by 4.2 per cent was not in the manifesto.  Last week, we showed that the Government is doubling the business rates for some hotels in Scotland, because of the First Minister's decision not to have a transitional relief scheme. Hotels on Mull, Islay and Bute, which rely on CalMac, face increases in their bills of 44 per cent, 144 per cent and 80 per cent. Now the First Minister is doubling the increase in ferry fares to get to those places. The situation is just as bad for other businesses. How does raising fares help salmon and fishing industries in Shetland, which depend on ferries? The First Minister's Government has decided to cut the speed of ferries from the northern isles, increase journey times and make vessels leave harbour before the fishing industry can load them. How is that fair? How can the First Minister do that without having the courtesy to ask businesses whether such a change will cripple them? If slowing down transport to save fuel is the future, will his ministerial BMW stick to 30mph when he goes home to Strichen?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2241)

This week is Scottish tourism week. Last night, in the Parliament, industry leaders predicted that 2010 will be a tougher year. Extra burdens on Scottish tourism could cost jobs and businesses. Why, then, are so many Scottish hotels facing an increase in their business rate bills from 1 April—they are way above inflation? Their business turnover is being hit in these tough economic times but their business rate bills are going up by 20 per cent, 40 per cent, 80 per cent and even 120 per cent. Does the First Minister think that that is fair?

The information is on the First Minister's Government website. I was not asking the First Minister about general business rates, but about the detail of hotels in Scotland. We should look at the bills that they face in just three weeks'  time: Stobo Castle will get a £25,000 increase in its bill; Prestonfield House in Edinburgh will get a 70 per cent increase; and the Queens Hotel in Lerwick will have to pay 65 per cent more. Let us look at the hotels where the Cabinet stayed during its summer tour last year: Malmaison in Aberdeen, the Apex in Dundee, the Radisson SAS in Glasgow, The Townhouse Hotel in Melrose, and—for the First Minister—Dryburgh Abbey Hotel. The increase in business rates that those hotels will have to pay in the new year are respectively 42 per cent, 59 per cent, 43 per cent, 31 per cent and 120 per cent. Will the Government change its mind and help Scottish hotels that are facing these eye-watering increases?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2222)

The Royal Bank of Scotland announced a £3 billion loss this morning, but the bank will still pay £1 billion in staff bonuses. Taxpayers, who own 84 per cent of the bank, now find that the Labour Government signed off those bonuses. That is not right or fair. What is the First Minister's policy on bonuses?

It would be helpful if the First Minister would clarify his Government's actions in this area, because I have a freedom of information response that shows that his Government's economic development quango, Scottish Enterprise, paid £912,000 in bonuses last year. Scottish Enterprise is the First Minister's agency and he has spent three years reorganising it. His Government's top priority should be to create jobs, even if we see today, yet again, that it is not. Unemployment in Scotland is continuing to rise, the claimant count is up by 36,000, the economy is still in recession and there is now a squeeze on public spending. Bonuses in Scottish Enterprise sit in the First Minister's in-tray; how much does he think should be paid out in bonuses to Scottish Enterprise staff from the public purse this year?

There we go. Annabel Goldie was quite right. We heard bluster, bluster and more bluster from the First Minister. I did not ask about cuts; I asked about Scottish Enterprise, and he did not answer the question. I remind the First Minister of Scotland that his Government signed the contract for the new chief executive of Scottish Enterprise and that his Government agreed to pay that person the same salary of £200,000 as the previous chief executive was paid, despite the fact that his Government had cut the organisation in half. That is his record.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2205)

People outside Parliament do not understand how the First Minister and ministers have let all this happen. Yet again, will the First Minister tell the chamber where he draws the judgment line? Is there anyone who can walk through an SNP minister's door and not get the letter that they want? How bad does it have to be before the SNP says no?

That was another shifty answer from the First Minister. He is trying to shift the blame on to someone else. The key word in the  code is "expected". Mr Salmond would do well to look closely at it. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice has called for new laws under which criminal assets can be confiscated. The cabinet secretary has said that such criminals are "parasites" who live "off the back of law abiding folk". Why did none of that occur to the Deputy First Minister when—I assume—she was sitting opposite one of them? The Cabinet Secretary for Justice has said of such criminals: "we're going to take them on and we're going to take them down." Does the Deputy First Minister simply take down whatever someone says and send it to the judge? Why does the First Minister have one minister who talks tough and another who begs for leniency?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2184)

Until today, only trained firearms officers in Scotland have been routinely equipped with Taser stun guns. Now Scotland's biggest police force, Strathclyde Police, is proposing to issue them to every patrolling officer in Cambuslang and Rutherglen. What is the policy position of Scottish ministers?

I certainly agree with that last point, but what involvement have the Scottish ministers had in the decisions of Strathclyde Police so far? Has the Government changed the policy position to allow Tasers to be issued to police officers who are not specialist firearms officers? Will the Parliament be able to consider whether a trial is even necessary before it is rubber-stamped by ministers? Will we get to see the evidence? Will Parliament have a say? When Tasers were put on trial in England, they were used 600 times in the first year—34 children were zapped with 50,000V. It is a slippery slope towards every officer in Strathclyde carrying a Taser gun. What active steps are ministers taking to ensure that what starts in one part of one city does not grow to take in the whole of Strathclyde and then the whole of Scotland?

It does, but it does not represent the entire industry. If she is to make a contention about the industry, I ask her please to be accurate about the industry's view. The proposed measure is not good; it is centralising and anti-democratic. I am disappointed that good friends and colleagues of mine in Labour think that the measure is a way forward—I look particularly at Mr Peacock. I am sure that, as a Highlands and Islands representative, he will reflect on the amendments before he votes on them. John Scott made a point that—

In a minute—I will deal with Mr Scott's point. John Scott suggested that different approaches throughout Scotland were a bad thing and that everything had to be done in the same way. I could not disagree more. He could and should ask the planning authorities that have dealt with salmon farming since the early 1980s to show him any problems that the existing regime has created, because they do not exist. Of course, procedures will always be refined, but John Scott and Elaine Murray contend that planning authorities—particularly those in Highland, Shetland, Orkney and the Western Isles, which are the main authorities that deal with salmon farming—cannot do the task, which I do not believe is right. I hope that the cabinet secretary will hold to his position on how the matter is dealt with. The idea that marine licensing is the only regime that applies to salmon farming is wholly wrong. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency and several other bodies deal with salmon farming day in, day out. In many ways, the consents that SEPA grants mean that it has more say than any other part of the system, so John Scott's suggestion that  the matter is all down to planning again shows ignorance of the industry. I hope that amendment 41 will be rejected. It is anti-democratic and would create more centralisation. We should not have it.

As the MSP for Shetland—an area where 200 jobs depend on salmon farming and 36 per cent of Scotland's farmed salmon is produced—I will make a brief contribution on amendments 41 and 22. I take issue with Elaine Murray's point that the industry supports her proposal, as she said early on. The industry in my constituency absolutely does not support it.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of his Cabinet. (S3F-2166)

There has been a dramatic increase this year in the number of people who have been turned away from Scottish colleges because there are not enough places. Figures that the Liberal Democrats are publishing today show that many colleges are turning away four times as many applicants as last year and that some colleges have had to reject people for the first time. Many young people's career plans have therefore been dashed. They are being hit twice: with record unemployment, they cannot get a job, and now they cannot get a college place. The First Minister knows that we raised the issue with his Government in November. Today's figures show why action in the area matters for Scotland's future. Will he ensure that next week's budget addresses the growing gap between the number of people who want to learn and the number of places available?

It is clear that people are trying to get themselves the skills and qualifications that they need. However, North Highland College in Thurso said that it was unprecedented to turn students away because of capacity limits; Oatridge College said that it had never refused admission before, but has had to reject 300 applications this year; Angus College was in the same position; and Carnegie College in Dunfermline has increased the number that it turned away by 800 per cent, from 120 to 904. Does the First Minister agree that action taken by his Government in this budget must increase the number of college places right across Scotland?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2149)

Under the United Kingdom Labour Government and the Scottish National Party Government, the number of people who are out of work in Scotland rose by 61,000 over the past year to 202,000. Quango bosses, who we found out this morning have ignored the  Government and have refused to give up hundreds of thousands of pounds of bonuses, are utterly wrong. People who are looking for work in Scotland would support our Parliament and the Government if money from highly paid quango bosses could be used to support new opportunities for young people without jobs and businesses that are struggling to get through the recession. What steps will the First Minister take to make that happen?

We certainly hope that the Liberal Democrats' budget proposals for pay cuts for top public service people will be accepted by the Government. Does the First Minister agree that what we have heard from the Conservatives represents the wrong approach on pay? Their proposed freeze on any salary of £18,000—below average earnings—tells us all that we need to know about the Tories. It would be a pay freeze for newly qualified Scottish teachers and nurses to pay for tax breaks for millionaires. Did the First Minister also hear the Conservatives say yesterday in this chamber that their pay policy will apply to the armed forces? That means that a lance corporal coming home from Afghanistan would find that the Tories had cut his pay in real terms while he had been away. When the First Minister decides his public pay policy, will he ensure that he has nothing to do with those unfair Tory proposals?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2128)

People at Innerleithen are battling to save one of Scotland's biggest textile mills. The Caerlee mill owners have called in the administrators and 170 jobs are at stake in a town of 2,500 people. My colleague, the local MSP, Jeremy Purvis, is involved in on-going talks and has been briefing the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. Government must create the space, time and opportunity for new investors and buyers to be secured. Textiles in the Borders have been hit hard in the recession and some companies have closed, but those that we still have are rising to the challenge of building new markets and creating new, high-end products. That is why this cashmere company has a future. Will the First Minister commit to getting behind the Scottish Borders textile industry for the future of the Caerlee mill and the 170 jobs that depend on it?

Scottish manufacturing figures for the past year are stark—there was a 19 per cent drop in exports—but the five-year trend shows conclusively that the Scottish textile industry has a future and that it can grow and be a success. It is not the right course for people to lose their jobs in such an historic industry or for the Borders to suffer loss after loss when the future could be so bright and promising. Scottish cashmere is a world-beating product. My party has proposed how the Scottish Government can give more support to manufacturing and textile jobs as part of its  budget. Will the First Minister act on that way forward for the industry?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2096)

Last week Audit Scotland reported that health funding was "a challenge" and "difficult" and that it was "difficult to see where the money would come from". On Sunday morning, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said that we were scaremongering to point that out. On Monday morning, Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board said that it was cutting the number of nurses to balance the books. What happened in those 24 hours to turn a scare story into the grim reality for patients?

Money is available for some policies. For example, it is available for the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to award consultants bonuses of up to £75,000 each. Seven of the consultants to whom she gave bonuses last January now serve at the private Murrayfield hospital in Edinburgh. However, Nicola Sturgeon told the SNP conference: "Our government will invest taxpayers' money always to build up NHS services, not to build up the private health sector." Millions of pounds are being used to pay consultants' bonuses even though the taxpayer does not get all of their time for the NHS. Does the First Minister intend to do anything about that?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2074)

The sum of £11 billion in the chancellor's pre-budget report is marked down as "efficiency savings". It shows the depths of crisis brought upon this country by Labour that there is £1.5 trillion of consumer debt, banks are not regulated properly and public sector spending is based on a property price bubble that Labour claimed would never end. An Audit Scotland report on NHS boards, which was published this morning, makes sober reading. On efficiency, the report says that it will be difficult for some boards "to achieve the required level of savings without any negative impact on the services they provide." Does the First Minister agree with Audit Scotland?

It would be much easier to get behind those proposals if Mr Salmond would answer the specific question that Audit Scotland put to him this morning. With tough times in the health service, the priority must surely be for nurses and doctors to be in post and for services to be kept open. However, health boards themselves have released  new figures under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, which show that more than 2,100 people in the Scottish health service get paid more than £100,000 per year—they make a total of more than £300 million every year, £30 million of which is in bonuses. Will the First Minister guarantee that those very well-paid people—not the nurses, carers and cleaners, who earn a fraction of that money—will shoulder the burden? Would that not be a fair way to protect front-line services?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2057)

The First Minister said that he watched on television Michael Russell's first speech as Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. In his speech, Mr Russell said that the situation in Scottish education was not hunky-dory, but was not a crisis. What does "not hunky-dory" mean?

Presumably, that all enthusiastically explains why the First Minister sacked Fiona Hyslop. When did he decide to remove her from her post? Was it when the Times Educational Supplement Scotland said that five out of six new teachers do not have a permanent job? Was it when teacher numbers dropped by 1,300 in one year, which was the reason that his press spokesman gave the BBC? Or was it when he found out that every other party in the Parliament was sick of the excuses and wanted change? Michael Russell says that this is not an education crisis. What is it? Is it a political crisis? Is having to sack an education secretary a personal crisis for a First Minister?

Mr Salmond is right to say that I resigned over the principle of fisheries policy. When he resigned from the Parliament to go back to Westminster, did he do so on a point of principle?

Politics is a harsh place and being a cabinet minister in charge of a Government department is a hard job, but it was clear that the previous minister could not continue as the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. We need a fresh approach on education. In one respect the First Minister was right, as we need a fresh education minister, but it is a matter of regret that he was the last person in this Parliament to know that, the last to admit that, and the last to take action. Action is needed, so the new minister will be assessed on how he meets these challenges.  Children in primary 7 across Scotland face the start of the new curriculum for excellence next August. Despite the groundwork laid by the previous Administration, teachers tell me that they have still not had the details of the assessments and the exams that they need. That must change. There are 1,300 fewer teachers in Scotland than there were at this time last year. This Government has fundamentally broken the relationship between central and local government by issuing the ill-considered threats of last week. Nobody believes that the minister in Edinburgh can possibly run every single school. The new minister needs to rebuild that bond of trust and create a working relationship between councils and schools that will help children and teachers. What the new cabinet secretary and the Government should do today is support the Liberal Democrat motion, which gets that fresh start under way. Mike Russell has no choice but to act, but his track record is not good. As the Minister for Environment, he left the privatisation of Scotland's forests and the crofting bill for his successor to sort out. As culture minister, he has left creative Scotland, the digital switchover and regional broadcasting for his successor to sort out. As constitution minister, we saw on Monday the mess that he has left his successor as the junior minister in charge of the referendum. He has also managed to leave a lower level of support for independence than when he started the job. I have children in primary, secondary and tertiary education, so let me say on behalf of all Scottish parents that the First Minister needs to make it plain that Mike Russell, as the new Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, has to sort out the mess that he inherited from his own Government. He cannot leave this one half-finished; he must concentrate on raising standards in Scotland's schools, not lowering them online. We will propose an agenda for action on education this morning, and we will be back next week, next month and next year to ensure that the change of minister means that there is a change of direction and there is real delivery on education for Scottish pupils, Scottish parents and Scottish teachers.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2040)

The First Minister has made it clear that the Scottish budget faces a tough settlement and that every penny counts. Are any Scottish Government quangos or agencies sitting on reserves of unused cash?

That was not an answer to the question that I asked. A report from the Auditor General for Scotland, which cannot come as a surprise to Mr Salmond, confirms that the Registers of Scotland quango has accumulated reserves of £122 million. Section 4 of the Government Trading Funds Act 1973 says that the money can be paid to the consolidated fund if ministers and the Treasury agree. There are no other positive plans to use the reserves. Scotland is in recession now and business needs help to get through it. Small businesses cannot get the funds that they need from their banks, so why cannot the money be used to help thousands of  them? Otherwise, we will have £122 million of good money in the wrong place in tough times. Will the First Minister ask for that transfer to happen?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2020)

The First Minister will have seen in this morning's papers the list of quango executives in Scotland who are paid more than him. Some of them are paid even more than his MP, MSP and First Minister salaries put together. Does he think that there are too many people on too much money?

That was a "No", then. Does the First Minister know that such reports only scratch the surface? Through freedom of information requests, the Liberal Democrats have discovered that at least 3,400 people in the public sector in Scotland are paid more than Scottish Government ministers and that they receive a total of £401 million in pay every year. People at the bottom of the income scale are being threatened with losing their jobs and the number of young people who are unemployed has never been higher—[ Interruption. ]

In these tough times, does the First Minister think that the tiny proportion of people who get such a vast share of public money should shoulder a fairer share of the burden? As part of his budget, will he set a target to reduce that pay bill and to spend the money instead on creating skills and jobs for young people?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-2002)

The chairmen of England's biggest football clubs are meeting now to consider whether Rangers Football Club and Celtic Football Club should become part of the most successful league in Europe. Are there not advantages for the Scottish game in the old firm playing in the bigger leagues? Does the proposal not have the potential to bring about greater competitiveness and more interest and to encourage more youngsters into the game in Scotland? Does the First Minister support it?

I am glad that the First Minister raised the economy because—[ Laughter. ] I think that the question is important and do not mind how much other people do not think that. When Rangers or Celtic has a champions league game in Glasgow, it is worth £8 million to the city's economy. The Tories may want to laugh about that, but I will not because I think it important. If the old firm joined a new English league set-up, it would mean a massive game in Glasgow every week. The number of visiting fans and the amount of television and media interest in Scotland would increase. A new league structure in Britain would mean £20 million in TV rights money for the old firm. Managers from Arsenal's Arsène Wenger to Tottenham Hotspur's Harry Redknapp—to say nothing of Alex McLeish, Gordon Strachan and Martin O'Neill—all say that it would be good for football north and south of the border. Is the First Minister's Minister for Public Health and Sport involved in the potential to bring football back to life in Scotland while helping our biggest clubs to develop?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's comments, particularly on megrims and monks. I hope that I am quoting him correctly but if, as he says, there are to be "further cuts in effort" next year, what exactly will our industry have to do to comply with those measures?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1978)

This week the United Kingdom Government announced that a further enormous wallop of taxpayers' money should be given to Lloyds Banking Group and the Royal Bank of Scotland, which is cutting 600 branch jobs across Scotland. Those banks are now focused not on our economy but on internal fire sales, rights issues and the Government's rules, yet we are in a recession and need banks and their money to move the economy forward and to create jobs. That is what banks are for, is it not? Last year, the First Minister said that the Lloyds takeover of HBOS was "the deal of the century". Has he changed his mind?

We will all be delighted to look back at how the First Minister expressed himself last year. He did say that it was "the deal of the century". If he wants to get worked up about the matter, it is up to him. More important than the First Minister's attempts to get out of what he said last year is the shape that he wants for Scottish banking. The chancellor could not say whether he wants more bonuses are back and greed is good banking, or separate retail and business banks that get the economy moving. The governor of the Bank of England was clear when he made the case in Scotland for breaking up banks. Does the First Minister agree that we should split the casino banks that can fail, from the solid, reliable business banks that cannot be allowed to fail? Would that not give taxpayers something to show for all the money that has been spent? Would that not be good for business and good for Scotland's reputation in the world?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1955)

The challenge is to understand how the Tories can attack the First Minister on business and then vote for the Scottish National Party's motion on the economy this afternoon.  There is another Royal Mail strike today. People worry that there will not be much of the Royal Mail left to deliver letters to every part of Scotland, for the same price, for much longer. Why did the Scottish Government give an £8 million postal contract to TNT and not to the Royal Mail?

I certainly agree with the last point. In March, when the United Kingdom HM Revenue and Customs gave a contract to TNT, and not to the Royal Mail, the SNP's spokesman spoke of concerns and said: "A private partner will only be concerned with profit, and Royal Mail must not lose its social focus". When the UK Department for Work and Pensions gave a contract to TNT, the SNP said that there was "outrage" at the decision, that "effectively the government" was "abandoning the Post Office to its fate", and that "The government must display a commitment to our postal service by using its services." I could not agree more, so what is the difference between the Scottish Government and the Labour Government in London?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1937)

Tonight, the Tories will vote SNP to keep a £23 million quango that will build not one new school in the current four-year parliamentary session. What will the Conservatives get in return for that loyalty?

I guess that the answer is that the Tories will not get very much. What bothers me—and, more important, what bothers children, parents and teachers throughout Scotland—is the two wasted years in which schools have not been commissioned. The First Minister has imposed two years of paralysis. Now, he is relying on Tory votes. Does he not understand that, in exchange for Tories voting SNP, Scotland will get to keep the £23 million quango this year, double its budget next year and put off building new secondary schools until 2013  or 2018? Why will he not concentrate on building new schools instead of new quangos?

I associate the Liberal Democrats with the tributes that have been made today to the life of Bill Speirs. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1920)

The tragic deaths of three people on a level rail crossing at Halkirk in Caithness are regrettably not unique. Where fatal accidents happen on Scotland's roads, action is rightly taken. At Sumburgh airport, barriers were installed on the road across the runway after motorists had problems seeing warning lights similar to those on rail crossings but, thankfully, before an accident. How, therefore, can it be acceptable for the rail industry to say that installing barriers would cost too much? How many fatal accidents or injuries do there need to be before action is taken? Does the Deputy First Minister agree that, if barriers can be installed at airports for exactly the same reason, there can be no justification for not acting to stop deaths and injury at rail crossings?

Jamie Stone, who represents the constituency, has been at a meeting in Caithness today and has been making that argument. Is it not time to cut through the morass of rail bureaucracy, which gets in the way? Network Rail has risk assessors; the local highway authority has responsibilities; and so do Transport Scotland, the rail regulator, the railway inspectorate, the Health and Safety Executive, the police and even the Scottish Law Commission. Will the Deputy First  Minister accept that, if she asks the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change to pull together all those organisations to order action and to request the money to do it, she will have support from across the Parliament, and certainly from the Liberal Democrats?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1896)

The First Minister is aware that ITV is involved in a dispute with STV that is damaging for viewers. I spoke to STV this morning; it is clear about its legal defence. Is the First Minister aware that the television regulator, the Office of Communications, offered binding arbitration earlier in the year? STV accepted that offer to sort things out, but ITV refused it. Will the First Minister agree to speak to the United Kingdom Government and the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, Ben Bradshaw, to push ITV into those mediation talks? Scotland  does not need a perpetual dispute between broadcasters. Could this not become a case of legal disputes coming first and viewers coming second?

Does not the First Minister understand the fear that people have of the consequences for broadcasting in Scotland? He has put forward plans to end the BBC in Scotland without any guarantee that the BBC will still be made available here. Is that not another case of more for the lawyers and less for the viewers? Let us consider the programme guide under Alex Salmond's broadcasting corporation. "The One Show" becomes "The Only One Show"; only the First Minister is on it. Especially for him, we will see a return of "Grandstand", and we know who will star in "Monarch of the Glen". If "Only an Excuse" is brought back to our screens, this time round it will see live coverage of First Minister's question time—[ Interruption. ]

We already know the "Weakest Link": it is Fiona Hyslop. Alex Salmond will be on every news item on "Reporting Scotland", unless the plan is for him to read the news instead of Jackie Bird. All programming will be fixed because the SNP Government plans to appoint the director general. In North Korea—[ Interruption. ]

In North Korea, TVs and radios come pre-tuned to Government stations. How can we avoid that happening in Scotland?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1872)

Mr Salmond froze the council tax in his Government's first budget to take the sting out of a difficult issue and give time to introduce a local income tax. Local income tax has been dumped by the Scottish National Party, so the justification for a central Government imposed tax regime on local government surely no longer exists. In evidence to the Local Government and Communities Committee, Dundee City Council stated that a freeze in the council tax "may not be sustainable" and that the pressures that it creates put at risk support for children, homelessness services and business advice. Highland Council and Aberdeenshire Council are saying similar things, as are Falkirk Council and South Ayrshire Council. Does the First Minister agree with those councils that today's budget should give them the money to allow them to make the choice and decide whether to freeze the council tax or protect the services that they were elected to deliver?

Of course, that was nothing to do with the question that I asked. [ Interruption. ]

Dundee City Council is an SNP council and it is worried about what the First Minister's policy will do to its services. I do not know why he will not listen to that. For local people, the issue is whether their local council can keep care homes open, provide specialist help to vulnerable children and keep teachers at work. Those are front-line services on which people rely. Why, then, does the First Minister want to make  decisions about them in Bute house? Why will local councillors and local people not get to make them? Is the First Minister not simply nationalising the policy and localising the blame?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1859)

There was a warning this morning that the United Kingdom may face a double-dip recession. That means that Scotland faces further serious job losses. Unemployment in Scotland is already rising faster than it is in the rest of the country. Diageo is a catastrophic hit on the people of Kilmarnock and Port Dundas, and the Government will have to pick up the pieces. What are the First Minister's tactics for dealing with future job losses? Does he think that the vital part of the Government's approach is to be consistent  for local people, their communities and employees who face the loss of their livelihood?

I would, too, and I agree with those points, but does the First Minister recognise the importance of explaining the quantum leap in the offer to Diageo compared to what has been offered in other parts of Scotland? As he said, for Diageo he led a protest march, there has been a Government task force and a significant financial offer was made. Banking jobs have gone in Edinburgh, Fife and further afield. What have the Government's tactics and approach been to them? In Hawick, Lochcarron of Scotland, Pringle and Hawick Knitwear have shed jobs—1,000 jobs have been shed across the Borders in the past year. A ministerial visit was made, but there was no task force or Government money. In the First Minister's area, what was his approach to the grievous loss of the Inverurie paper mill? Companies, workers and their communities need to know what to expect from the Government. Is the First Minister offering every company Government money to keep jobs here? How will he be fair to all workers in different parts of the country who face the sack in this difficult recession?

Nothing that we can do can bring back the 270 lives of the Lockerbie victims. What faces us now is to reflect that many victims' families feel that they will now never know the true story of Pan Am 103. Does the First Minister believe that the Scottish Government has a duty to those families? Will he explore any avenues where any new information and evidence can be considered? Have any discussions taken place between ministers and the judiciary to consider whether, in the special circumstances of the case, evidence that has been gathered for the appeal can be made public?

Because of the appeal, which was dropped, these matters are within Scottish jurisdiction. Will the First Minister agree to start discussions with the judiciary to examine how the evidence that has accumulated could be taken further, as I asked? The Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission believes that it has information of value, but that has now in part been locked away as a result of the ending of the appeal. The victims' families want the opportunity to see and test that information and to learn what closure and resolution it can bring for them. If the First Minister takes action on the matter, including by changing the law, he will have our support. Does he agree that securing closure and resolution for the families is particularly important?

Amid the hustle and bustle of politics over the past few weeks, it is worth pausing to consider how events and memories come together. In his widely acclaimed eulogy to his fallen brother, Robert, in New York in 1968, the late Ted Kennedy said: "My brother need not be idealised, or enlarged in death beyond what he was in life; to be remembered simply as a good and decent man, who saw wrong and tried to right it, saw suffering and tried to heal it, saw war and tried to stop it." Today is the 70 th anniversary of Britain going to war in Europe; 70 years on, our troops are still at war. Two brave Scottish soldiers lost their lives this week in Afghanistan; another did so today. In the most extraordinary week of the past 10 years, perhaps we should take some time to reflect on a war that continues and the Scots who are involved in it. I am grateful to the First Minister for advance sight of his statement, but I hope that after the past fortnight, the parliamentary authorities and the Parliamentary Bureau will discover some backbone in handling this Government's approach to Parliament. I cannot say that I am holding my breath. The First Minister's statement to Parliament used to be a significant event. That is no longer the case. It is not even called a statement on the legislative programme. To describe it as such would be a challenge even for the highly talented SNP spin machine. This Government no longer stands for change—it is all desk management now. On the crucial challenges of our day—the need to tackle recession, to deal with a budget crisis and to promote reform of the public sector—the Government is stalled. Despite its bold rhetoric of this time last year, this Government lacks the commitment and desire to see through major reforms. On reform of the children's hearings system, it is back to the drawing board. The Government lost a statutory instrument in committee this week because ministers did not tell MSPs that there were live proceedings in the Court of Session. That is not very competent. I suspect that reform of crofting will never see the committee corridor. This week, the minister responsible lectured the crofting counties. I can tell Parliament that that went down like a lead balloon.  If the Government wants to work with people, it needs a new phrase book. Public service reform is bogged down, as the number of people who work in Mr Salmond's quangos reaches an all-time high. How the SNP made fun of previous bonfires of public sector bodies, but the SNP's record is laughable. A record number of new brass plates have been put on the same doors in the same buildings; the same well-paid bosses and the same policies are in place. The record that the SNP will defend will be one of even more people working for the Government. The main task of this Government—and of any Government—is to tackle recession, lift people back into work and get the banks lending again. The economy shrunk by 0.8 per cent between April and June. Economists predict a 3 per cent decline in 2009. In July, public debt reached £800 billion or 56.8 per cent of gross domestic product, which is the highest level on record. Unemployment in Scotland is rising faster than in the rest of the country. As the recession bites in Scotland, the SNP has taken apart the local enterprise networks, completely emasculated Highlands and Islands Enterprise and narrowed Scottish Enterprise's role. No plans have been announced to reverse that. GDP in the Highlands will fall by 2.8 per cent this year. The Highland board will be rebuilt in the future, but not by the SNP. On the biggest financial issue of the past year—banking—the SNP was ominously quiet. It did not support Vince Cable or my call for those taxpayer-owned monoliths to be broken up to help customers, competition and Scottish business. The First Minister agreed with Gordon Brown—the First Minister called the Lloyds takeover of HBOS the "deal of the century". That takeover has been an utter disaster for the taxpayer, for the customer and for every business that cannot get credit and therefore cannot get the economy moving again. They expect to have the support of their Government. From Lerwick to Linlithgow, bank branches in Scotland will close in the coming months. Deal of the century? I think not. As far as driving our economy is concerned, Labour has put up fuel three times in a year, which has hit every Scottish motorist. Worst hit have been those in rural and island areas. Jim Murphy briefed The Press and Journal that he would introduce a pilot to cut costs in Argyll and then denied it. What has the SNP done? We could have agreed on rural fuel, but it was a Liberal Democrat motion, not a Government one, that called for action. A freedom of information request shows that the Scottish Government did not respond when it had the chance to do so. Why does the Government not use the European levers  that are available, which would enable credit to be provided to small businesses? We will support the Government when it concentrates on people's jobs, on the recession and on credit for business. We will not support the Government when the SNP's internal party politics are more important than the country. The referendum is about the SNP. The recession and jobs are about Scotland. We will put Scotland before the SNP. There are legislative reforms that should command support across Parliament, but the SNP approach is to centralise, control and dictate. That is not our approach. On housing, we need to kick-start building work and help joiners, bricklayers and plumbers, but the SNP's legislative proposal is about centralising, controlling and dictating to Scotland's housing associations. It is clear where the Government wants to go on policing—it wants to have one Scottish police force. We can tell how wrong that would be because Labour wants to do exactly the same. Convening a national policing board that would be chaired by the justice secretary is a slippery slope towards a single Scottish police service. In previous statements, Mr Salmond said that reforming local government finance would be the hallmark of his term in office and that the council tax would be swept away. No legislation was produced, never mind introduced. This time last year, the SNP warned that people would harshly judge any MSP who voted to keep the council tax. That was fighting talk, but the Cabinet voted to keep the council tax. We should be told why. I want a Government that proposes real change, that has the courage to argue for what it believes in and that wants to reform, change and improve the place of our people, but which will trust people to make decisions free from the grip of the centre. Mr Salmond's statement showed that on those tests, his Government is failing.

David Owen!

This has been a strong debate, with passionate contributions from across the floor of the chamber: from David McLetchie—although his was more a comic turn for the sketch writers—and from Tricia Marwick, who spoke about values, from Jeremy Purvis, who spoke about morals and, perhaps above all, from Elaine Murray, who was a passionate advocate of the town that she represents. Nothing that we can do now will bring back those 270 lives. Mr MacAskill has made his decision to release a mass murderer. He made it clear that he absolutely believes in the conviction of al-Megrahi for causing the deaths of 270 men, women and children. Nothing we can do—no vote that we can take, however overwhelming—can bring al-Megrahi back to this country. Mr MacAskill has made his decision. I respect the fact that the decision was extremely difficult. I acknowledge any minister who makes a tough call and I acknowledge Mr MacAskill's courage in making the decision, but we must ensure that all our efforts in the matter serve justice. People have come to different views on what they think they might have done if the decision was theirs, but none of those opinions—and, certainly, no weight of opinion polls—can turn that decision around. What we can do, and what Parliament surely must do, is hold ministers to account. When they exercise quasi-judicial powers, they exert enormous power over individuals. It is right that ministers are challenged to explain their decisions. That is not party politics but accountable Government. No Government should be frightened of that. My colleagues have highlighted today, as we did last week and the week before, that the powers used in the decision were judicial but were exercised poorly and in a way that no judge would have entertained. No judge would have briefed the media in advance, as the SNP did. No judge would have briefed television cameras to follow  him to Greenock jail, provided a running commentary on the decision itself and then heightened tension to unbearable levels before making the announcement. Some may wish to reflect on the feelings of the families of the lost during that time. No Government should have made such a momentous announcement to the basement of St Andrew's house rather than to this Parliament. That was very wrong. We know that the SNP made no effort to contact the Presiding Officer or the other parties to ask for Parliament to be recalled. Had it made such a request, we would have accepted it gladly. In its handling of the issue, its spin and manipulation, the Government put publicity before responsibility. It is unfortunate that Mr MacAskill will not close the debate, which means that he will not be able to answer, as he should, the detailed questions that members have asked. His place is to be taken by the First Minister, who is the political head of the Government. Many are surprised that the First Minister will close the debate, not least Mr Michael Russell, who usually gets such slots. Up until now, the First Minister has observed that the decision to release al-Megrahi and the decision to visit him in jail were Kenny MacAskill's decisions alone. Will the First Minister tell us whether he discussed with Kenny MacAskill whether his jail visit was appropriate? Other questions remain, as many members have said. Why was the UK justice secretary blamed for the visit to Greenock? On Newsnight on 20 August, Mr MacAskill was asked why he had gone to prison to visit al-Megrahi. He said that he had had to, because Jack Straw had made it clear that representations should be heard from the prisoner. That was repeated by our First Minister on the BBC news the very next day. However, what was said turns out not to be the case. The policy was made specifically to allow written submissions, so why did ministers allow the media to be told the wrong information? Why did they change their story—as they did—when the written records of the House of Commons showed otherwise? When he was questioned on his statement last week, why did the justice secretary give the impression to Margo MacDonald and Pauline McNeill that he did not discuss al-Megrahi's appeal on his visit to Greenock prison, when the official note of that meeting shows that he volunteered information about the implication of continuing the appeal? Denying that the appeal was ever mentioned simply casts further doubt on the basis on which al-Megrahi decided to drop his appeal, which many wanted—and still want—to be heard. In response to Margo MacDonald earlier, the minister said that he considered the PTA and  compassionate release together, which again leaves room for doubt. Does not all of that simply confirm that the meeting in jail between a convicted murderer and a justice minister while legal proceedings were live was plain wrong? It was particularly wrong, given that a similar audience was not accorded to the families. Why did the justice secretary hear representations on compassionate release from al-Megrahi and from the Libyans at eight intergovernmental meetings, when on 1 July he told the relatives of the UK victims that he was not prepared to hear from them on that issue? It does not seem to be due process to deny the families of UK victims the right to make clear to the justice secretary their views on compassionate release. There are legitimate questions for the UK Government to answer, not least whether the Libyans were told that the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary favoured al-Megrahi's release. I do not see what the Prime Minister has to hide. Why does not he speak? If Andy Murray wins the US open, he will certainly speak about that—

Many have found the cabinet secretary's decision difficult to understand. We must find ways of coming together as a Parliament to respond to it. The amendments to the motion provide a way of doing so.

I, too, thank the cabinet secretary for providing a copy of his statement. In the eight years since Mr al-Megrahi was found guilty and imprisoned, the world has changed, but now because of the handling of the decision to release him, Scotland finds itself on the wrong side of change, with its international reputation failing, not growing. The Parliament has been recalled too late to influence the Cabinet Secretary for Justice—that is wrong. I have asked for support to allow a vote next week, as a demonstration to the world that Scotland has a wider view, and not just the narrow view of its minority Government. Why did the Government choose to announce the biggest decision in 10 years in the basement of St Andrew's house and not to the Parliament? Where is the accountability in that? In last Thursday's statement, Mr MacAskill said at least eight times that he was responsible for the decision, but at least eight times he sought to pass the blame on to others, from Jack Straw, to a superior Scottish national character, and a so-called "higher power". Why did Mr MacAskill visit al-Megrahi in prison? What was said and will the notes be published? Was an appeal discussed during the meeting? Above all, why did Mr MacAskill make the visit when not one, but two appeals were in progress? What advice did Mr MacAskill take from the Crown Office on that? We now know that Mr MacAskill did not need to visit al-Megrahi in Greenock prison as, despite what Mr MacAskill has said, a written representation was all that was required. How many prisoners can elect to have a minister visit them in their cell, even though they have a well-equipped set of lawyers who are perfectly able to write a letter? Does Mr MacAskill's comment on the use of Scottish compassion mean that no prisoner, however bad their crime, will ever have a request turned down again? The First Minister and his Government have split Scotland—they have split our country within and split our nation from many international friends. Next week, Colonel Gaddafi can parade al-Megrahi as part of his 40 th anniversary celebrations. Next week, will the Scottish Government support a vote in the Parliament to restore our national reputation? Otherwise, the defining image of the SNP's four-year term of government will be rued by many across our nation for many, many years to come.

I am not quite sure what an "internacine" war is, but I am sure that we will hear in due course. As part of the Scottish National Party's campaign to centralise the police under the control of ministers, the Government announced yesterday the formation of a national police board. How will that board report to this Parliament?

For 150 years—[ Interruption. ]

No, I am not going there. This issue is quite serious, so we might try to get a serious answer, but I suppose that we will wait some time for one. The First Minister is always good for the jokes, but we never get an answer from him. For 150 years in this democracy, people have been worried about the Government gaining political and operational control over policing, so why does the First Minister not see that a national police board, appointed without debate in Parliament and with no basis in law, moves us down that dangerous road? Northern Constabulary has achieved the best clear-up rates for crime in the United Kingdom, but how much of that will be lost when a newer priority is dictated by a minister here in Edinburgh? The Grampian joint police board convener said this week: "Grampian Police are leading the way in many innovative projects ... We need a police service that is responsive to local needs not subject to central diktat and centrally imposed targets." This is the slippery slope to one police force, is it not?

I am no unionist—I believe in a federal United Kingdom and a federal solution to the needs of this country. After listening to this morning's performances, my view that there is a need for such a fundamental change to the whole of the country has not changed; indeed, it has been enhanced. Mr Gray mentioned that the public galleries in the Parliament are not often full. Gosh, it is just as well, given that what we had from the leader of the Labour Party in Scotland and from Mike Russell were speeches aimed at the members of their own parties rather than at the country. If ever there were an issue that should be about the country, it is the one that we are discussing this morning—that is what we should be trying to achieve. I congratulate Kenneth Calman and his commissioners on their work, and those who supported them in that work; I also congratulate them on putting up with some of the observations that I made. As a party, we have been in favour of home rule for more than 100 years. We recognise that the Scotland Act 1998 was not the final word and that more could be done to build home rule for Scotland. As Liberal Democrats, we argue for change and for a different approach. That is why we pushed forward the Scottish Constitutional Convention as it delivered the Parliament and why we built support for Calman's 10-year review of where Scotland is and where we should travel to. The Steel commission, chaired by a former Presiding Officer, did groundbreaking work that set the agenda and created a dynamic for change. I  would argue strongly that the cutting edge of change on the Calman commission has been provided by my colleague Jim Wallace. Calman's proposals will have a real impact. On jobs and the economy, Calman points the way forward on, for example, how to pay for the new Forth bridge. We all remember the SNP Government's statement of last December, which implied that it had an agreed approach to the funding of the Forth bridge, but it turned out that it had not. On 4 March, the UK Government announced that it had come up with a £1 billion package to pay for the bridge, but it had not. Calman means that the age of announcement without money is over—and not a moment too soon. The powers proposed in his report will provide the opportunity to get on and get building. This week, the Parliament passed the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill to cut greenhouse gas emissions. Calman opens the door to radical thinking on how to link that legislation with measures that can make the new law do something. An action plan is one thing; an action plan strengthened by a progressive tax regime is better still. On social justice, the Calman proposals mean that a fair replacement for the council tax could go ahead. We have still not had the full inquest into the mysterious and sudden death of the SNP's proposals for a local income tax on 11 February, but the fingerprints—in the form of opposition from the UK Government and disengagement by Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs—seem to be all over the body. Calman changes all that. It can give the Scottish ministers and the Scottish Parliament a direct route to using the tax man. It gives us the chance to bring in a fairer system of local tax, thus avoiding the SNP's approach so far, which has been to allocate £500 million to freeze the council tax, even though the biggest benefit has gone to the richest people living in the biggest houses.

That is a cheap one. Calman continues the process of ensuring that this Parliament has responsibility for both sides of the balance sheet. That is a theme, a principle and a practice that we should use wisely for the people whom we serve. I am pleased that the leaders of the Labour and Conservative parties here and at Westminster have agreed to form a delivery group, but it must be about implementing Calman. The old establishment politics of Westminster—which fool no one, alienate yet more of the public across the  UK and fail utterly to recognise the desire for something different—have no place here.

I am all in favour of pressing ahead on agreed areas "right now", to use Mr Swinney's words. However, as he knows as a minister of the Scottish Government—indeed, he makes this point regularly in the chamber—a minister cannot always do things "right now". If he sets out a timescale and is prepared to work with the steering group to deliver the aspects of the Calman proposals on which there is agreement, I will be more than happy to see him there. I hope that the SNP will play a full and constructive role in exactly that process. On that, I am sure that Mr Swinney and I could agree. We need a strengthened Scottish Parliament within the UK—that is what all the parties have to want to deliver. I warn those who prevaricate, dither and dream of long grass: it will not wash. I listened carefully to the qualifications that Annabel Goldie issued. I say to her that either this reform gets done or she will be run over by the people's impatience with tired old establishment politics. The opportunity and appetite for stronger devolution with more powers for our Parliament is with us. When the Calman commission was founded, the Scottish Government said that it would not get anywhere and it would not propose radical change, but it has. The SNP amendment shows its commitment to get involved—that is good, but let us see it in action now. The proposed changes require legislation and new rules at Westminster and Holyrood. The Scottish Government should give its political support and release the practical expertise of its civil servants to assist in the process. Now is the moment for those in the Government who want to see more powers for this Parliament to be part of the plans. I cannot conceive why any nationalist can be against change and reform that strengthens this Parliament's accountability. The SNP cannot pick and choose: being against change is not an option for the SNP or for any others. Let us get this done and move the country further forward towards a stronger home-rule Parliament that is a stronger Parliament within the UK, a Parliament with a purpose and a Parliament with powers for a purpose.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet (S3F-1786)

In eight weeks' time, 180 children will start their first day at secondary school at Inverurie academy. Will any of those children have a new school built for them in Inverurie before they sit their standard grades?

Is that it? The First Minister ignored the point; 180 children and their parents will be very surprised that he does not know, will not say or—as usual—thinks that it is someone else's job. Aberdeenshire Council has had plans ready for two years, while it has waited for schools funding from the Government, but the Government has wasted two years failing to get the Scottish Futures Trust to work—two years of blind alleys, garden paths and dead ends. Two years of delay should have given ministers time to answer the basic question about which schools will be built. Some children will wait a decade for a new Scottish National Party school. Will that include Inverurie?

Shoring?

Does the First Minister recognise the serious impact that the loss of Setanta income could have on Scottish football clubs? For some, it could mean the end. Setanta's deal is worth £13.5 million a year to the Scottish Premier League and, for some smaller clubs, the income from television represents more than 60 per cent of their turnover. It means the difference between being a Premier League football club and bankruptcy. What engagement has the Scottish Government had on this important issue?

I am sure that the First Minister is aware that the Office of Communications, the broadcasting regulator, is about to release a report on the pay TV market which was undertaken following complaints from Setanta and others about BSkyB's near monopoly. If there is no market, the monopoly pays peanuts, which is bad news for football clubs, players and, above all, fans. If Setanta folds in Scotland, there will be a Dutch auction for the TV rights and the current £13.5 income to Scottish football could drop below £5 million. If that is not bad enough, Clydesdale Bank's sponsorship could also be reviewed if the TV cameras are switched off. If Setanta goes bust, will the Government get involved in making the case for the Scottish Premier League to be broadcast on free-to-air TV? Is such a move not better than pay TV having the rights to the game but using its monopoly to pay next to nothing?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1747)

Next Wednesday, the Parliament will vote on the Scottish Government's Sexual (Scotland) Offences Bill, which has been described by ministers as "a once in a generation opportunity" and "an historic opportunity", and by Rape Crisis Scotland as "a crucial opportunity". Will the First  Minister be here to vote for the bill, or will he go down to Westminster to vote for an immediate general election?

The First Minister has been caught out by his own decision. His constituents in Banff and Buchan may expect him to be in the House of Commons at 4 o'clock next Wednesday to vote for an immediate general election, but his constituents in Gordon expect him to be here at the same time to vote on important legislation that will protect people from crime. That is two jobs, in two cities, two Parliaments and two constituencies, and too many people being let down. If there is not to be a general election after next Wednesday, will the First Minister ensure that there is a local one in Banff and Buchan, so that people there can have a full-time member of the UK Parliament and this Parliament can have a full-time First Minister?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Cabinet. (S3F-1731)

Climate change threatens our way of life in this country and it threatens the lives of tens of millions of people around the world. Why has Stop Climate Chaos Scotland, which represents 1.5 million people in environment, development and faith groups and in trade unions, said this week that the SNP's Climate Change (Scotland) Bill is "desperately unambitious"?

The slight difficulty with that line is that Richard Dixon of WWF Scotland said this week that the bill was "unambitious". I am not sure from which bit of history Mr Salmond quotes. Stop Climate Chaos Scotland says that the Government's immediate targets are no more ambitious than those of the United Kingdom. Mr Salmond said that he wanted to lead the world, but now he cannot even keep up with London. The SNP promised 3 per cent annual carbon reductions in its manifesto, but it voted against those reductions on Tuesday. Will the First Minister listen to the voices of those who criticise  the bill and to the people who wrote his manifesto by changing his bill to adopt the scientifically credible reduction that he promised before the election or, as usual, does the spin matter rather more than the action?

No.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1710)

Six hundred jobs went at Lloyds TSB Bank this week and 900 others went the week before, on top of yesterday's 300 jobs at the Royal Bank of Scotland. If that happened in one go there would be a riot, but job losses are being dripped out bit by bit. Lloyds has made it plain that headquarters functions will move from Scotland to London. It also admitted to the City of London yesterday that it will have to sell off parts of its business, perhaps even the Bank of Scotland. Will the First Minister bring a new plan to the table to protect Scottish banking jobs?

If the First Minister builds a genuine campaign, which is not just cross party but across Scotland, I will back it. That should be a campaign to bring Bank of Scotland home. Last year, the Labour Government used all the instruments of state to force the takeover of HBOS. We said that that would hit competition and hurt customers. The European competition  commissioner, Nelly Kroes, whom I met on Monday, recognised that, too. Lloyds will now have to sell parts of its business. There must be a campaign for a smaller bank that serves Scotland's families and businesses, rather than taking high-wire gambles with other people's money. Can we have the Bank of Scotland back home? Will the First Minister lead that campaign?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1688)

Earlier, the First Minister mentioned the exceedingly serious nature of the economy. On Tuesday, we learned that 20,000 people in Scotland have lost their jobs in the past three months. This morning, BT announced that it will cut its workforce by 10 per cent worldwide. There are 8,500 BT jobs in Scotland—21,000 if one includes the businesses that depend on BT. What does the First Minister think the implications are for Scotland of BT's announcement?

BT has also said that it could relocate jobs from India. We know that we have in abundance the skills to take customer service and technology jobs back from India. BT centres in Dundee, Thurso, Alness, Aberdeen or Glasgow could be a base for them. Will the First Minister give one of his ministers the job of putting a compelling case direct to BT for such work to come to Scotland—jobs the country needs? Will the Government put a minister in charge of a team to make this pitch direct to BT?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1670)

This week, the First Minister received a prisoner transfer request from the Libyan Government. I ask him where he stands on the statement that he made in June 2007, in which he said: "The question of prisoner transfer is particularly important, not least in relation to the case of Mr Al Megrahi,  the Libyan who was convicted in a Scottish court of the Lockerbie bombing". He went on to say: "the Scottish law officers and others, including the secretary-general of the United Nations, gave assurances that any sentence that was imposed would be served in Scotland."— [ Official Report , 7 June 2007; c 586.]  Does he stand by that statement, which he made as First Minister?

That is as it should be, but I agree with the secretary-general of the United Nations and the Scottish law officers: Al Megrahi should serve his sentence in Scotland. The First Minister has announced today that he will reopen and revisit the assurance that was given by the secretary-general of the UN, yet elsewhere SNP members are saying that the transfer request is simply a conspiracy to prevent the criminal appeal from being heard in full. Should the First Minister not end that uncertainty and prevent the matter from dragging on? Why does he not today reassert the position and the assurances that he voiced in June 2007, and ensure that the sentence that has been imposed is served?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1648)

This morning, under pressure from Opposition members during a Liberal Democrat debate, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning admitted that the Government's plans for teacher training are changing. Instead of the 9 per cent increase in training places that was announced only on 3 March, there will be a cut of 4 per cent. Given that teacher numbers have fallen by 1,000 under the First Minister's watch, how is such a cut the right thing to do?

The cabinet secretary said that there would be a 4 per cent cut in teacher training places next year, with teacher numbers under the Scottish National Party down by 1,000. The statistics are bad. For example, the number of mathematics teachers is down. Has that been done on purpose to stop children ever counting up how badly they have been let down? Although children should know that the progress on class sizes has been microscopic, they do not, because the number of science teachers is also down. Will they ever learn how to use a microscope?  Children might also have called the whole policy a pantomime, but the number of drama teachers is—yes, you've guessed it—also down. How can we tell? In 2007, Fiona Hyslop said: "If we get it right, we will energise an entire generation".— [ Official Report , 20 June 2007; c 883.]  Every set of Government statistics shows that she has not got it right. How much longer has she got?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1625)

After yesterday's budget, politics and government are, more than ever, about choices. Everyone faces 10 years of pain because of Labour, so Governments should account for the choices that they make. The Scottish National Party queued up with Labour at Westminster to vote for the short-term VAT cut. That has not worked. Unemployment is soaring. Our Government could have used the same money to build for the long term, with investment in 95,000 green jobs and public transport. Does the First Minister regret making that short-term choice back in December?

That still begs the question why Alex Salmond voted for the VAT cut. It is business as usual with the choices that the Scottish National Party Government makes. Money is to be spent on free school meals for rich kids, on reintroducing beavers to Argyll and on the  referendum campaign, but which can never be cut, no matter how bad Government finances get or how high our taxes have to go. Let us consider the construction industry. The SNP has announced and re-announced its capital spending. Yesterday's growth figures show that the Scottish construction industry is down by 4.7 per cent—the worst hit of any sector in the economy. Even under disastrous Labour in London, it is only 1.1 per cent. Why is it worse here than in the rest of the United Kingdom? Will the First Minister tell us whether that is anything to do with the choices that his Government has made?

That is the Scottish figure.

No, it is not.

Mr Salmond is right: the figures in the tables for Scotland are 4.7 per cent down and for the UK they are 1.1 per cent down. It is as simple as that. Those are the published figures. Would he like to explain or is it, as usual, someone else's fault?

Today, and for weeks and years to come, our thoughts and prayers will be with the loved ones, families and relatives of the lost. We on the Liberal Democrat benches give our support to those who are involved in the continuing recovery work. I have many friends at home in Shetland who work offshore. The helicopter is the lifeline transport service that keeps the North Sea working. Flying a helicopter requires immensely skilled men and women. However, it is not a pleasant flight. I have flown offshore in the North Sea with people from the oil industry. The strong men and women who ignore mountainous seas and gale-force winds do not enjoy the helicopter flights to work or back to Aberdeen or Scatsta in Shetland. There is nothing glamorous about helicopter flights. The islands that I represent remember all too well the tragic Chinook crash of November 6 1986, when 45 men who were inbound from the North Sea's Brent oilfield perished, one minute's flying time from Sumburgh airport. On that occasion, the impact and trauma were enormous, and that is the case again today. Twenty-three years ago, emergency staff faced huge pressures and responded with the utter professionalism and courage that we expect. We had hoped that their abilities might not be needed in this way again, but it is already clear that the same professionalism and courage have been the hallmark of the offshore and onshore recovery work that has taken place yesterday and today. It would not be fair to ask the First Minister questions about matters for which his Government has no responsibility. My colleagues Alistair Carmichael and Malcolm Bruce are pursuing those matters with United Kingdom ministers in relation to the statement that, as the First Minister said, is being made in the House of Commons. The air accidents investigation branch and the CAA must act quickly. The immediate issue is to reassure men and women who are asked to fly today, tomorrow and next week. They must know that the helicopters are safe. If the UK Government needs to ground Super Pumas, it should. Lessons must be learned. However, today, our support is for the emergency services teams,  and our thoughts and sympathies must be with the loved ones of those who have tragically lost their lives.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1576)

Following the December fisheries council, the Scottish National Party fisheries minister said that it was a "huge relief"; it was "blazing a trail"; there had been "breakthroughs"; he was "delighted" by it; and fishermen "would sleep easier". I spoke this morning to skipper Michael Henderson who was sailing back to Peterhead. He says that the fishermen get "no sleep" in the storms because there is nowhere for them to shelter—he has been forced by the Government's regulations to fish 240 miles beyond Rockall, out in the Atlantic. Men will lose their lives if that goes on, skipper Henderson told me this morning. Scottish fishermen face "bankruptcy" because of the deal that the Government signed in December. Those are not my words but those of Scottish fishing leaders. When will the First Minister act to change the fishing regulations that his Government is imposing on the industry?

It is interesting to hear that the First Minister is an MP now: that will be news to people in Banff and Buchan and in the House of Commons, given that he missed the fisheries debate there last December. The First Minister's answer was utterly in denial of what is happening in the fishing industry in Scotland today. To ignore the fact that men are being injured on boats while fishing in the Atlantic around Rockall shows that he is in denial about this very serious issue for the industry. Those men are fishing out there not from a desire to fish those dangerous waters in winter but because of the implementation of the European deal by the SNP Government. The fisheries minister is being told today that scores of fishermen could be out of a job. The industry is saying that this is the deepest economic crisis for 15 years, and half the Shetland fishing fleet—including new boats—face a 20 per cent cut in fishing days. There is complete chaos over the nets to be used. A skipper from Macduff said last night—[ Interruption. ] This is a serious issue, despite the groans about it from the SNP members. A skipper from Macduff said last night that the Scottish Government's fishing regulations mean that he must tie up his boat for five weeks then fish for three. Fishermen are angry—how can they make a living out of that? Ministers can give the fishing industry no answers other than platitudes and rhetoric. They give no detail where detail is needed. Will the First Minister tell his Government to sort out this mess and to work out the details? The fishing regulations that are crippling boats can change from the end of April—

Will the First Minister make that change happen to help the fishing industry in Scotland?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1549)

A global research study by HSBC bank shows that the United Kingdom is investing less of its economic recovery package in tackling  climate change and reducing carbon emissions than anywhere else in the world except Spain. The UK proportion is just 6.7 per cent; the United States Government is spending double that proportion. Governments should be creating new green jobs and supporting economic recovery by tackling climate change. Will the First Minister publish the equivalent figures for his economic plans, so that we can know that his Government is not making the same mistakes as the UK Government?

Most people accept that marine renewables can create 7,000 jobs across Scotland and, of course, the industry conference is being held in Edinburgh this week. However, on Tuesday, Shell announced that it was stopping investment in wind, wave and hydro energy. Surely such a loss is significant. Did Shell consult the First Minister? Did he try to convince the company that this is the wrong time to be copping out of investment in green energy jobs? The cheque for the saltire prize will not be signed until 2015, but Shell is pulling out this year; meanwhile, this week, Labour started its latest dash for nuclear energy. What new investment in green jobs can the First Minister offer today?

What about tomorrow?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at next week's meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1502)

I broadly agree with Annabel Goldie's line of questioning, and I want to ask the First Minister a couple of different questions in relation to that dreadful incident.  There is no shortage of separate reviews and studies in response to the tragic case of Brandon Muir. However, the case is surely serious enough for a minister to be put in charge to pull all the investigations together. Social work, criminal justice and health are all involved; there is only one way to bring them together and that is through Government. Will the First Minister name a minister—one of his colleagues—who will have a direct leadership role in responding to this tragedy?

I welcome the First Minister's clear commitment to have a minister in charge of what has emerged. This morning's Daily Record newspaper carries the shocking views of Brandon Muir's mother that it was the social workers' job to tell her that Cunningham was evil. Does that not show that she was incapable of judgments that would keep her child safe? I cannot be the only person who thinks that that should have added to the evidence that the authorities should intervene to keep the little boy safe, as the grandparents warned that they needed to. As the First Minister says, it is right that we debate the balance of risks and try to get the balance right between families and social work. However, the debate must lead to strengthened services and changed practices. According to the Government's figures, about 50,000 children in Scotland live with drug-abusing parents. How many of those children are currently being reviewed, given Brandon Muir's dreadful murder?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1474)

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for the letter that you have written on our behalf to Mr and Mrs Cameron. Indeed, I echo the sentiments of the First Minister and other party leaders this morning. Stephen Hester, the new RBS boss, said this morning that the United Kingdom Government—the UK Labour Government—had agreed the details of Sir Fred Goodwin's departure from RBS. Sir Fred Goodwin is getting a pension of £650,000 every year that is paid for by the taxpayer. The figure is 140 times the size of the normal state pension. On the day when RBS announces that thousands of Scottish jobs—in which people earn a fraction of that pension money—are at risk and posts the worst losses in corporate history, and when billions more of taxpayers' money is being used to bail out Fred Goodwin's mistakes, does the First Minister think that Fred Goodwin should touch a penny of that pension?

People find it truly shocking that the first instinct of banking fat cats has been to arrange their bonuses and their pensions, and that a Labour Government can sign off such a scandalously sweet deal behind closed doors and then attack it in public. Yesterday's report by the Fraser of Allander institute says that the Scottish economy will shrink by 2.6 per cent this year, that 159,000 Scottish jobs could be lost and that the overall effect of the Scottish Government's six-point plan is "negligible". There are big, clear challenges ahead, so why has the First Minister spent this week creating a new argument with London? Why do people see in the papers this morning only spin and counter-spin, when the Governments should be adopting a united front to tackling the recession? When will our First Minister change how we go about doing business?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1448)

The First Minister's election address for Gordon features smiling people, who said that they were voting for Alex Salmond because he would abolish the unfair council tax. Are they still smiling, or will he simply use the same photo for the next election address?

I am grateful to the First Minister for mentioning votes in Parliament. This week, the First Minister has got his priorities wrong. He did not appoint a new minister for economic recovery; he appointed a new superminister for independence, grandstanding in Parliament, holding roadshows in every town, wasting taxpayers' money and soaking up time—time that should be used to strengthen small business in the face of recession, to help the eight unemployed people chasing every vacancy, and to turn round stalled economic growth. We need action on recession, not rhetoric on secession. Why does the First Minister not follow his new Salmond rule of government, which says, "You can abandon any promise, however solemn, as long as you've got a long enough list of people to blame." He can drop the independence bill and put my name on the list of people to blame. Will he focus the Government on finding the way out of recession and abandon the independence bill here and now?

Bashir Ahmad never struck me as a politician's politician. He was rather better than that. He was a man of sincerity, dignity and manners—a genuine gentleman. In many a walk from the Parliament chamber back to the office after a vote, we would discuss marriage—the need for marriage and the importance of it. He gave me that polite and cheerful lecture in the most understated of ways on a number of occasions. He was referring to my then girlfriend, and I finally got the point. His achievement as Scotland's first Asian member of the Parliament will be to encourage people of all backgrounds, faiths and thoughts to tackle politics and public life. The party of which he was a member deserves credit for putting him  here. On a day of reflection, I cannot be the only party leader observing that his presence should apply across politics. However, Bashir Ahmad was no identikit politician—he was not just another man in a dark suit. Perhaps the greater legacy, at a time when people can find politics to be too much of the same, is to appeal to people who are outside the orthodoxy of modern public life. That would be a worthwhile change indeed. The First Minister has called Bashir Ahmad a great patriot—I do not doubt that he was. We are a stronger Parliament, country and people if we can revel in our Scottishness but reflect it in the diversity of 21 st century Scotland. Bashir Ahmad epitomised that. From the Liberal Democrat benches, I express my sorrow at his passing, our condolences to his family—who join us today—and our hope and desire that that genuine gentleman will be, in memory, a beacon of hope across politics and throughout the country. Scotland is a sadder place for his passing.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1427)

Does the First Minister envisage that he would ever use the phrase, "Scottish jobs for Scottish workers"?

I am sure that the Parliament will welcome the First Minister's careful choice of words. People are angry about the recession and angry with a Labour Prime Minister who invented a slogan about British jobs to deflect attention from the miserable job that he is doing. Yesterday, Labour gave us a lecture on economics without mentioning the Prime Minister's useless slogan or his comments about conquering boom and bust, saving the world and the beloved prudence. Nor did Labour mention the £1.4 trillion of consumer debt, which might have had something to do with the position that we are in. This morning the Parliament debated how to protect Scottish jobs in financial services, which look after not just Scotland's pensions but the world's pensions. Our reputation has been shattered by the turmoil and failure of the banks. Does the First Minister agree that putting up national barriers will not protect a single Scottish  job? How will he promote a global role? Does he have more to offer than a slogan?

Does Mr Peacock accept that, when he was a finance minister, public expenditure was rising remorselessly, which affected the circumstances of his tenure?

When does the Labour Party in Scotland plan to submit any evidence to the Calman commission?

This debate is not about constitutional change; it is about Scotland having powers for a purpose. We face a recession, rising unemployment and the worst gross domestic product figures in recent times. The lack of fiscal powers confines the Scottish Government's ability to respond to changing circumstances. With no borrowing powers and a total budget determined at Westminster, the options for change are limited. The choice between making tax reductions for low and middle-income families, increasing public spending or bringing forward public sector investment needs to be fully available to this Parliament. There can be no doubt that additional powers would enhance the Parliament's autonomy and accountability. Today, we Liberal Democrats have initiated a debate in our time to develop those political and economic arguments so that we can tackle the recession and find new ways to fund the Forth estuary crossing and further road and rail investment across Scotland. I recognise the Scottish Government's welcome change of position, not on powers but on how to get there. This week has been politically significant and economically progressive. The First Minister, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and their colleagues have recognised that being part of a coalition for change, and arguing the case through the Calman commission, is the best way to deliver the additional responsibilities that we need. I hope that Labour and Tory members will raise their game from yesterday's pitifully low level. They appear to be impaled on the fence of conservatism. [ Interruption. ] There is no better example of that than Mr Whitton. However, there are voices of reason and change in those parties. Wendy Alexander and Murdo Fraser have much to contribute, which I entirely welcome. I hope that  the breadth of their approach rubs off on their colleagues. As always, I live in hope. Borrowing powers would give the finance minister of the day more fiscal latitude and more political and economic choice. How would additional borrowing powers work? The Treasury could agree specific applications for borrowing consent, which would amount to the same prudential borrowing regime that is used by local government in Scotland. A better approach would be for the Governments of the United Kingdom to agree a framework of rules and broad principles for the use of borrowing powers. By definition, a Scottish Government cannot bankrupt the UK. There needs to be a broadly defined and agreed fiscal approach, but the rules must be agreed by the national states of the UK; they must not come through Treasury diktat.

As a politician who believes in a federal approach to the United Kingdom, I fully agree—acceptance of that point is implicit in the Liberal Democrats' approach to change. I am sure that the cabinet secretary deals with the present position, day in and day out, just as former finance ministers in previous Scottish Governments did. As a former junior finance minister, I acknowledge the point that the cabinet secretary makes about the manner in which that engagement takes place. There are a number of mechanisms that we could work through in the coming years to enhance and improve that relationship. I do not think that that is a constitutional point in particular, although it involves a bigger and broader constitutional issue. There is a practical element to the approach that we must adopt. We favour the Governments of the UK working together to agree a framework on the use of borrowing powers. It is inevitable that there will be disagreements—that is the nature of such debates. We advocate the setting up of a finance commission for the nations and regions, which would not be a UK Government body but would be created from the constituent parts of the UK. It would be jointly owned by the nations of the UK on a federal basis. That might not happen immediately following the recommendations of the Calman commission, but it is the approach that we should seek to adopt in the longer term.  Borrowing powers must be additional to the Scottish budget and should not be used to fill any funding gap. What should they be used for? It would be reasonable to borrow for current expenditure on capital projects, but there should be flexibility. As Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown said that his golden rule was unbreakable, but first he changed the cycle over which it was judged and then, in the face of financial meltdown and recession—among many other factors—he ripped it up completely. Although it was the current chancellor who had formal responsibility for that, it was Gordon Brown's golden rule that was shattered beyond redemption. As the nations of the UK negotiate the operating parameters with the Treasury, flexibility must be built in. The argument that such golden rules are sacrosanct is not credible. Where would a Scottish Government borrow from? Again, there are two choices. It could approach the international finance markets through the UK Government, or it could approach the markets directly.

I am not into the application of patriotism to matters of finance, although I am sure that Mr Brownlee makes a serious point about the bond market. That is an aspect that would be explored through the structure that we envisage. The proper answer to the borrowing question is that both avenues would be open to the Scottish Government. It would be necessary to adopt the approach that provided the better deal for the taxpayer, and flexibility would have to be enshrined in whichever approach was adopted. Yesterday, I held discussions with the German ambassador—I am sure that you did, too, Presiding Officer—in which I asked about the Länder system. He pointed out that the German Länder have no borrowing limits but are limited by their ability to cover their borrowing proposals financially. In other words, there is a market discipline. The ambassador observed that that can lead to the Länder having more financial discipline than the federation. Some say that if the Parliament had borrowing powers, the reality would be profligate borrowing, but I counsel against such scaremongering. There would be a significant international upside to the adoption of a prudent and careful approach in Scotland.

I will be blunt: this country must rebuild its shattered reputation for financial expertise, probity and integrity in international circles. The banking crisis has seen to that. The approach that I have outlined is the right approach. I hope that it commends itself to other parties, and I commend it to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament believes that the acquisition of borrowing powers would enhance the autonomy and accountability of the Scottish Parliament and improve the Scottish Government's ability to respond to changing economic circumstances; notes that borrowing powers would allow the Scottish Government to phase the funding of major capital projects such as the new Forth Replacement Crossing sensibly and efficiently, and therefore welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to give permission for civil servants to engage fully with the Commission on Scottish Devolution to assist the delivery of borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1400)

Parliament needs a budget bill for private sector jobs and for public services but, more important, the country needs the right budget bill to tackle the economic problems that we face. Yesterday's economic news was truly disturbing: the growth figures for Scotland are worse than those of the United Kingdom; the UK figures were judged by the International Monetary Fund to be the worst in the world; and a global engineering business with an Ayrshire base is to close. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has been commendably blunt and said that Scotland is in recession. Does the First Minister agree with Mr Swinney?

This is about jobs in the private sector. We need a long-term plan to rescue us from the economic storm. Alex Salmond leads a minority Government and he has to work across all parties. Is the First Minister prepared, as I am, to sit down, roll up his sleeves, and work with others to build a budget and a long-term economic approach that can create jobs and tackle the economic recession? His economic growth target for 2011 was invented in the boom times. What is his assessment of that target now that we are in the bust?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1377)

My question is about traditional banking. Today, in Glasgow, Derek Simpson of the union Unite is wringing his hands over the Lloyds TSB job losses. Does the First Minister regret the irony of the fact that a union that backed the Labour Government's enforced takeover of HBOS by Lloyds TSB is now campaigning on those job losses? As those banking jobs add to yesterday's unemployment figures, does the First Minister support Parliament's work to get straight answers from banking bosses who have destroyed their businesses and Scotland's reputation for financial probity and expertise?

Tens of billions of pounds of public sector pension funds have been hit hard by banking losses. The First Minister could bring together the people who control those pension funds in Scotland to speak with one voice. Does he agree that doing so would provide a substantial lever to get an explanation from the bankers? People are angry that the bankers have made monkeys out of the Government. Some £37 billion has gone from the taxpayer to the banks, and money has gone out of the door in bonuses to bankers in Northern Rock this week. People cannot believe the stupidity of the bankers who let Bernard Madoff get away with a $50 billion fraud. How could the Royal Bank of Scotland ask shareholders for £12 billion in a rights issue, knowing that there might be an £8 billion loss as a result of bad investment decisions? Enron people were investigated and some were jailed. Should there be an investigation now? Who would carry it out? Do not we need steady, careful and considered decision making on banking boards and an end to their gambling with money that is not theirs and to their trading shares that they do not own? Should not we taxpayers, who are paying for the debacle, put people of quality on to those boards until the insipid and culpable regulation of banks catches up with the world that we, the people, are really in? The First Minister can bring together the voices of hundreds of thousands of people and the clout of tens of millions of shares to get the answers and action that people want. Will he make that happen?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1350)

As of this morning, parliamentary motion S3M-3226 has been signed by almost 50 members of the Scottish Parliament across the political parties. The motion calls on the First Minister to apologise for stating that the issue of funding for the Scottish Inter Faith Council was resolved when it was not. Will he apologise?

Our issue is not with what Mr Ewing said but with what the First Minister said. Last week, the First Minister said four times that the situation was resolved, not that it would be or was being resolved. If the First Minister thinks that it was resolved last week, what on earth was Mr Ewing doing at a meeting on Tuesday night this week still trying to sort it out? Why was the Government unable to place a shred of written evidence into Parliament last week as I asked? Why did Government spin doctors scurry around journalists yesterday with an e-mail in which they forgot to delete the sentence that makes it plain that the issue was never going to be resolved until this week? However much he wants to, the First Minister cannot just make stuff up in response to parliamentary questions. [ Applause. ]

In responding to the cross-party motion, the First Minister needs to do more than simply apologise. He needs to think before he speaks, and to choose his words so that they accurately reflect the true situation. People expect  him to respect the values of the Parliament in his answers. Will that happen?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer, I am told that the funding for the Scottish Inter Faith Council was agreed last night at a meeting between the Government and the executive committee of the Scottish Inter Faith Council. That is of course good and we welcome it, but the Government continues  to claim that the funding for the Inter Faith Council was "resolved" not last night, but before 12 noon last Thursday, 8 January. The Government's claim is not true. The First Minister said at question time: "the matter has been resolved."— [ Official Report , 8 January 2009; c 13822.]  He said not that it would be or is being resolved, but that it "has been resolved." That evening, last Thursday, I received an e-mail from the convener of the Inter Faith Council, Major Alan Dixon, which states: "I understand that some concern has been expressed over the response from the First Minister when he indicated that matters relating to funding had been resolved. This is just to indicate that this is not so". I reiterate the timing: that was last Thursday, after First Minister's question time. Although the matter undoubtedly was being discussed by the Government and the Inter Faith Council—on that I absolutely accept the assurance that Mr Ewing has just given to the Parliament on his involvement—it was not resolved at the point at which the First Minister told Parliament that it was. To claim that the matter was resolved is to say that Major Dixon is not telling the truth. Last Saturday, The Herald newspaper reported that civil servants telephoned the Inter Faith Council only after First Minister's question time. The paper reported that Major Alan Dixon confirmed that "he only received a call from a civil servant at around 12.30pm, which would have been just as FMQ's ended." As you know, Presiding Officer, my office has given you and the First Minister's office copies of the correspondence that I had. There is therefore absolutely no doubt that the situation was not resolved before 12.30 pm last Thursday, but the First Minister made exactly that claim on four separate occasions. Therefore, the First Minister misled Parliament. In the absence of any statement from the First Minister, neither I nor Parliament can know the reason for that. Regardless of the reason, the issue is a serious one for the Parliament. For nothing to happen as a result would have profound implications for the way in which we conduct our business. I have taken advice on how such issues were handled in previous sessions of Parliament. There is ample precedent for clarifying statements and, indeed, for straight apologies to be made when something that was originally said was incorrect. In the absence of any such appropriate statement from the Government, I ask you, Presiding Officer, to protect members from being misled.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1324)

I have a letter that was sent to all eligible staff at the Scottish Inter Faith Council on 11 December. It is their redundancy notice, which was sent by the convener of the executive committee, Major Alan Dixon. He writes: "despite every reasonable attempt made by the SIFC Executive Committee on your behalf, core grant funding from Scottish Government beyond 16 January 2009 has not yet managed to be secured ... we are hereby giving you notice that your employment with SIFC will terminate on 16 January 2009." Can the First Minister explain why it is the right time to risk closure of the Inter Faith Council through Government dithering and delay?

I am delighted to hear that, but the First Minister needs to explain why redundancy notices were issued to all the staff at that time. If that is the case, we want that  information to be put on the record and placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre today. It is difficult to understand why, at this time of year, when the world is in the state that we see on our television news every day and when we have just had a parliamentary debate on Gaza, the Scottish Inter Faith Council was forced to issue redundancy notices before it could get straight answers from the Government. If the First Minister can now clarify exactly when the situation was resolved, we would all welcome that information.

I certainly welcome that action. All I am asking the First Minister to do is to put on the record in Parliament exactly when that action was taken and why redundancy notices had to be issued. Can he do that today, please?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1296)

That most senior and most loyal SNP back bencher, Alex Neil, told the Finance Committee that Scottish "chief executives of quangos have been paid mega film-star bonuses." He added that they were "taking the taxpayer for a ride."—[ Official Report , Finance Committee, 9 December 2008; c 864, 867.] Was he right?

The difficulty for the First Minister is that new contracts from his Government are coming thick and fast. He has slashed the Scottish Enterprise budget by 40 per cent during a recession, yet the chief executive still gets £245,000 a year. The First Minister's new skills quango is advertising a six-figure salary for its chief. The advisory body that is the new Futures Trust also offers six figures, despite its being entirely bypassed by the transport strategy. If the First Minister will not tackle his quango fat cats, is he tempted to look one last time at what is left of the arc of prosperity? Will he consider Ireland? Its budget proposes a 10 per cent cut for Government ministers. In these tough times, will the First Minister order the same for his ministers?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1272)

Is the First Minister serious when his Government says that, after the new Forth crossing, all 28 other transport projects that were mentioned yesterday are of equal priority? Will that be the case even if the Treasury declines the opportunity to make an interest-free loan to pay for the Forth bridge? Is the Scottish Government's position the reason why The Press and Journal says today that "The SNP is trying to be all things to all people"? [ Interruption. ]

That was in The Press and Journal .

The Courier  says: "Talking up the prospect ... is all very well but, as of now, it has all the substance of a mirage."

The difficulty is that The Press and Journal also said that the review was all spin and wrapping paper. The Scotsman says: "All of this has a fishy smell about it." I ask again: are the 28 remaining transport projects all of equal status? Are they all at equal risk if the SNP cannot make its sums add up? Is the truth not that the one real SNP priority is to create a war of words with the Treasury? What is it about the Government and transport? It has a rail franchise with no business plan, a bridge with no funding and a Scottish Futures Trust with no money. The Government must tell us the timetable for all the projects and which will survive into plan B. When will the First Minister stop being all things to all people?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1243)

Yesterday, the chief executive of Lloyds TSB, Eric Daniels, toured Government, parliamentary and media offices. I heard nothing yesterday and have read nothing today that says what the impact on jobs, branches and headquarters functions will be as a result of Lloyds  TSB's takeover of HBOS. Is the First Minister any better informed than the rest of us about what the specific impact on Scotland will be?

The First Minister will be aware that, next week, there is to be a hearing of the Competition Appeal Tribunal, to consider competition in banking. The Office of Fair Trading's report on the merger makes it plain that Scotland and Scottish business are most at risk from a drop in competition and a rise in bank charges. The Competition Commission should not have been bypassed by ministers on such a substantial takeover. The case has been taken to the tribunal by a group of Scottish businesspeople—the Merger Action Group—who have raised significant sums of money to pay for the appeal. Is there not a place for the Scottish Government in the process, which is in the interests of Scottish business? We now have small business against big business and big government. The Treasury is threatening to enforce big costs against the challengers. Will the First Minister therefore examine the case for providing legal support for the challenge?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1217)

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth's budget statement yesterday contained 2,000 words. How many new proposals did the Government reveal?

That was certainly a new definition of "new". The £25 million for council housing was announced in April and the £100 million for housing was announced in August—of course, we now know that only £9 million of that is already committed. We have heard it all before. The list is not new and it has not changed. It is all out of date. At such a time, the test of a Government is its plan B—its ideas and its competence in dealing with change. We need change to deal with  unemployment, which is up by 13,000, change to deal with mortgage lending, which is down by 20 per cent, and change to deal with the tens of thousands of banking jobs that the United Kingdom Government put at risk over HBOS. What will it take for the First Minister to grasp his budget and change it to respond to the urgent needs that Scotland faces right now? How much worse does it need to get?

From what I remember, the council tax policy was announced in 2006. At that time not even Prophet Salmond would have been able to work out that a recession was going to happen. The country wants to hear what he is going to do now, not what he did two years ago, so let us have some answers.

I am grateful to the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment for giving way on his point about securing outcomes and increasing choices for fishermen. Shetland's fleet seeks increased days, rather than a loss of days in exchange for an increased cod quota. Will the cabinet secretary assure members and the industry that the Brussels negotiations that are about to begin will not result in a trade that involves an increased cod quota but a cut in days? That would be extremely damaging to the interests of the fleet that I represent in the Parliament.

To ask the Deputy First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1192)

An e-mail from an electronics company in Galashiels, which has 40 employees, says this: "Our banking facility has been ... at base +1.5% for years ... Last Friday we had a meeting with our bank manager ... and were stunned to be advised that they would require base +4%." The Government has a Financial Services Advisory Board. Does the Deputy First Minister expect it to help Scottish business during the recession?

For years, we have all supported the financial services industry in Scotland. Now, we need its help in return. Small business is being hit by banks. The collapse in competition will make that worse, and now the banking industry has been shamefully let down by the UK Government over HBOS. The Government has ripped up the level playing field, broken its promises and thrown 20,000 jobs to the wind. At the dawn of a recession, Scottish business has found itself  raided by the banks and abandoned by Labour at the Treasury. [ Applause. ]

Will the Government call in what is left of Scottish banking this week and get it to drop the punishment charges for small business? Further, will the Government establish a banking jobs task force to tackle the crisis that the UK Government has created?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1167)

In response to the damning child protection inspection in Aberdeen, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning said this morning that she was "reassured that considerable efforts are being made and things are moving in the right direction." The recovery action plan that is being driven by the inspectors could take four months to produce, and the follow-up inspection will wait for a year. How can that possibly be urgent enough when children in Aberdeen face living in high-risk situations with drug-abusing parents and without adequate support or protection, and with services that do not intervene quickly enough in cases involving parental substance abuse and neglect? None of that is acceptable, is it?

I agree with the First Minister that the situation is totally unacceptable. Children in Aberdeen are at risk, so when he returns to the north-east, as I am sure he will this weekend, will he meet the political leaders of Aberdeen? Yesterday, in response to Aberdeen City Council's lack of Government funding, they published 317 pages of new council cuts, including more cuts to children's services. Will he tell them that they must deliver a first-class child protection service? This morning in Aberdeen, there is a child in a flat who has drug-abusing parents. The council needs to act and so does the First Minister's Government. Will he today promise more resources to help that child?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1144)

I join the First Minister and other members who have congratulated President-elect Obama—a very liberal Democrat. This week, Unite the Union told me that there is now no doubt that we face losing thousands of banking jobs in Scotland. Only minutes after its meeting with the First Minister, Lloyds TSB told the City that it would cut 20,000 jobs. What levers does his Government have to influence HBOS shareholders to keep Scotland's bank Scottish?

The First Minister inherited a position in which the Scottish Government is hardwired into the Scottish financial services industry. That needs to be exploited. There is now a fight to find an alternative way forward for HBOS. How is it acceptable that the bankers' first instinct is to pay one another £60,000 a month to advise one another on the mess that they made? The taxpayer is now a £1 billion shareholder in our banks, and we want our money to do more than lose 20,000 jobs, send other jobs overseas and close down branches on the high street. Will the First Minister tell bankers that, when the taxpayer has to cough up billions to bail them out, we expect them to listen to the interests of customers and small businesses, not tell us to leave them alone?

What has that got to do with the question, Presiding Officer?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1117)

In the chamber in April, the First Minister spoke about the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Bill. This week, Cardinal Keith O'Brien said that the proposals in the bill were akin to "Nazi-style experiments", and he said that it was behaviour "last seen under the Nazis". Does the First Minister think that that is the right sort of language to use?

I quite agree that free speech is a pillar of our society, but I do not think that a First Minister of any persuasion should equivocate on such language. The debate is extremely important, but the last thing that it needs is extreme language. The First Minister's Government is investing—as previous Governments were right to do—in building Scotland's life sciences industry. It is one  of Scotland's priority industries, and it gets millions of pounds of support from his Government. Equivocation is not an option when language about Nazis could put Scottish jobs at risk. What steps is he taking to put right the damage that might be done?

The UK Government has made available £57 billion of his and my money—taxpayers' money—so I presume that Derek Brownlee would concede that his suggestion that that the bank would simply collapse and disappear is not the case.

The Liberal Democrats welcome the opportunity to initiate—in our parliamentary time—another debate on the economic issues that confront Scotland. We believe that it is the right thing to do. We remain disappointed that other parties—including the Government, which has much more parliamentary time—have not yet managed to do that. We encourage them to take our approach in the coming weeks, because we should consider the future of our economy in great detail as the pace of change that we face continues. There are few occasions in history when global events have happened quite so quickly and have changed so thoroughly the world and the way in which we see it. The backdrop is one of global economic chaos. Stock markets and people's pensions have lost nearly half their value—more than that in places such as India. There is real concern about whether we face downturn, recession or depression. Things have moved fast—that is the point of today's debate. Decisions that seemed clear cut on 18 September are not so obvious now—that is why we lodged the motion that we are debating today. We have included the words suggested by my good friend Mr Alex Neil in order to gain maximum support for our case. We say that the Parliament should unite to save a 300-year-old national institution—to save not just a bank, but the jobs in that bank and all the jobs that rely on the scale of the Mound's operation. I refer to the sandwich shop that serves staff through the working day, the taxi companies that cross the capital and towns throughout Scotland, and the cleaners and many more who keep the bank operating. We should unite not just for the thousands of HBOS staff but for the many thousands more who depend on the banking sector and on HBOS, in particular.

I have talked to many members of banking staff over the past few weeks, both within and outside my constituency, where a bank branch will probably go if we follow the Labour Government's current proposals. I am sure that John Park does not wish that to happen. I assure him that I have met banking staff to discuss the  matter and will continue to do so. This morning we argue that we should say no to the takeover of HBOS by Lloyds TSB. A few short weeks ago the takeover was the only game in town—the UK Government was correct to make that case at the time. However, in those few short weeks the global banking system has changed more than it has changed in a generation. The UK Government now needs to change. On 8 October, it decided to create taxpayer-funded banking institutions. That decision was right, but it means that today the Government should re-examine what is in the best interest of taxpayers, because now we are shareholders in those institutions. Small businesses and customers rely on local banks, with competition in high streets and towns across Scotland. On 22 September, party leaders joined the Government and the Scottish Council for Development and Industry here in Edinburgh. We were united then in saying that Scottish banking expertise, the tens of thousands of banking jobs and the strong Scottish financial sector are huge arguments in favour of retaining an HBOS headquarters here in Scotland. The First Minister made those arguments; I supported them in September, and I support them absolutely today. That should now mean that HBOS is retained as an independent bank, in Scotland, for the long-term benefit of the Scottish economy. The action of the UK Government can make that happen. Our First Minister should be meeting the Prime Minister and the chancellor. One issue that has not changed is the impact of the situation on customers. From day 1, I warned about the impact of a loss of competition on the high street. I want us to stand up for the individuals and small businesses that will face loss and threat as a result. Let us look at what the Federation of Small Businesses is saying. Its members—small businesses in Scotland—are saying that they have seen increases in the cost of borrowing facilities from the clearing banks. More than half have seen an increase in payment times from invoicing to full payment, putting their cash flow at risk. Small businesses are being asked to secure overdrafts and loans on their homes. Banks are shortening business lending review dates. One small firm that is involved in the tourism industry told the Federation of Small Businesses: "Our bank facility has recently been up for review at the moment. The bank has informed us that in addition to them taking a £150 'renegotiation' fee they are going to increase our overdraft rate from 2.5% over base to 6.95% over base." This morning the president of the National Farmers Union Scotland said on the radio that banks are shortening credit and pulling in  overdrafts on farm businesses across Scotland. The last thing that businesses need is a collapse of competition in banking that will threaten their access to the overdrafts and borrowing that keep them going in tough weeks and months. That is the impact of what has happened. Since the Government announced its support for the takeover in September, everything has changed. Now the Government also needs to change. The UK Government has nationalised Northern Rock, bailed out banks and even subsidised the losses of Icelandic banks, so why should we wipe out Scotland's bank? The collapse of competition in banking is already biting small business. Unless Parliament unites and the UK changes its policy, there is a real danger that more Scottish businesses will enter the jaws of bankruptcy. What was urgent for the short term in September was swept away by the transformation of banking in October. We need to look again at those decisions and to take the route that gives strength to the Scottish economy in the long term. That is the case for an independent HBOS in Scotland. The Scottish Government should make that case in the Scottish Parliament today and to the Prime Minister and the chancellor. We should unite to support that case today. I move, That the Parliament gives a general welcome to the measures taken by the UK and other governments to tackle the current banking crisis; considers, however, that the recapitalisation plans announced by HM Treasury in October 2008 have fundamentally changed the landscape under which competition rules were waived to enable a merger between Lloyds TSB and Halifax Bank of Scotland (HBOS); further considers that inconsistent statements have come from the UK Treasury about whether or not the banks would independently have access to the recapitalisation funds; believes that this ambiguity is not serving anyone's interests in the present environment; further believes that losing HBOS corporate headquarters and jobs in Edinburgh would seriously jeopardise the city's position as a financial centre; sees no reason why HBOS should not be able to access UK Treasury recapitalisation and, therefore, liquidity funding on the same independent basis as other major banks, and, with this in mind, considers it a very real possibility that an independent HBOS solution could be found that may well be in the best interests of shareholders, employees, customers and the Scottish economy at large.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1088)

Yesterday's enormous financial package will be judged on what it does in the real economy: its impact on personal lending, individual deposits, bank credit to business, and jobs around the country. HBOS will now be a taxpayer-supported institution. When the First Minister said three weeks ago that the Lloyds TBS merger with HBOS was "the only game in town", he was right, but that is no longer the case, is it?

I return to the point about shareholders. Things have moved on, so there is a chance to say, "We want our bank to stay in Scotland. We want to keep the Bank of Scotland's independence, its headquarters and branches on every high street, and jobs that otherwise would be lost." That would protect competition for customers, which is also important for the long-term interests of Scottish business. Will the First Minister negotiate to get Treasury and Bank of England support to HBOS? Will he take that argument to the Treasury? The rescue package creates taxpayer-supported institutions. Does he agree that the package gives Bank of Scotland shareholders another option? Will he take those fresh steps to keep HBOS in Scotland and to keep it independent?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1059)

What discussions will the Scottish ministers host to prevent rail strikes next week?

I think that the answer was none. Tens of thousands of people will suffer next week. I spoke to First ScotRail and Network Rail this morning and found that people face four days of travel chaos, with no service to Aberdeen or Inverness. When it was in opposition, the SNP stood in this chamber and said that the Government had a responsibility to act; it had to knock heads together and it had to host talks. Now that the SNP is the Government, will it guarantee to host meetings before Tuesday? Have ministers knocked heads together? What is the First Minister's action plan to stop the strike? Is it anything to do with him?

So when Mr Salmond's colleagues said last session that the Government had to knock heads together and host talks, I presume that they were talking absolute nonsense.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1030)

Today's assessment of Scotland's economy makes grim reading. Business turnover is predicted to fall by 28 per cent in six months. However, things are already tough for families and individuals. Electricity costs are up by 18 per cent, gas is up by 28 per cent and food is up by 14 per cent. By what percentage has the First Minister changed his budget plans to respond?

I can help the First Minister: his budget makes 0.3 per cent of a change. He needs to choose; there is an offer on the table. Do his new quangos and their budgets really come first? Families and individuals face big challenges now and through the winter, but the First Minister's budget is 99 per cent old news. If this was anyone else's Government, he would accuse it of idly standing by. People do not understand why Government will not tighten its spending belt when families have to do so every day. The Parliament has the powers to cut income tax and deliver hundreds of pounds back into people's pockets, and this is the time to meet the real challenge that people face. I am up for it—is the First Minister?

Today, economic, city and financial grandees are all promoting their interests. Some want a complete rethink of the deal, others feel that the deal is not in shareholders' interests, and some are even coming round to my view that a substantial issue is that there will be less competition on the high street. In that respect, I carefully noted the First Minister's observation that the issue is of abiding concern. Lloyds TSB's gigantic takeover is of great interest not only in the City of London, the city of Edinburgh and Parliament, but in every village, town and high street in Scotland. This Parliament and our Government need to be seen to be standing up for the individuals and small  businesses that will potentially face loss and threat as a result. Lloyds TSB's takeover affects armchairs in the board rooms—who decides what, and in which city, does matter. Scotland stands united in wanting to secure all that can be secured on the Mound, around Edinburgh and throughout Scotland, but we must not lose sight of the impacts on the factory floor, at the shop counter and at the farm gate. Every small business will say that one of the top three relationships that it has is with its bank. Therefore, as I explained to Archie Kane yesterday, a real priority of our work must be to protect functions, services and competition on the ground throughout Scotland. It will not be only in Lerwick, where a Bank of Scotland branch is 100yd from a TSB branch, that one bank will go. For reasons of local economic impact, the crisis and the challenge of the future of the Bank of Scotland involve reserved powers and devolved consequences. People therefore expect the Scottish Parliament and the Westminster Parliament to work together. Today, I have written to the chairman of the Treasury Select Committee, John McFall, and to the convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, Iain Smith, to ask them to convene a joint inquiry into the failures that led to the crisis and the impact that it will have on business and the prosperity of companies and individuals throughout Scotland. We must learn why, and we must work on the future. I cannot agree with Iain Gray that the Prime Minister and the chancellor are without blame, because for 10 years Gordon Brown was warned about City of London loopholes that give every incentive to get-rich-quick schemes. For 10 years, he told us that he had conquered boom and bust and that there was no more bust. For 10 years, he ran an economy that was based on ever-increasing house prices that would never fall, that would feed a credit explosion, that would leave £1 trillion of consumer debts, and in which the only problem was to decide how high the inheritance tax threshold should go to protect the bonanza. The economic music then stopped, and look where we are. It is important that both Governments have clear objectives and it would be helpful to staff, businesses and account holders if those objectives would coincide. The First Minister was quick to condemn those whom he blamed for the crisis, but according to financial commentators, short sellers appear to be less at fault than the weakness of the HBOS business model. The First Minister also claimed that as a Prime Minister or President of an independent Scotland, he would have ordered his central bank to lend £100 billion to sort out the problem. Until now—to  answer a different criticism, in fairness—the Scottish National Party has said that it would not have a central bank, let alone that such a bank would be under the personal control of the head of the Government or that it would have £100 billion ready to lend out.

The First Minister should certainly follow the advice of Vince Cable, and follow much more of it more regularly. He would do very well if he did so. It is important to note that financial commentators—as opposed to me, Vince Cable or anyone else—have made observations on HBOS's business model. The First Minister might want to reflect on that. We are observing what is happening in the current circumstances. A united and consistent approach that involves everyone in politics and business is not helped by palpable nonsense about central banks and an independent Scotland. We need to keep the banking system moving forward, but I do not agree that we need to keep the lifestyles of every top banker going. They get their great rewards because of the great risks that they tell us about, but they have hit their heads on the risk that has been taken. We need to keep Edinburgh as a financial centre and make best use of the world-class talent, skills and experience that we have here, and we need to retain the grass-roots talent that works with Scottish business in every corner of the country. Last night, Simon Thompson of the Chartered Institute of Bankers in Scotland said that what had happened "comes down to poor decisions made in banks". He put the responsibility on bankers for "allowing a culture to develop in the banking industry far removed from the high ethical and professional standards required." Those are not my words; they are his words. Peter Burt was even more succinct on television at the weekend. People throughout Scotland, and further afield, need to be convinced about our banking and financial industry. The industry, which is of such  significance to Scotland, should not underestimate the jolt that recent days have given to people's confidence—I do not mean people with £1 million share options, but people whose life savings are held on account. The industry has a job to do to convince us that probity, professionalism and the highest standards of analysis and decision making are at the heart of what it does. I have no doubt that the people in the industry will do that, but do it they must.

I thank the First Minister both for the advance copy of his statement and for his invitation to join the SCDI's meeting with the Scottish Government on Monday, along with so many other people who are concerned about the future of financial services in Scotland. This morning, the chairman of the First Minister's Council of Economic Advisers, Sir George Mathewson, gave warning about the proposed merger. He is concerned that less competition in the banking sector is not good news for Scottish business customers. Does the First Minister support that analysis? What will his presentation to Lloyds TSB say on that point?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-1010) I, too, welcome Iain Gray to his new position.

Following today's confirmation of the merger between HBOS and Lloyds TSB, Scotland is worried about other financial institutions as well. Does the First Minister accept that Scottish customers and businesses are deeply concerned about the future of banks that are not based in Scotland? How is the First Minister reflecting the cross-border, international issues that the situation exposes?

I accept the First Minister's description of deficient financial models. Does he accept that city speculators are holding a loaded gun against the taxpayer because they know that the Government will step in? We need to put a stop to a policy that privatises profits and nationalises losses. Tens of thousands of people who work for banks in Scotland, and millions who use them, fear for their future. Rich kids in bright shirts in London, New York and Tokyo are making money at our expense. Scotland loses its bank, people lose their branches, and the country is worse off. How will the First Minister work to get a joint approach to protect banks today and in the months ahead? I will work with him, for where else, indeed, does this end?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-986)

The First Minister's Government has been big on talking about fuel poverty. Following today's announcement, what new investment will he be making to cut the fuel bills of people in Scotland? Does he have a new programme of action to cut fuel bills ready to go?

Does the First Minister accept that those people who have significant fears about fuel prices are not that interested in arguments between Governments? If Scotland does not get its fair share from the United Kingdom Government, the First Minister will have our support in getting that money. Advice is good, but action is rather better. People know that the First Minister already has real powers at his disposal. He has had plenty of warning of the crisis that people face. What levers will he use this year to  get money into people's pockets? He knows that more people than ever are feeling the pain of high energy costs. For many this winter, the decision will be, "Boiler on or boiler off?" Will the First Minister give a guarantee that he will rise to that challenge and that his action will benefit more families and pensioners than ever before?

To ask the Deputy First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-955)

On Monday in Campbeltown, I met people who had real worries about the closure of the Vestas wind turbine factory. What is the Deputy First Minister's Government doing to keep the factory open and to save those jobs?

The worldwide head of Vestas said from the start that he would not come to Scotland and would meet only in Denmark. If such a threat to 100 jobs had occurred under any previous Government, the SNP would have been first to demand that ministers took the lead and got over to Denmark to engage with the most senior people in the company. Given that the SNP is in government, why have ministers not done that? Jim Mather told the Campbeltown Courier : "For Kintyre to lose 100 private sector jobs would be the equivalent of the Royal Bank of Scotland closing in Edinburgh". I agree, so why have ministers spent the summer travelling around Scotland promoting independence, when they should have been going round Europe protecting Scottish jobs? When will ministers get across to Denmark and make the high-level case face to face? There is a flight to Copenhagen from Edinburgh at 4.15 this afternoon. Will there be a minister on it?

I thank the First Minister for his statement and for his earlier kind words. I agree with what he said about both Nicol Stephen, my friend and colleague, and Wendy Alexander. I was struck today by how little of the First Minister's statement was about the big issue facing the people of Scotland today: the cost of living. The past 12 months have seen energy costs rise by 15 per cent, with 30 per cent more to come, food costs rise by £30 a month, and headline inflation up to its highest level for 16 years. It is at times like this that people want to hear how Governments are working together to make their lives easier. They want to know that the SNP Government is not just on the side of spin but on their side. I know that it is hard for the First Minister to work jointly with London, because the Labour Government is part of what is wrong—dithering, divided, out of touch and on the way out, with Alistair Darling performing some sort of reverse Macmillan, telling us, "You've never had it so bad." However, what is the First Minister doing to make it better? What steps is he taking as a political leader, not as a political commentator, to meet that challenge? What parts of the First Minister's programme are designed to work consistently with the United Kingdom Government to tackle the crisis in housing? What is happening beyond reannouncing money either side of the border to make buying and renting more affordable? What evidence can he give us that he will put taking action to tackle the rising cost of living ahead of his need to make a political point? That is what people want to hear; or does the First Minister think that they will understand Governments being tribal when the need to work together has never been so important? It is the economy, Presiding Officer.

Will the minister take an intervention?

It is not, actually. I am grateful to Mr Russell for talking about funding, but I would like him to clarify something. If his position is that there will be local discretion, is the funding within the grant-aided expenditure settlement? I cannot see how it can be within the GAE settlement and be needs based at the same time.

There must be something symbolic in the fact that, when Mary Scanlon and I choose to speak in a debate in which we have only a general interest, the heavens open and it starts to pour with rain. No doubt, by the time that Mr Russell winds up, he will have come up with a suitable symbolic interpretation. I, too, welcome this important report, which the convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee introduced earlier. The issue is a tough one for both Parliament and Government because it is about tough choices, which Mary Scanlon illustrated in her speech. On behalf of the Liberal Democrats, I welcome the continuation of much of the work that my colleague Ross Finnie began in the previous Administration. I saw earlier a bit of the year-zero approach that we are all too used to from the front bench, but perhaps even Mr Lochhead could, in his more charitable moments, find a way to give some credit to ministers in previous Administrations who worked pretty hard on this difficult issue. I note that the umbrella group Scottish Environment LINK stated clearly on the radio this morning that it welcomes the work of current ministers because it continues the work of previous ministers in this difficult policy area. I welcome what the convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee said about climate change in her introductory speech, and the points that Sarah Boyack and others have made on that issue. That appears to me to be the right context in which to view the debate. In addition, Nanette Milne, who is no longer in the chamber, rightly made a point about households. From our television screens last year we all gained a powerful impression of the impact of the floods down south on businesses and households, but particularly on the latter. That demonstrated the compelling need for Government across the UK, which in our context is the Scottish Government, to take action to deal with the enormous distress that is caused to people in such circumstances. Roseanna Cunningham, Mary Scanlon, Peter Peacock and others mentioned recommendation 11 on clear criteria for the prioritisation of funding. Prioritisation is a ghastly word, but we use it all the time. I confess that I am a little confused by the  Government's proposed approach to this because we are being told—and I understand that the committee was told when considering the spending review—that the budget will be allocated to local authorities. The budget will be £126 million, which is, in effect, a continuation of the £42 million a year that was given to local authorities in 2007-08. However, if the Scottish Parliament information centre's numbers are right, that indicates a real-terms cut in the budget for flooding. I am not quite sure how consistent that is with the recommendation, or how the minister will square off the need to tackle funding issues, as Mary Scanlon rightly mentioned. I ask the minister to reflect on the fact that there is no reference to flood protection in the Government's national outcomes, indicators or targets, which we are repeatedly told in the Parliament are the defining purpose of the Government. If I quote the cabinet secretary correctly, he said earlier that "flooding is one of the biggest threats" and I am sure that we all concur with that. If he is right, why are flood prevention and the funding for it not mentioned in the national outcomes, indicators or targets? I would be grateful if the Minister for Environment could give us an answer on that when he winds up the debate. I would also be grateful if he would help us to understand—perhaps not today but in due course—the principles of distribution that have been agreed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. What is the precise formula by which money has been allocated? What will happen to schemes that have been worked up but were not submitted as completed schemes by 14 November? There is a huge list of such schemes, as members said. In paragraph 40 of its report to the Finance Committee on the Scottish budget spending review 2007, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee said: "The Committee is unclear about how the reallocation of funding to local government will be calculated". I would be grateful if the minister would clarify that and other matters that I mentioned. It is important that not just the Parliament but affected communities should understand the Government's approach to such issues. Peter Peacock talked about coastal erosion and flooding, which I have raised with the minister's colleague Linda Fabiani in relation to the impact on island communities. During this morning's debate on the Scottish parliamentary pension scheme, Peter Peacock said that members of the Scottish Parliament probably have an eight-year tenure before they are out of the Parliament for one reason or another. If the most recent research  findings from the Scotland and Northern Ireland Forum for Environmental Research on rising sea levels and on tide levels, which can be elevated by up to 2m by major storms, are true, my constituency is sinking and will be gone soon. I take Bill Wilson's point—he has left the chamber, too—about the changes that are happening. In that context, built heritage is an important issue. Perhaps the minister will consider the need to remove archaeological material that will be lost. I appreciate that the issue is not as important as the loss of businesses and homes, but it is important to many people. David Stewart talked about weather radar. I do not disagree with his central point, but Shetland has no weather radar—not one iota. I am grateful to the convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for mentioning the issue and I ask the minister to say exactly what the Government is doing about the matter. David Stewart was right to say that the issue is important, not just for the Highlands but for the islands, which could do with weather radar. I hope that the minister will give a comprehensive answer on that point.

MacDonald of Clanranald.

In my capacity as convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I will deal with the wider debate before I deal with some of the points that Mr McGrigor has rightly raised. I am a Ronald of Clanranald, which is a sept of clan Donald. My forefathers died fighting for Charles on Culloden moor, and I have, of course—dangerously—married a Campbell. The Campbells and MacDonalds scrapped it out up and down Scotland's west coast for many years—the Campbells were ultimately successful. In the interests of marital harmony, I may or may not agree with the considered view that the Campbells were more politically adroit than others. I also note—purely in the interest of stimulating an important family debate—that two Dukes of Argyll were executed for treason during the Scottish civil wars. I have been told that, in times of yore—I hasten to add that—the McGrigors were a lawless bunch of cattle rustlers with a panache for publicity. That may or may not be the case—I am sure that Jamie McGrigor will keep me right. We think of Rob Roy in that context. Their name was proscribed at one stage, which meant that if any member of the clan were caught they could be beaten, robbed or even killed, without fear of punishment on the part of their captor. I have no doubt that Mr McGrigor will take issue with all that, given that he has introduced such a worthy bill. However, I note that his clan survived for 200 years as outlaws—no doubt as a Conservative, Mr McGrigor knows how that feels.

This has been rather more entertaining. I take Mr Gibson's point. I mention two incidents that I think are directly relevant to the bill. First, this morning at the Royal Highland Show I encountered the new top team of the Scottish Crofting Foundation, who were resplendent in the new crofters tartan—a  corporate tartan. We might talk more about such tartans, which Mr McGrigor mentioned. Secondly, earlier this week I and colleagues on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, a number of whom are in the chamber, were in Vienna to consider tourism marketing and promotion. As we took in the Turkey versus the Czech Republic game on the big screen in a Vienna fanzone—purely in the interests of research, members will understand—we encountered four Scottish lads in kilts. Even when our team does not qualify, the tartan army goes on tour. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which I convene, strongly recommends that the Parliament agree to the general principles of the bill. I pay tribute to Mr McGrigor's work on the subject in this and the previous session of the Parliament. His success is the more notable because he has been able to bring together the Scottish Tartans Authority and the Scottish Tartans World Register and to secure a commitment from those bodies to make over their existing collections to the proposed statutory register. The committee's discussions on the bill were rather more lively than we might have expected them to be. We came across the interesting and passionate debate between wovenists and modernists, which Mr McGrigor aptly described. The committee's collective view was that tartan has historically been defined by its woven character, so we asked Mr McGrigor to consider whether the definition of tartan in the bill should refer to the tartan being woven. We did not think that the suggestion was incompatible with his overall aim, which we share, and I note what he said about the matter. The committee suggested that there should be a requirement to include a swatch with an application to register a tartan. Such an approach would help to promote the textile industry in Scotland, which the committee regarded as an important point. Members will want to consider the committee's arguments in the context of Mr McGrigor's comments about his concern that such an approach might have a deterrent effect. Members will want to return to the issue during the bill's later stages. The committee acknowledged the importance of protecting and preserving the archives that relate to tartan and thought that it was important to make the archives more accessible to interested parties by linking the register to the family history centre that will shortly be opened at the National Archives of Scotland. We had one or two reservations about the bill. First, we urge the keeper of the register carefully  to consider how to develop the classification system in order to differentiate between tartans that have played an important role in our nation's history and tartans that have been registered for entirely separate reasons, for example for corporate or sporting purposes. Tartans that are designed for football clubs, in particular, were discussed in that context. The role of such tartans is surely quite distinct from the role of tartans that have historic links with particular clans or regiments. Mr McGrigor might want to reflect on the issue. In our report, we also noted our concern about "the lack of definition on the face of the Bill as to what constitutes a sufficient link between an applicant and their right to authorise the Keeper to register a tartan." Mr McGrigor might consider how the matter might be clarified, either in the bill or in guidance that the keeper would develop. On fees, we stressed the importance of finding a level that deters frivolous applications but not genuine applications. A balance must be struck in that regard. Those appear to be the most important points on which Mr McGrigor might want to comment in his closing speech.

I thank the cabinet secretary for advance sight of his statement, which will be, we presume, the last before the summer recess. Rather than the unforeseen, which Mr Brownlee mentioned, I want to ask Mr Swinney about a number of foreseeable issues that he will have to deal with. Yesterday, the governor of the Bank of England said that rising food and energy prices could push UK inflation above 4 per cent. Further, interest rates are set to rise and the credit and financial squeeze is a reality, as anyone will find out if they talk to any of the one in six householders across  the country who fear losing their jobs. Those factors are foreseeable—they are commentators' assessments of what is happening. Given that today is Mr Swinney's last statement before the summer recess, does he agree that he could have used this opportunity to consider some of the wider economic influences that the Government and the country face? Further, why was there no comment in Mr Swinney's statement on how he is going to fund capital projects such as the new Forth bridge? He promised to make such a statement to Parliament before the summer recess. Why, too, was there no mention of pay policy, which is a significant part of overall Government expenditure? Is his policy still that there will be no redundancies in the public sector? Finally, why was there no mention of the "Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland" report—the famous GERS? We are told that the press—not Parliament—will receive that tomorrow. Possibly, Mr Swinney could confirm when the rest of us—that is, MSPs—will see that particular paper. Is it still a "dodgy dossier", to use his words? Will the authors, who are, of course, now Mr Swinney's civil servants, alter the report in light of Mr Swinney's comment in 2007 that "the authors have once again admitted that it says nothing about how Scotland would fare with the benefits of independence"? What are the authors to do this time, and when will we hear about it in the Parliament?

I always say that to myself as I stand up to speak. I welcome Willie Coffey's remarks about calm and relaxing bus travel, although that is not always how it feels on the number 5 bus in the morning. Indeed, Mr Renilson, whom Alex Johnstone mentioned, was on the receiving end of a sharp e-mail from me yesterday about why the number 5 never seems to run on time, although maybe that is just a personal impression. I agree with Alex Johnstone that many more of us are using buses. Members of all parties have talked about the reality of rising fuel costs and changing travel patterns: that has been the flavour of the debate. I agree with Patrick Harvie—although we agree on little else—that travel patterns are changing. Christopher Harvie was most unfair to Jeremy Clarkson. Professor Harvie and Mr Clarkson are two of a kind in many ways: they are both hugely entertaining, and although we might not agree with everything they say, they certainly enliven debate. Professor Harvie and I serve on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and no meeting is complete without an illustration of the problems that Professor Harvie has encountered on the morning bus from Melrose. The committee is none the worse for that and it is always useful to hear from Professor Harvie. I was intrigued when Patrick Harvie rubbished the SNP on climate change—he used a word that I will not try to pronounce—given that I thought that the other day he and Mr Stevenson had made a joint announcement on climate change. Mr Harvie seems to be in a slightly difficult position. The tenor of Keith Brown's remarks was a little difficult to understand, given that the Government motion mentions the risk to "the positive developments in the bus industry in recent years."  Mr Brown should perhaps have thought about what he was signing up to before he made his speech. Yesterday in Parliament Alex Johnstone and I took part in a good old-fashioned ideological debate about tax and spend in relation to business rates. I thought that today's debate would be about regulation versus deregulation—there has been some of that. I acknowledge what the minister said about the bus service operators grant, but it is important to note what bus companies and the Confederation of Passenger Transport say. I am sure that the minister pays a great deal of attention to the CPT—he would be well advised to do so. In its briefing for members of all parties, the CPT said: "The £4m allocated to BSOG during the debate will only cover a shortfall in funding that has been apparent since the publication of the Scottish Spending Review. To spin this £4m as an increase to protect fares and services is a complete misrepresentation." Those are not my words or those of Labour or Conservative members; they are the CPT's words. I am sure that the minister will reflect on them, and that he has ideas on how to improve the situation in the coming years, but he should not tell Parliament that all is well when the industry says clearly that that is not the case. I understand and sympathise with many members' comments on concessionary fares. It is important to reflect on the budget lines that Parliament considered earlier this year, which cut the budget in real terms by the end of this parliamentary session. The minister might say that he plans to change that, but parliamentarians can go on only what is in the spending review, according to which the budget will reduce from £189.4 million in 2007-08 to £181.4 million in 2008-09. Members who argue for a widening of the concessionary fares scheme, which is a fair and reasonable argument, must also ask the minister why the budget is being cut and how eligibility for the scheme can be widened while the budget is being cut. That seems to be a difficult circle to square. We look forward to hearing from the minister how he will do that.

On the bus service operators grant, the Confederation of Passenger Transport's briefing said: "To spin this £4 million as an increase to protect fares and services is a complete misrepresentation." Does the member agree with the CPT on that point?

I am tempted to say, after hearing about Aileen Campbell's survey, "Bring back the historic concordat, all is forgiven." In fairness, I was wrong about the debate. I thought that we would be in for a lot of self-congratulatory speeches from SNP and Conservative members, but instead we have had a debate about tax and spend. It is a shame that John Park has left the chamber, because I was going to say some nice things about his analysis—perhaps I will leave those until later. I, too, recall—through gritted teeth—the delight of the intricacies of payroll and pay as you earn, and of completing VAT returns. Certainly this ex-businessman—a very small businessman—recognises the merit in what the Government is doing. The Liberal Democrats strongly appreciate and welcome the minister's commitment to support what our amendment calls for. We believe—this was one of the interesting aspects of some of the Labour speeches—that the minister and his colleagues have made much of the importance of judging policy and refining policy outcomes in the past 12 months. We hope, therefore, that he will accept the amendment that Liam McArthur spoke to. Mr Brownlee queried whether there would be any benefit in independent assessment. Surely the need for such assessment is illustrated by the return of the work at the Fraser of Allander institute, which will begin later this summer. That has been welcomed, I see, by the various economists who comment on such aspects of the Scottish economy. I would have thought that that would interest Mr Brownlee and his colleagues, not least because, last month, the Office for National Statistics chopped by more than 2,000 the estimates of the number of people who are employed in Scotland's financial sector. The commentator Bill Jamieson, whom Mr Brownlee and some of his colleagues mention regularly, wrote: "The quality of economic statistics, the clarity of their presentation and their timeliness all need to be radically improved."  I hope that the Tories will consider our amendment to be a helpful contribution to that improvement, as we look forward to full implementation of the measures in the coming years. I was grateful, too, for Mr Mather's mention of BIDs. I absolutely agree with what he said on that. All that I can say is that I am glad that Mr Mather has won the argument and put Mr Ewing firmly in his box. I am sure that Mr Mather will remember that, when the previous Administration introduced BIDs a couple of years ago, Mr Ewing said: "This is outrageous and I challenge ... Jack McConnell and Nicol Stephen, the enterprise minister, to say why they are bringing forward a tax on small businesses." I agree with Mr Mather and I am pleased that he won that debate in his own party. The motion, particularly the part that states "businesses themselves are best placed to decide how to use the reductions", reeks of a heavy dose of Thatcherism, which is presumably why so many friends and colleagues on the right are so appreciative of it and so many friends and colleagues on the left are wholly against it. I thought that John Park's analysis—with its trickle-down economics, supply-side economics and Reaganomics—was not far from the truth. I commend Mr Mather's utter clarity on the point. He was clear about the position that he and his colleagues take on what he described—I hope that I quote him correctly—as a "major tax cut". It is clear to all of us that those who argue that tax cutting is the right way forward have won the debate in the present minority Government. I suspect that the debate reflected that, particularly in the speeches from the Government's back benches, although we did not hear the speeches from some of Mr Mather's colleagues that we might have expected to hear on an issue of such interest. Perhaps we will hear them one day, although many of us are not betting on hearing them soon. I take Roseanna Cunningham's point that small businesses welcome the move, and particularly very small businesses—I think that that was her particular point. Yes, they welcome it, but every small business to which I have spoken in the past few weeks is more concerned about fuel and energy prices than anything else. That is not to diminish the argument, but it is important that Government recognises that the bottom-line issues for businesses of all sizes are fuel prices and energy prices. Indeed, in the column that I quoted, Bill Jamieson wrote: "Scotland is facing an economic slowdown whose extent, severity and duration has been downplayed and underestimated by an administration in serious danger of losing touch with reality."  Those are not my comments but the comments of the independent Scotsman deputy editor, Bill Jamieson. I am sure that the minister will want to reflect on the views of observers and the many statistics that have been quoted today. For example, the Ernst & Young ITEM club group of economists has warned that Scotland will take a bigger-than-expected hit from rising oil prices. That demonstrably affects and will impact on every business throughout Scotland. It is important that the minister reflects on the other side of the debate. Many of us have argued that the tightness of the public sector finances at present will impact on the sustainability of any policy position that the Government takes, be it on small business rates or others. On oil production, the Mackay Consultants report that was published the other day states: "There is little doubt that the revenues will fall over the next few years because of the continuing declines" in UK continental shelf production. "The key factor, however, will be the level of world oil prices. If they fall back to more sustainable levels ... then the government's revenues in the future will be much smaller, possibly about £3billion per year". Clearly, the report refers to the UK Government, but as ministers say good things about the small business scheme, it is important that they reflect on the overall budgetary position and the tightness of the period into which we are about to extend. Small businesses are the cornerstone of Scotland's economic potential but, as the minister commented, the national and international economic perspective is biting. How the Government responds to the challenges will be a test. Some challenges have already arrived—fuel and energy costs are the important issues for small businesses today—and some will emerge in the future. The potential tightening of the public sector finances will try any minister's patience, and we can only judge what will happen in the coming years. Business needs certainty during this period of international uncertainty—many of us have concerns about that. As I well know, there is more to a small business account than just business rates.

On the minister's point about his discussions with business, is his position on regulation still that it should be one in and one out?

Does the First Minister accept that Shetland Islands Council faces an additional bill this year of £1.2 million because of the rising fuel prices to pay for the interisland ferries and bus services? [ Interruption. ] Shetland thinks that this is important, even if some members do not. Those facts are familiar to other local authorities. Given that it is absolutely within his Administration's ability to do something about that, will the First Minister provide assistance to the local authorities facing the additional costs?

A sensible change to the CAP would involve support for the fragile areas that the minister has mentioned. Some in the industry have presented arguments on the suckler cow premium, on the need to retain cattle in upland areas and on the link that goes right through the chain to the lowland areas of Scotland. Is he impressed by those arguments, and will he take them up?

Will the minister give way?

Among the issues for which the minister and his Government have responsibility is the funding of local government. A number of members have illustrated the problems that local government budgets are facing because of unprecedented rises in costs. Will the minister undertake to discuss the matter with his colleagues and face up to the reality of the pressure on local government finances?

A week ago, The Shetland Times reported that the cost of diesel was £6.40 a gallon. Today, the cost of diesel in one garage in central Lerwick is 0.5p short of £6.50 a gallon. That is how fast prices continue to go up in constituencies such as mine, Mr McArthur's and Alasdair Allan's. I agreed with pretty well everything that Alasdair Allan said. He made a well-argued case for the derogation that should be granted to our parts of Scotland and to wider Scotland. The UK Government must address those extremely serious issues. I will concentrate on a number of points that local people have made to me over the past few days. A lady who lives in Brae in Shetland wrote: "despite the fact that I car share I made a decision that I could no longer justify working in Lerwick because the price of owning and running a car to work steadily rises all the time. I worked out that I spent more than £4,500 on my car last year ... I do hope that something can be done to bring the cost of our fuel down to similar price that everyone else is paying on the mainland". I fully agree with Alasdair Allan on that point. The real scandal is the differential between the price that people pay in Stornoway, Lerwick or Kirkwall and the price that is paid in Ullapool, Aberdeen or down the road in Inverness. Someone is making money out of that—let me put it no stronger than that. I hope that, as well as listening to the argument that Alasdair Allan rightly made for a derogation, Michael Russell will support the case that the Office of Fair Trading should investigate the distribution system. Another constituent wrote that fuel costs were the biggest concern, as they affected everybody and everything, and commented that it was ironic that, although there was oil and gas in the Sullom Voe oil terminal, fuel in Shetland was the most expensive in the country. Alasdair Allan, Liam McArthur and I could probably have a competition over whose constituency has the most expensive fuel, but the present state of affairs is no great tribute to us or to any of the people we represent; it is an unfortunate fact of island life at this time. Yet another constituent made the wider point that has already been made in the debate, which is that fuel costs affect all aspects of island life. They wrote:  "We know of one couple with a young family, who were planning to build a house here in this village"— which is on the west side of Shetland— "and have now changed their minds because of the punishing costs of commuting to Lerwick to work. Another young family is seriously considering moving nearer Lerwick for the same reason." I am sure that my colleagues who represent the other islands will have similar examples regarding the change to the structure of island life that is caused by significantly high fuel costs. As Alasdair Allan also rightly said, the issue is not just the impact on family life and individuals, but the impact on businesses. I met representatives of the fishing industry at home in Shetland on Monday along with Vince Cable and Alistair Carmichael, who are my colleagues from London. The fishermen's point was that they are price takers rather than price setters, so passing on the cost of fuel increases to the customer just does not happen in that system. Mr Russell and Mr Lochhead will meet the task force on Friday—I understand that that will be its first meeting—so they need to move that issue forward. As Bertie Armstrong said to me today, we need immediate assistance. I hope that Mr Russell will respond positively to that message in his winding-up speech. The same issue affects agriculture because crofters and farmers face the same increases. For someone buying 500 litres of red diesel, the price this week is 67.4p a litre, compared with 34p a litre six months ago. I will finish on this couple of points, Presiding Officer.

There is no better illustration of the impact of such increases than the fact that a steer worth £500 at market would have been worth £480 12 years ago. That is the reality for our island lives and our constituencies. We certainly need action, but we need it here in Edinburgh as well as in London.

I am glad that Mr Brown and his party are interested in solutions. Why did his party vote against the amendments that my colleagues moved at Westminster that would have introduced the very derogations that Alasdair Allan has rightly proposed this evening?

I will help the minister by moving the debate from Christine Grahame back to crofting. Does the minister accept that one of the aspects of the SRDP that is of concern to crofters, and to anyone who wants the programme to work, is that the world has simply moved on? John Scott made that point in this debate and in a debate that we had the other week. We would work with the Government if it were prepared to consider what could be done to the SRDP to make it fit for purpose now, compared with how it was last year.

The Liberal Democrats welcome the Shucksmith report, and we acknowledge the work that Ross Finnie, Sarah Boyack and Mike Russell have done to bring it to fruition. As a Liberal Democrat, I recognise that no election address is complete without a reference to Gladstone; many of us still get elected on that basis. We agree with Shucksmith's broad thrust, and we welcome the debate that the report  continues. For many people this summer, the report will be a useful starting point for discussions over the farm gate and around the cattle pens and showgrounds. I associate myself and my party with the gratitude that has been expressed this morning to all involved. Across my constituency of Shetland, I plan to have a series of meetings with crofters on the recommendations of the committee of inquiry on crofting. Mark Shucksmith and his colleagues finished their report after a year when the local, national and global issues affecting crofting have changed dramatically. The minister acknowledged that in his opening remarks. Food price inflation and food security are the talk not just of crofters but of the governor of the Bank of England. My starting point is therefore that reform must be about securing food production, cattle and sheep in the crofting counties. Livestock means families; families mean schools; and schools mean a future for the islands, glens and high hills of Scotland. Paragraph 1.5.9 of the report stresses food security, and I agree with what it says. This Liberal Democrat wants the debate to be about the measures to support livestock production and enable crofters to get on with what they are best at—producing the quality stock that underpins agricultural trade and supply lines throughout the country. Yes, crofting is a way of life, income comes from many sources, and the environment plays a large part in the management of crofting land, but crofting, certainly in my community, is about production. It is about growing crops, filling the freezer and bringing quality livestock to market. The minister said that crofting is in a perilous state. I have two suggestions for him, the first of which concerns the Scotland rural development programme. It is the fault of no minister, current or previous, but events of the past 12 months mean that the programme is now out of date. Paragraph 1.6.2 of the report recommends changes in the programme. I would advocate that the Government should go further, because there is no more important test for any Government than that it can react to global changes affecting local people. Food security and food production have to be the cornerstone of crofting and agricultural policy. I ask the Government to make changing the SRDP an immediate priority. I will be happy to support and work with ministers if they commit to that course of action. I come now to my second suggestion. Crofters have been calling for the reintroduction of the suckler cow premium and even the sheep annual premium. France has retained such support for cattle. Shucksmith argues for measures where there is market failure, but I would go further. The  review of the common agricultural policy is under way, so now is the time to assist go-ahead crofters to invest in their cattle. Do we want to stop the remorseless loss of cattle and sheep from crofting areas? If the answer to that is yes—as it is for me—the Government needs to find ways of achieving that. As we digest the full details of the report over the coming months—as Sarah Boyack and John Scott have rightly said that we should—we will have many questions. The report is stark in pointing to differing views on regulation; a simple way of putting it might be that the west wants more, but the north does not. As I am sure the minister would accept, no one-size-fits-all approach will work. That can be consistent with the recommendations for regulatory change, but we need to be clear that local decision making needs to avoid a system that pits one crofting neighbour against another. I certainly would not favour any regulatory approach that led to that. I am unsure whether the recommendation to give HIE development functions is consistent with the devolution of decision making for crofting regulation. In paragraph 3.11.11, the report says: "It is essential that this is additional to HIE's own resources, and not used to mask cuts in the resources allocated to HIE's normal business." Indeed. The report speaks loudly on that point. The recommendation to leave budgets with Government does not appear to be consistent with devolving responsibility. I note the committee's support for the rural stewardship scheme, and its even greater support for the environmentally sensitive areas scheme—a better scheme in my view—but SRDP budgets are the direct responsibility not of local decision makers but of ministers. Ministers will have to decide what their policy is. If they advocate devolved budgets and decision making, I will absolutely support them. However, there is a deal of work to be done in joining up all the dots. The minister may wish to dwell on this final point. What can he do now? Ministerial powers to direct are clear—they have been in place for a considerable time—and recommendations on budgets can be taken forward in that way. As the minister considers the report and as he considers what he wants to bring back to Parliament, he must be clear on what can be done and on what really needs legislation. Parliament will want to scrutinise that. Sarah Boyack put those considerations in the context of the work of the committee. My party and I will work with a Government that is determined to take crofting forward. Mr Russell should be in no doubt about that. However, my test is on the immediate issues that ministers can  confront with all-party support and agreement—issues that can make a practical difference. I will conclude with the wise words of a good friend of mine, Norman Leask, who is the former chairman of the Scottish Crofting Foundation. Norman's work has always been about the people, because without people in the community there would be nothing. As he says, crofters need "affordable housing, decent jobs and fair treatment from governments in Edinburgh, London and Brussels. The report is a firm foundation for building all these requirements." I agree.

This morning at a cross-party meeting, the chief economist of Lloyds TSB stated that the Scottish economy was slowing and that the SNP's target of matching the UK's growth rate target would be achieved as the UK economy contracts. Given the First Minister's typically ebullient statement, will he take credit for that? That meeting also heard about Scotland's relatively poor business start-up rate. Does the First Minister agree that the number of new Scottish businesses that are profitable, successful and still in existence in three years' time will be central to improving our growth rate? Given that the swingeing cuts to Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise mean that responsibility for business start-ups now rests with local authorities under the business gateway—a move that business has profound concerns about—can he explain why it is that those arrangements are still not in place in the Highlands and Islands and what impact he expects that to have on growth in that area?

Gains!

The core of this debate has been whether Scotland's public services can be retained or developed without reducing staff—because staff are the budget. All Governments face that challenge. The SNP policy with which Mr Crawford began his speech was that there will be no redundancies. Michael Matheson made it clear that that position had to be retained. Mr Crawford went on to attack the record of my party. He claimed that, in previous years, 8,000 extra staff were brought in with new bodies. His Government's policy is that not one redundancy will be made out of those 8,000 staff—they will all be retained. That is one of many inconsistencies in the arguments that Mr Crawford made. If Mr Swinney is to achieve the £2 billion of efficiency savings with no job losses, public services must either change or be cut, as Tom McCabe said. That is the challenge, and the reality, that the Government will face over the next four years. The most striking aspect of the local government settlement is that, in 2008-09, cuts are now a reality. That is not scaremongering by any individual councillor or group throughout Scotland; it is the reality that has been presented to MSPs of all political parties. That is why Brian Adam and other SNP members joined Nicol Stephen and members of other parties in meeting the cabinet secretary last week to discuss the situation in Aberdeen.

I will wait to see what comes out of the Audit Scotland inquiry into those matters. I am sure that Mr Swinney would expect me to rest on that independent body's independent advice to the Government and the Parliament in that regard. Members of all political persuasions will be interested to see that advice. COSLA's assessment—not mine—is that the next two financial years will be very tight. In the context of Mr McCabe's remarks, it strikes me that the cabinet secretary and his colleagues in ministerial office cannot avoid—although they  might try—the reality of what will happen over the next three years because of the choices that are being made at local level. People will recognise what those choices mean for their local services and link that to the settlements that the councils have received. I understand and sympathise with the principles that Mr McCabe set out, and I recognise his consistency on this point. If I remember correctly, Mr Swinney—I am sure that he will correct me if I am wrong—made clear during his summer tour of local authorities last year that there would be no reform of local government. In that case, we will retain 32 heads of human resources, planning, social care and all the other areas that Mr McCabe described. Mr McCabe knows that to change that would be unpopular. Local government would, understandably, make representations about the nature of local democracy if the Government started to consider boundary changes and structural changes throughout Scotland.

I will just finish this point, as I am trying to develop a point in response to the one that Mr McCabe fairly posed to the chamber. My contention is that, although Mr McCabe, or indeed the Parliament, might expect the Government to take unpopular decisions in that area, there is not much evidence to suggest that that will happen this year or in any of the next four years. I am happy to give way to Mr Crawford on the point about unpopularity.

I would have a lot more respect for Mr Crawford's position if he had outlined such thoughts in his opening speech, rather than delivering a petty, ill-informed rant attacking all the other parties. Not one of those ideas was in his speech. If he had made that point, I would have agreed with him; it is a good point for us to think about. If he had been thoughtful in preparing his speech, instead of using the usual political tactics, we would deal with him with considerably more respect. I turn to what Willie Coffey said on outcome agreements. He made a serious point that we would do well to reflect on. He said—I hope I quote him correctly—that outcome agreements were "hard to measure"; I agree with him on that  but, as he knows, his Government is introducing 32 of those outcome agreements across local government. I am not sure that we have any of those agreements yet—Parliament has not had an opportunity to scrutinise them. Could the cabinet secretary tell us when we will have them, as Parliament has a responsibility to examine them to ensure that they are right? Mr Crawford said in regard to his record that it was all about abolition, and that everything was going well. My colleague Robert Brown made the point about £25 million being spent on creating more bodies. If it is all about abolition, why is he abolishing the fire service inspectorate but replacing it with a fire and rescue service advisory unit? Why is he abolishing the Scottish Building Standards Agency but replacing it with a new directorate for the built environment? Why is he merging the Rowett Research Institute with the University of Aberdeen but creating a new institute of nutrition and health? There is plenty about the record that we will be happy to reflect on over the next four years.

Will Mr Crawford give way on that point?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. I also agree with his sentiments on ending the dispute as quickly as possible. The First Minister said earlier that there is a "substantial and ample" stock of fuel to cope. The cabinet secretary said in his statement that the Government needs to "mitigate any possible impact" and that, should any shortage arise, the Government will act. Does the Government realise that the impact is being felt now and that there are shortages? If, as ministers say, fuel stocks are "substantial and ample", why are petrol stations on the A9 without fuel today—in April, not in May? From Evanton north, there are shortages of diesel; stocks do not exist in many rural areas; and speculation is pushing up prices. In the Borders, the local NFU Scotland representatives have told Jeremy Purvis that there is no red diesel available because of the situation at Grangemouth. Even the Shell petrol station that is close to the Parliament has run out of diesel and, this afternoon, increased its petrol prices by 1p a litre. The First Minister told Parliament earlier that fuel would last well into May; yet, just an hour later, Lothian Buses reported that there would be no buses from Sunday onwards. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that, this afternoon, the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change telephoned Lothian Buses to guarantee supplies for Edinburgh? If that is the case, does that guarantee from Scottish ministers extend to every bus operator in Scotland? Is the cabinet secretary also aware that 130p a litre is normal in my constituency, where the price of fuel is still rising? Why is 130p a litre now the reality elsewhere as well?  As people drive home tonight and see the reality, who will they believe: the Automobile Association, the Royal Automobile Club and business organisations, which are reporting restrictions, closures, queues and rising prices; or the ministers who say that they will monitor any impact? Is the Government not out of touch with what is happening across Scotland?

Which is rich, coming from Derek Brownlee.

I accept Mr Harvie's contention that there will always be complexity in proposals for changes in taxation. However, he was not terribly clear about how complex his proposal would be. I would be grateful if he would tell us.

Mr Brownlee was keen to talk about arithmetic. I recall that when the Conservatives were in Government, they recalculated unemployment at least 19 times. When it comes to arithmetic, Mr Brownlee's party certainly knows how to cook the books—it did it for 18 years and people were out of work because of the way in which it behaved. We will take few  lectures from the sanctimonious Mr Brownlee on such matters. Labour and the Tories are competing to be the voices of conservatism. Both are arch advocates of the council tax, despite their open acknowledgement that it gravely penalises Scottish pensioners. There is a consultation, which parties can use. We can let Parliament debate the issue when the Government introduces legislation. Through our Steel commission, the Liberal Democrats will work on a wider package of fiscal reforms. We take the point about the importance of local income tax fitting into a general basket of taxation, in terms of both the objective of growing the economy and the pressure on the incomes of Scotland's hard-pressed households. The council tax is the ultimate in discredited, unfair, blunt instruments. Labour and the Conservatives—because they introduced it—argue for its retention.

It is interesting that Mr Brown disapproves of those who want to work to change the council tax. I want to work to get rid of the council tax and he does not, which is where he and I disagree. Despite the rises in the cost of living in this country, Labour and the Conservatives argue for the retention of the council tax. The people in the lowest income tax bracket are being hit by changes in the budget, such as the withdrawal of the 10p minimum tax rate that was introduced by a previous Labour Government. Margo MacDonald referred to the international monetary system. Today, we hear that the Labour Government is to bail out the banks and expose taxpayers throughout the country to unprecedented levels of risk. That follows the utter shambles of Northern Rock. Labour cannot come here and lecture us and, more to the point, the country on taxation and on management of the economy. In China yesterday, our esteemed Chancellor said that Labour needed to sharpen up. At least Mr Darling is more in touch than the boss. There can be no greater indication of how much Labour in London is out of touch than its withholding what most Scots see as their money—that has given the SNP the easiest campaigning, anti-Labour argument. It is clear from last night's "Newsnight" that Labour needs rather more of Paul Murphy and a lot less of Des Browne and Yvette Cooper. As Patrick Harvie pointed out, the Labour/Tory motion contains no proposals. There is nothing  about the new council tax bands proposed by Labour during last year's election and nothing about revaluation, which also came up at the election. In Wales, where revaluation happened, millions face rises in local taxes that are not linked to the ability to pay. The Tories never seem to have any proposals, but what we remember of the most recent election is that they proposed cutting tax and rewarding the better off. That is not quite the on-message position of Mr George Osborne, who has had his Gordon Brown "Today" programme moment and committed the Tories to Labour spending levels and no tax cuts. Mr Brownlee's position is therefore even more right wing than that of George Osborne, which takes some doing. Labour and the Tories are tied to what a recent survey of 30,000 internet financial users found to be the most hated tax—above inheritance tax, VAT and even fuel duty. The Scottish Government's proposals for a local income tax address some of the inequalities inherent in the current system. If the detail can be got right, 60 to 70 per cent of local tax payers throughout Scotland could be better off. However, the SNP's plans for a national tax undermine the autonomy of local councils. Our plans avoid the legal issues that appear to beset the SNP's position. There are differences between the Liberal Democrats and the SNP on local accountability—which we believe in—but we absolutely agree that no matter how the council tax is adjusted, it will always be unfair and it will always fail to reflect ability to pay. We will work constructively with the Government on the case for change and the detail of that change.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the impact of high fuel prices on the Scottish economy. (S3O-2852)

I thank the minister for that full response. I realise that no Government can change world oil prices, but does the minister acknowledge that fuel prices are hitting Scottish businesses and, indeed, are impacting in two ways on island and rural businesses in particular? Will the Government commit to matching the fuel support schemes that the French and Spanish Governments have introduced for their fishermen and which, we are told, are consistent with European law? Will the minister continue to make representations on the crude one-size-fits-all approach taken in the UK budget, which penalises Scottish crofters, farmers and fish farmers for using pick-ups? Those vehicles are not Chelsea and Milngavie tractors, but essential to businesses.

The debate has fallen between those who think that the local government settlement is bad and those who think that it is good. I will run briefly through the contributions of those who think that it is good. Mr Bob Doris made what I presume is an historic speech of loyalty to his cabinet secretary. He particularly mentioned the local authority council tax freeze. Of course the decision to accept such a freeze can be made by local government leaders, but it sure is an easy decision for them to make when a gun is pointed at their heads. That is the reality of the situation. I notice that Bob Doris welcomes it in his own area, although I am sure that he does not welcome the fact that Glasgow City Council's figures show that 425 posts are likely to go because of the efficiency savings.

I am sure that it will bring a sense of relief to the people who lose their jobs when Bob Doris points out that that is happening because of restructuring, which is caused by the fact that, as Mr McAveety pointed out, all that appears to matter today in local government finance is the council tax. All parties should have more feeling for the range of local government finance issues that the Parliament must confront rather than concentrating on one aspect of it. Mr FitzPatrick raised the issue of local income tax. I agree with him about that, if his party is proposing just that. At the moment, it is not. If a local income tax is to be a local income tax, there is a clue in the first word of that phrase. Mr Brian Adam called the local government settlement "generous" which, as other members have pointed out, will be news to many people in the north-east. I will come back to Mr Brownlee, but he also supported the Government as if he were a member of the Government. Of those who opposed the local government settlement, the member whose argument I found most difficult was Keith Brown. I respect Keith Brown's knowledge as he is, like Mr McAveety, a former council leader. Members who were council leaders bring expertise to the chamber, and I respect Keith Brown and Frank McAveety's knowledge of leading large and small Administrations. I could not therefore understand why Mr Brown took his argument into the blame  game by blaming local councillors for their decisions. That is the essence of where the debate is. My contention, and that of the Liberal Democrats, is that the decisions that local governments, of whatever political position, now have to take have been foisted on them by the settlement that they have received from central Government. That is always the way; it does not matter which Government is in power. We come into the chamber and spend a morning playing the blame game, as Mr Brown did. That is unfortunate, at best, particularly if, like Mr Brown, one has considerable knowledge and understanding of local government. Lewis Macdonald raised the issue of the north-east, as did Richard Baker and Mike Rumbles. I found it interesting that Joe FitzPatrick was so well briefed on Aberdeen's position when he made his intervention. He is either extremely knowledgeable about local government finance, or he has taken his whip's instructions particularly well. One of the more important points that were made this morning was the cabinet secretary's point about the distribution formula. If I heard him right—I wrote down his remarks as he made them—he said that there will be a "simplification" of the distribution formula in coming years. Mr Swinney might deal with this point in his winding-up speech. My understanding is that we have a three-year settlement, so I assume that any simplification of the formula could come about only during the fourth or subsequent years of local government finance. Mr Swinney has made a commitment in respect of the City of Edinburgh Council, but I am not aware that any commitment has been made to any of the other 31 local authorities across Scotland. It is fundamental to the Parliament's scrutiny of any Government that members know what that change to the distribution formula might mean, and the timescale to which it would operate. I ask the minister to deal with that in his closing remarks. Finally, I will deal with the Conservatives, who are in a ridiculous position. I will quote Miss Goldie for Mr Brownlee's benefit, because he cannot have read these immortal words at the time—and this from a Conservative party that is hooked into and dying a death with the SNP Government on the issue of local government finance. Miss Goldie said that the nationalists are following a "left-wing agenda" and she accused ministers of "living in the past" when it came to public services. Why the devil did the Conservatives vote for the budget and support every aspect of it? Why are they now apparently so out of touch with it? Their position is extraordinary.  If Mr Brownlee and his colleagues—they all look very cheerful at the moment—are saying that they are not going to support a simple amendment that "regrets the extent of public service cuts", then I can only assume that they support public service cuts. I assure Mr Brownlee that every leaflet that is sent out in his constituency will point that out. The debate is about accountability, the impact on local services and public finances. We should debate the subjects in that sphere.

I am surprised at Derek Brownlee's line of questioning because, only on Monday, his leader was describing Mr Swinney's colleagues as socialists. If they are so socialist, why did the Conservatives vote for their budget?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I spoke to the Government's proposals, but Derek Brownlee is making a speech on behalf of the Government. Would you draw him back to the debate that we are having?

The Liberal Democrat amendment asks that Parliament should not just pass the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2008 but reflect on its consequences. I want to make three points: on the state of the public finances; on the impact of the settlement on local government throughout Scotland; and on the nature of local democracy. The state of the public finances must be of concern to any finance minister. A prudent approach to the public finances would be to accept how interdependent the Scottish economy is on the economies of England and Europe and wider world influences. Tax returns, the credit squeeze and business failure can and will affect the United Kingdom economy. The windfall from higher oil tax revenues will not offset those financial challenges, so Scotland's financial cake has the potential to be slimmer, in real terms, over this session of Parliament. The politics of girn do not wash. Alistair Darling's much-criticised growth targets in the recent budget look at best ambitious, and perhaps foolish. If public spending is predicated on growth targets, and taxation income projections are not realised, the repercussions for Scottish public expenditure could be severe. It is surely against that background that Parliament is debating—and will pass—the order. However, it is that background that suggests that financial decisions, and populist measures with a view to short-term political gain and not the long-term future of the country, must be assessed. Inflation is back in the political lexicon. Price increases are real: in food, energy costs and household living. The governor of the Bank of England said last month that it was "more likely than not" that he would be writing a second letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer to tell him that he had missed the inflation target. Before its members start jumping up and down, the SNP would keep an independent Bank of England prior to joining the euro, so there is no monetary policy difference between Mr Salmond and Mr Brown. So much for the myth of economic independence. Yes, the Scottish economy looks resilient against the international financial pressures that apply now, but experience suggests a lag before the global impact bites here. A prudent approach  to the public finances is imperative. The budget decisions taken by this Government have not been about the long term. As we have heard before, this Government is a disciple of the Clinton and Blair playbook—every decision is about 2011. The order is part of that. However, the impact of the order on local services is profound. The council tax freeze was a policy no local council could turn down, but the consequence is that many local people—who depend on local services—are being turned down. The Liberal Democrats asked the Government to guarantee that local services would not be cut as a result of the SNP's budget decisions. We asked that question consistently throughout the budget process and never received an answer. We now know why. There is a scale of cuts—even in Glasgow. I noticed in the papers this week that Glasgow is cutting 425 posts, 124 of which are teaching posts. However, I agree with the cabinet secretary that the political colour of the Administration does not matter. Throughout the country, under every party represented in the Parliament, jobs and services are being cut. That is not my construction but that of council chiefs throughout the country. The "historic"—as everything is these days—settlement cannot be all that the Government cracks it up to be. If it were so good—so historically good—why are so many jobs being shed, and why are so many councils having to consider cutting services? It might be a more worthy target of the slightly intemperate word that Mr Swinney used earlier. The impact is severe, and it will be more so in the next two financial years. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, local authority finance chiefs and independent commentators all state that the settlement to come is eye-wateringly tight. Given the background of the public finances and the need for the Government to find resources to meet a council tax freeze for the rest of this session, what is happening now across Scotland will become more pronounced in the years to come. My final point is on local accountability. We should be clear that no council now has any control over the income side of its balance sheet. The argument that applies to the Parliament—which some of us strongly wish to change—now applies equally to the 32 Scottish local authorities, and no change is in sight. The Labour Party and the Conservatives oppose getting rid of the council tax and the SNP Government wants a national income tax. Unfortunately, the parliamentary arithmetic means paralysis and no change. For those reasons, the Parliament should not only agree to the order but reflect on its consequences and consider the future that lies rather further ahead than 2011.  I move amendment S3M-1631.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, regrets the extent of public service cuts and closures in communities across Scotland as a direct consequence of the financial settlement received by local government from central government."

The minister will accept that the programme will be a good-news story and a great opportunity only if crofters and farmers can access the schemes. However, that is by no means guaranteed for the 1,000 units in Shetland that are currently in the environmentally sensitive areas scheme, the organic aid scheme or the rural stewardship scheme. Will the minister consider again the potential for ensuring that all that valuable benefit is continued in constituencies such as Shetland? Will he consider devolving the budgets to local management committees, which is absolutely within his gift and which would ensure that decisions are taken locally and are the right ones?

The order will achieve a number of outcomes that Liberal Democrats support. We support in principle the reduction of ring fencing. On the council tax freeze, no one wants to pay more tax, but we want to see the Government's proposals on abolition of the council tax. The cabinet secretary will also need to explain to Parliament how a freeze is affordable without cuts being made to services—an issue to which, I am sure, many members will turn today. We also support the allocation of additional resources to local councils, although I accept the analogy that Mr Kerr used earlier in terms of the overall balance of the settlement. I am sure that Mr Swinney will accept—not on the basis of my figures, but on the basis of local government's figures—that year 2 in particular will be extremely tight and must, even at this stage, pose serious questions for local government throughout Scotland. Questions remain, so I ask the cabinet secretary to answer several questions that local councils have raised with me. The questions reflect a broad theme to which Derek Brownlee referred a moment ago, concerning the amount of information that is available and the clarity of the position on numbers, indicators and, especially, outcome agreements. That information is not available as councils set their budgets, which must be a significant issue for all local authority members as they come to grips with a changing financial position. I have raised the matter before with the cabinet secretary and I do so again. I ask him to ensure that the entirely legitimate and fair points that have been put to his department by councils throughout Scotland are answered in detail. The cabinet secretary said earlier that the changes are significant. If they are significant, surely local government deserves as much clarity as it can possibly have in the budget-setting  process. That is important. Does the cabinet secretary commit to the changes being flexible, or does the Government plan more of a straitjacket on local government? Some people in local government fear that an outcome agreement could be simply a return to ring fencing, but in another form. I am sure that the Government accepts that local councils have democratic mandates and that people vote for different issues at local and national levels. It follows that councils must be given the necessary flexibility, within the outcome agreements, to construct local solutions to local problems. I am sure that Parliament and its committees will want to scrutinise outcome agreements in depth on that issue when the agreements are published—which the cabinet secretary said would be before 1 April—given that that will affect many of the arguments that all our communities will face about making cuts versus making savings in expenditure. I trust that the cabinet secretary will accept that as an important principle of local democracy; after all, that sits with the principle of reducing ring fencing. The cabinet secretary will surely also accept that councils are not clear on certain budget areas, including regional transport partnership funding, the strategic waste fund and—this issue was raised with me this morning—flood protection. How can the Government ensure co-operation among councils following the changes to the previous system of a specific grant funding mechanism, which will no longer be available to local government? It strikes many of us who have looked at the new system that, if councils are to work together on issues, such as flood protection, that cross local government boundaries, there must be some way of allowing such co-operation to be built into the process. If those moneys are simply part of the overall settlement, it is not clear to me—nor, more important, to many councils—precisely how councils will be able to ensure that strategic planning over a number of years will be facilitated. I hate to raise again the issue of efficiency savings—I was roundly condemned by the cabinet secretary for doing so yesterday—but I will have another go. Is the cabinet secretary prepared to accept the reality that not all councils will achieve the 2 per cent efficiency savings that will be expected of them? I accept that councils that achieve the target will be able to keep those sums—I welcome that—but what will be the position for councils that do not hit the target? Will they be allowed to keep cash savings below that target? In budgeting terms, that might not necessarily be an issue in the coming financial year but I suspect that it will be a significant issue for finance directors and local members in years 2 and 3 of the settlement.  On class sizes, although in principle it is perhaps more important today to consider the generality of the order rather than the specifics of policy areas, councils are saying that they have not been given one penny more to meet the national policy. Despite the concordat—which, by my reading of it, is crystal clear on the issue—no new money has been provided to lower class sizes. I presume that the policy will be implemented only by authorities that have a reducing school roll. How will that be addressed in outcome agreements in circumstances in which a council has real difficulties in achieving that? Finally, the cabinet secretary will know that the distribution formula is of concern not only for Scotland's capital city. If I heard him right, he said that capital city funding would be dealt with outwith the financial settlement: in other words, it will be dealt with outwith the normal distribution formula that local government understands. How will he deal with other councils that have expressed concerns about the formula? I am sure that my good friend and colleague Mr McArthur will mention Orkney in that context, but I know that other councils have similar concerns. I imagine that the cabinet secretary does not plan a complete recasting of the distribution formula—otherwise, he would have mentioned that in announcing the settlement today—but does he plan any changes in that regard? Overall, it is surely vital that Government does not blame local government for local services issues—that fundamental agreement must exist—but councils are saying that they are £400 million short, so how are they to deal with the tightness of the settlement? How will the Government accommodate the realistic, fair and reasoned arguments that councils are making?

Steady there.

At one stage, young Shetlanders would get ready for a night out listening not to Radio 1 but to Robbie Shepherd's "Take the Floor". My advancing years have got the better of me, and I am not quite sure—nor do I want to know—what my children's generation choose to listen to before they go out for the evening. That said, I take Jamie McGrigor's point about those programmes seriously. I absolutely agree with Rob Gibson that we must take the traditional music sector seriously, and I acknowledge not only the commitment that the minister and Cathy Peattie have shown, but Aileen Campbell's knowledge of the subject. Having danced an eightsome reel with Liam McArthur, I warn any of the fairer sex who might take part in a set with him that they should be very worried. On that occasion, Orcadians and Shetlanders came together, which is something we do from time to time. Rob Gibson is right to highlight the lack of TV coverage, even though there are many more festivals now than there have ever been. Indeed, as Jamie McGrigor said, the sector is strong and growing. The minister would have considerable support from Parliament in her efforts to convince the broadcasting authorities and other broadcasters that these are areas of great Scottish strength that have enormous export potential. Rob Gibson is also right to mention the significance of the traditional music industry. Some people find words such as "industry" inappropriate in this context. I know graduates from that very fine and important Scottish institution, the RSAMD, who have careers in the area. I acknowledge,  welcome and respect their talents, but I also want to ensure that they are able to have those careers. I appreciate that there are some funding issues to deal with—like all members, I have received representations on the matter—but I hope that the minister will find some time to deal with the issue. Surely, as Phil Cunningham becomes the RSAMD's director of traditional music, this is a particularly fine moment to take the institution forward. As for Celtic Connections, Rob Gibson and I went along to the Shetland night and met Aileen Campbell—I was going to say that we met in the bar afterwards, but that would be most unfair to her. Mr Gibson was good enough to bring along some overseas friends. The great thing about the night—apart from the fact that it made me, as a Shetlander, very proud of the sheer depth of talent on stage and across the islands that I am proud to represent in Parliament—was the number of people who turned up not only because they are expatriate Shetlanders who live and work on the Scottish mainland, but because they care passionately about traditional music and its future. I hope that the minister can work with the industry to develop every aspect of those initiatives. A review in The Big Issue of that night said: "We came for Aly Bain, but hosts Fiddlers' Bid are worth it alone." That says enough about the diversity and strength of the music that comes out of my islands. That said, I am pleased to be here, to be better informed by colleagues who are part of strong musical traditions in their parts of Scotland. I wish the minister well in her work on traditional music. I hope that she will be able to drive forward Government initiatives that strengthen and support the sector. If she does that, I am sure that she will have our full support.

I am happy to take responsibility for anything that happened on my watch. The point that I made to Mr Brown is that the council was the body that was progressing the project. That is a statement of fact—I was not having a go at the council in that sense.

Go and cancel it, then.

Will Keith Brown remind us which council is in charge of the project?

Mr Brownlee will make a great nationalist one day, and that day is not far away. This is the Con-Nat budget, based not on principle, not on careful stewardship of the nation's finances and not on the extraordinary bluster of Alex Salmond, but on the Tories' determination to prop up the SNP. That is extraordinary. We can only feel sorry for Annabel Goldie and Robin Harper, because as John Swinney ably sorted out the last pesky details of the Con-Nat budget, Alex Salmond threw an almighty strop. All was agreed. The Tories had been bought off last year. They voted against extra scrutiny and they even voted against policies that they support. The Greens were bought off by a committee convenership in May. However, at the 11 th hour, Mr Salmond had to get into the story. He was getting a bit worried that Mr Swinney would get all the credit—deserved credit—for sorting out the Con-Nat deal, so he decided last night at his Cabinet to threaten the Greens and the Tories. Given how historic every Con-Nat deal is, Mr Salmond's intervention was a landmark strop, overflowing with historical significance. The press were duly spun—some of them even believed the tosh. "What on earth is going on?" the First Minister said to the Tories and the Greens. "There is a deal. You know there is a deal, because we agreed it before Christmas. The Con-Nat budget is a done deal, so don't get all uppity at the last moment," blustered Mr Salmond. Historic and landmark bluster, but bluster nevertheless.

Indeed. Let me pay due credit to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. Although I have no doubt that the negotiations over the Con-Nat budget were protracted and historically painful, Mr Swinney has certainly bought the Tories on the cheap. He struck a deal on police numbers, but given that the move was supported by all parties in the Parliament that was not too difficult. There is also an uncosted drugs strategy.  Last night, I read the careful and considered words of the minister responsible. Mr Ewing said, in a Press Association report, that the drugs strategy would be funded "when resources become available." Those are wise words from Mr Ewing, but they are good enough for the Tories. In his remarks on business rates, Mr Swinney could have been a little more graceful to those of us who were in government over the previous eight years, given that one of his central arguments about the business rates income was that, because of the buoyancy over the past eight years, he was able to do what he has just announced. I hope that Mr Swinney is prepared, in the eloquent style that he uses in the Parliament, to accept that, if nothing else. Mr Swinney has done a wonderful job in buying off the Tories on the cheap. It is akin to Northern Rock—Mr Swinney has done a Darling and nationalised a private entity in all but name. That is masterful. The Greens have sold out on everything that they claim to stand for. They are backing a budget that contains £1 billion of roads spending, including Mr Harvie's pride and joy—the M74. They are also backing real-terms cuts in rail services. It is a strange demonstration of power to vote for all the things that they once absolutely and totally rejected just to win something that everybody else already supports. We said clearly that the SNP's budget gave no details on efficiency savings; public-private partnership alternatives; single outcome agreements; the council tax freeze; national priorities; level 3 spending plans; or, crucially, the impact that those things would have on the delivery of public services throughout Scotland. How can Parliament endorse a budget in the absence of such information? The budget is reliant on £1.6 billion of efficiency savings, of which the Government has failed to provide any details. Perhaps the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will deal with that issue in his winding-up speech. In the final stage of the budget debate, will he state here and now that his unspecified savings and diversions will not adversely affect the delivery of front-line services in the health and education sectors and across councils? That is not scaremongering; it is what people in the communities that we all represent want to know. Will he confirm that his plans will not lead to public sector cuts across Scotland? Parliament deserves an answer to that question. The Liberal Democrats have argued throughout the budget process for long-term sustained investment in the higher education sector to build the intellectual capital of our economy. I  acknowledge what Mr Swinney said earlier; the points that he made about the Barnett consequentials are right and helpful. However, surely even he must accept that we cannot base a strategy of long-term investment in a sector simply on what might happen in the Barnett consequentials. We look to him to be much stronger in that area, with no real-terms cut next year and no use of end-year flexibility money just for pay in 2008-09. I note that Mr Swinney confirmed that that is to be spent this year. It remains to be seen whether the money that will go to local government is adequate to meet the SNP's policies. It remains to be seen whether £1.6 billion of efficiency savings is achievable and what will happen if it is not. It remains to be seen whether the SNP's populist policies can be delivered without cuts to other services that are valued throughout the country. The budget is opaque and nebulous, but the Con-Nat budget is now also exclusive. With the Tories on board, it is a budget to prop up the Con-Nats. The Lib Dems want nothing to do with that, and nor will the country.

The Liberal Democrats welcome the announcement that Mr Swinney has made this afternoon on police numbers—a position to which the SNP has been brought by the whole Parliament. All members should respect that. Parliament will want to look closely at the numbers that Mr Swinney has announced, as the budget contains less detail than ever before. I am sure that the numbers that he has announced will be scrutinised in considerable detail by the Justice Committee. Mr Swinney should not have brushed off quite so readily the statement of Chief Constable Strang, on behalf of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland. Chief Constable Strang said: "Retention will not increase police numbers. If we retain someone, the funds will not be available for recruitment."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 20 November 2007, c 356.] It is important that the cabinet secretary and his ministerial colleagues reflect on that evidence, which was given to a parliamentary committee. The Liberal Democrats are puzzled as to why the Government's golden rule that every amendment must say where the money would come from within each portfolio area and must be fully scrutinised has been disregarded at stage 3. There has been no parliamentary scrutiny by the committees of the changes that Mr Swinney has announced this afternoon. We take Mr Swinney's word for it that those changes are not significant. However, there are changes in the budget areas of e-health, motorways and prisons, among others. It is up to Mr Swinney to demonstrate to Parliament that they are insignificant changes. They are changes that no committee has had the opportunity to scrutinise. I hope that the minister will reflect on that.

Will the member give way?

This is all good knockabout stuff, but I will try to bring us back to the real debate. How many of the Howat recommendations will Mr Neil's Government implement?

On independent radio this morning, the budget did not rate a mention, whereas the death of the actor, Heath Ledger, in New York last night, speculation about George Burley as the Scotland manager, and the recovery in share prices, fuelled by the stimulus package that was announced in Washington yesterday, all made it. I felt a bit sorry for the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. No doubt the Scottish National Party's spin machine was out last night and words such as "historic" and "history" were repeated, but the budget was not mentioned on that news bulletin. The test of any Government is its budget—its allocation of moneys for the delivery of public services. The Parliament still lacks what Liberal Democrats want: real responsibility and accountability for income as well as for expenditure. We set that out in the Steel commission proposals and we will articulate the changes that we want and the positive case for reform in the commission that will consider and propose the strengthening of Scotland's Parliament. It appears from the contents of that august journal The Daily Telegraph that Annabel Goldie is out of step with her party on the issue of having more powers for Scotland's Parliament. Let the Liberal Democrats extend a hand of support to her. She should take on the demons within and  not let the siren voices in the Conservative party—those who want not simply to stop any changes but to get rid of the Scottish Parliament altogether—win. The Liberal Democrats certainly hope that the lady is not for turning on that issue.

I certainly will, but I hope that Gavin Brown cares about the future constitutional settlement of our country. His intervention rather shows that that settlement is of only passing interest to some Conservative members. Annabel Goldie may need to deal with him before she deals with anyone else. The Liberal Democrats have made clear their concerns throughout the short and tight budget process. This budget is the most opaque budget since devolution. It contains less detail than there previously was and it lacks clarity on key numbers, indicators and targets. It was designed for the Government by ministerial diktat, announcement and spin, and it fails to meet the tests of modern Scotland. The Finance Committee recognised those concerns. The language that it used in its report on stage 2 of the 2008-09 budget process was soft, as one would expect, but members should read between the lines. The report stated: "The Committee recognises the concerns expressed by all subject committees ... particularly:   Level 3 budget lines now rolled up into the local government settlement;   GAE totals;   the distribution of capital grants;   the splitting of Level 3 budget lines into capital and revenue."    Mr Welsh was at his diplomatic best, but really he was saying that no committee knows what is going on. The SNP's budget has no details on efficiency savings, public-private partnership alternatives, single outcome agreements, the council tax freeze, national priorities, level 3 spending plans, or—crucially—the impact that those things will have on the delivery of public services throughout Scotland. How can a Parliament endorse a budget in the absence of such information? The Liberal Democrats have raised substantive and significant issues in committee and have highlighted serious concerns about a number of spending commitments that are vital to Scotland. They have expressed concerns about police numbers, student debt, class sizes, health expenditure, enterprise, transport investment, waste management and flood measures. No answers have been given to our questions. I  assure members that we do not take it personally, but anyone who reads the Finance Committee's report will see that reasonable and constructive requirements on the Government to provide information have been rebuffed. We hope that things will change. We remain concerned about the complete lack of detail on efficiency savings. That detail-free zone is genuinely puzzling. "There must be clear proof that savings have been generated by service improvements not service cuts ... Unless Ministers tackle these issues we will be left in a position that the efficiency savings will be no more than what Ministers claim". Quite. I am sure that Mr Swinney had a point when he made those remarks during last year's budget process. They are certainly accurate today. The Government is changing the efficiency rules as it goes along. First of all, only councils were to keep their efficiency savings—that was the "special treatment" that there would be, according to the historic concordat. Then the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing announced to the Health and Sport Committee that health boards could also keep their savings; they were now special, too. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth then told the Finance Committee that all departments were significantly special, as they "will be able to retain a significant proportion of their efficiency savings".—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 10 December 2007; c 230.] There has been a whole new definition of the word "special". We are all special now, although some are more special than others. COSLA said that meeting the 2 per cent efficiency savings would mean job cuts. The Finance Committee has said that it is "difficult to come to a judgement on whether the target is realistic or not". Everyone believes that the target is challenging, but the Government has produced a budget with next to no detail on how £1.6 billion of savings are to be made. Then, it has published a technical note of just 281 words, containing no detail about where the savings will be made. We are not content to sign up to a budget that is so contingent on £1.6 billion of savings when the Government cannot tell us and Parliament how and when those savings will be made. That is what our amendment is driving at, and we look to the Government to answer those points during this debate. I am puzzled by the Tories in Parliament. First, they were so against back-door deals being stitched up in smoke-filled rooms—well, they were against them for eight years; I guess that they are okay now. Therefore, it is curious that although they oppose the abolition of the graduate  endowment, they will vote for the spending allocations that will allow it to happen. Secondly, the Tories are a party of conviction. They say what they mean and mean what they say; they do not do consensus. I enjoy finding a quote from Mr McLetchie, and I have found two. The first is: "consensus is invoked to frustrate opposition to the government of the day and stifle proper debate of crucial political issues." Tut, tut, tut. However, there is an even better one—a real McLetchieism.

He knows it. It is: "worshipping the false god of consensus too often leads to adopting the lowest common denominator". I assume that, in this case, the lowest common denominator is failing to achieve either what the SNP or the Tories said about police numbers during the election. We are seeing from David McLetchie and the Tories the "I say these things because they are only words" approach to politics. I am puzzled by the Tories for a final reason. During this budget process, we have heard one consistent lecture from my friend Alex Neil. We will call it the Neil dictum. It says that no alternative spend shall be proposed unless it can be shown from where the spend is taken. The Neil dictum—

Of course I will, but I will finish the point. The Neil dictum applies to all parties in the Parliament, except the Tories and the Greens. It might even apply to Margo MacDonald, but when it comes to Alex Neil and Margo MacDonald I am entering a world of nationalist politics that is too complex for this foot soldier.

It is always good to see someone enjoying his job as the most loyal back bencher on the Government side.

People say that Mr Neil is highly effective. I always thought that he was highly effective in the previous session, but no one paid any attention to him then either.

The most charitable observation that I can make about the Conservatives—[ Interruption. ] I will repeat the point. The most charitable observation that I can make about the Conservatives is that they have simply dumped everything that they said in the past eight years about consensus, coalition, deals and even being in opposition. The one thing that they are not in the Parliament is an Opposition. I will deal with Mr Neil's point because it is important. Throughout the budget process—not at the last minute—the Liberal Democrats have raised the issue of the funding that is available to Scotland's universities. Scotland's universities are world class, and we do not agree with the SNP's budget—and I hope that Mr Neil will bear this in mind—because it cuts real-terms spending on universities next year. That is wrong, and this is why: Scotland's higher education system has a global reputation for excellence. It is a world-renowned educational system, with a certain ratio of graduates to capita. Scotland surpasses most countries of comparable size in Europe.

SNP members do not like what I am saying but they should listen, because universities are important to Scotland. They have a key role to play in fulfilling Scotland's economic potential, especially in areas such as financial services, energy and life sciences. The key to the future competitiveness of the Scottish economy is the competitiveness of the university sector. Unless the Government addresses the funding deficit that it is helping to create, Scotland will sleepwalk into having an uncompetitive higher education sector, with disastrous long-term implications for the Scottish economy. The Government will have to find a solution to that issue and find it quickly. I move amendment S3M-1176.3, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, believes that this is a budget of SNP broken promises; believes that the budget document is the most opaque seen since devolution; regrets the failure of the SNP government to provide adequate information on its detailed spending proposals, efficiency savings programme and alternatives to PPP; is further concerned that the budget choices made by the SNP government will lead to cuts in vital public services across Scotland, and therefore calls on the SNP government to address these issues as a matter of urgency."

I hesitate to say this, especially as I am standing next to Mr Russell, who is an author of note, but I wrote a pamphlet several years ago that was entitled "Scotland: A Renewable Energy Powerhouse", or something of that ilk. It was received with critical acclaim—or at least with criticism. I take Joe FitzPatrick's point that it is important to recognise how Scotland can gain in this international world and I will deal with that in a few minutes. Mr FitzPatrick showed commendable bravery in saying that the sun shines only in Dundee. There is no doubt that he will go far in this place. David Whitton introduced what I suppose we must call the Whitton doctrine of respect, to which we will all listen carefully in the coming years. If we can agree on a few matters following the debate, they are that we need to keep the lights on, as Gavin Brown said, that we need to tackle the cost of power to Scotland's households and that we need to recognise the national and international requirements that are placed on the Parliament by documents such as the Stern report, the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's reports and the many  scientific reports that are produced here in Scotland and in the wider sphere. It is a little unfair for SNP members to claim that only they stopped new nuclear facilities. No new nuclear development happened in the past eight years, so it is a bit unfair to criticise Labour members such as Sarah Boyack. It is probably because of people such as her that some nuclear development did not happen. She has created a debate in her party and she deserves a little credit for that bravery. All our parties benefit from those in them who question the basis on which we advocate energy or other policy. Conservative and Labour members were a little coy about extolling the virtues of nuclear power—I will return to the energy mix in a moment. Parties, professionals and scientists who articulate those points have a responsibility to tackle the issues that many members across parties have raised this morning, such as the independently projected clean-up cost of existing nuclear power capability of some £70 billion. There is an appalling record of cost overruns on nuclear technology new builds. No British nuclear plant has ever come in on time or on budget. Indeed, the industry seems to run as much on optimism as on uranium. The billions of pounds of taxpayers' money that are spent on nuclear research and development should be compared with what is spent on other energy production methods. Furthermore, it is not true that nuclear energy is carbon free. The whole life cycle of nuclear plants and the emissions from uranium mining construction and decommissioning should be considered. Members who extol the virtues of nuclear technology have not mentioned nuclear waste. There is no satisfactory long-term solution for dealing with nuclear waste. According to a UK Environment Agency report to UK ministers, the current plans are "overly optimistic" Last week, the independent nuclear consultation working group reported just before the UK Government made its announcement on new nuclear power that there is "no proven technical solution for the long-term management of radioactive wastes." Those are serious issues that must be addressed by those who extol the virtues of nuclear technology. The Sustainable Development Commission, which is much quoted in the chamber by members of all political parties, has said: "there is no justification for bringing forward plans for a new nuclear programme at this time". I want to deal with other points that members have made. Patrick Harvie was right about the need for an energy reduction target. He and I also agree about the argument that some people put  forward for aiming to make nuclear energy a great export industry for Scotland—the Conservatives in particular have spoken about that. The Liberal Democrats do not support that contention. We think that there are many ways of marketing Scotland in the international sphere, not least as a world centre for life sciences and as a country with globally competitive universities. We should not market Scotland as a great exporter of nuclear energy. Such an approach would not suit us. Lewis Macdonald and Alison McInnes made a correct point about the oil and gas industry. It is a driver of technical innovation—Lewis Macdonald was right about that—but surely there must be a new role for the PILOT programme and FREDS and other Government and industry bodies when that industry turns its focus towards developing renewables, and engineering solutions and its intellectual firepower are brought to bear on the new technologies. When that happens, we will see a real take-off in renewables technologies in Scotland. I agree with the arguments about nuclear energy that Mr Mather made in his opening speech, but I was disappointed that he did not have any prior knowledge of the UK Energy Bill, as we are sometimes told that the relationship between the UK Government and the Scottish Government is excellent—indeed, Mr Lochhead said that yesterday in the fisheries statement. A little consistency on that would be beneficial. However, Mr Mather was right about territorial waters. I suspect that the argument is not only about energy, but also about the marine bill that we will no doubt consider in the coming weeks and months. I turn to the strong arguments that, to be fair, members across the chamber have made about the importance of renewables. No one has argued that wind power is the only option; rather, most members who care deeply about the matter have argued that there should be a mix of renewables and that there is a mix within the renewables industry. It is simplistic to say that the energy mix can be renewables, nuclear, and coal and gas—there is a mix within renewables. We are not yet there with the commercialisation of many renewables, but they can be commercialised. Back in 2004, Jim Wallace opened the European Marine Energy Centre, to which my colleague Liam McArthur, and Rob Gibson, referred. Commercialisation was one of the aims of that innovative and world-leading centre. Jim Wallace also launched the green jobs strategy, which I commend to the current ministers. Given that time has passed, it no doubt needs to be reconsidered, but it provides the right basis for moving forward. Other members—Kenny Gibson in particular—talked about hydrogen. I agree with what Mr  Gibson said about it. The Pure Energy Centre on Unst exports intellectual capital on energy policy around the world. Many of us see the potential for hydrogen—again, as part of that mix—to be developed and to help meet Scotland's future energy needs. David Stewart put forward an excellent argument for hydropower. He and I are concerned that the Glendoe project may be the last hydropower project on such a scale. I hope that it is not, and encourage ministers to consider ways in which the large-scale provision of hydropower can continue. I know that there are environmental concerns, which the Minister for Environment, Mr Russell, must tackle with Government and non-governmental bodies, but David Stewart made a serious argument, which I agree with. As 80 per cent of Scotland's energy demand is not delivered by the electricity grid we need to think in that context. Possibly, as others have argued, the black gold of yesterday can become the green gold of tomorrow.

As the minister knows, the Crown Estate announced yesterday the outcome of a study on grid connection using a cable down the east side of the UK. What would the minister say about the cost to the developer of that grid connection? Will he ensure that the Government considers that matter and the other studies that are being done, particularly through Highlands and Islands Enterprise? Will he seek to ensure that the cost of such developments to the developer is realistic?

As the minister knows, the kilowatt-days regime works only if the days go to the white-fish boats that need them and if costs are reduced. Can he assure me that that regime will achieve those two objectives? Further, will the Government agree the precise criteria for establishing spawning areas with the industry?

Is the First Minister aware of the European Commission state aid ruling against Shetland Islands Council that has a Monday deadline? Does he acknowledge that the ruling will mean repayment by Shetland fishing businesses and 78 Shetland share fishermen? I thank Mr Lochhead and his staff for the help that they are providing to the council, but will the First Minister urgently ensure that the council is assisted in appealing to the European Court of Justice against the Commission ruling, if that proves to be necessary and appropriate?

I wish a happy new year to all, although there has not been much of that this morning. Before Mr Swinney jumps to his feet, I say to him that I had a good share of Christmas cake this year, although I do not notice much humble pie being eaten by members on the  SNP benches. The party used to make much of consensus, saying that this was a Parliament of minorities in which it was a minority Government. It used to say that politicians should work on the issues on which they agree and that it would propose and debate any changes for which it sought parliamentary approval. Well, well, well. Eight months have gone by, and we have a minority Government, but with a majority ego. We have a Government whose motto is, "If you say it often enough, people will come to believe it"; a Government with the arrogance to dump its promise to scrap student debt without even bringing its plans to the floor of the chamber; and a Government that goes on to claim, without an ounce of shame, that it is delivering for students, when not one Scottish student will see their loan debt written off as promised. It appears that the SNP's promises are easily made and easily broken. We now have a Government that, when it found itself skewered by its own budget plans for a real-terms cut in university funding next year, was prepared to instruct civil servants and publicly-paid spin doctors to produce dodgy tables to hide that fact. This is a Government that is prepared to send hecklers to disrupt a legitimate protest by students from across Scotland who came to the Parliament to point that fact out. [ Interruption. ] There are plenty of paid hecklers on the SNP benches today. We now have a Government that is prepared to be so economical with the truth that the BBC has been forced to set up a whole new webpage on the topic of SNP spin. This is a Government that is so hopelessly wedded to spin that a key manifesto pledge to cut class sizes to 18 was deemed to be met by issuing a single piece of paper that was backed up by not a single extra penny—not one penny. I do not know whether the penny should be described as an historic penny, a landmark penny or simply one that has already been spent. It makes no difference: I see no mood of optimism sweeping the classrooms. We now have a Government that is prepared to threaten councils with the loss of both their share of the extra council tax money and their efficiency savings, and the re-imposition of ring fencing. It is prepared to do that simply because councils may reasonably assess that, without a single penny of extra funding, they will be unable to make progress on class sizes.

Mr Gibson should ask local authorities how much money they have been  given to achieve the policy, on which I assume he stood at the election. All 32 local authorities will tell him that they have received not one single penny. This is a budget of broken promises. The problem for the SNP is that its sums did not add up before the election and they do not add up now. The SNP overpromised, and now the SNP Government has had to backtrack and break promise after promise. It has blamed Westminster and the Opposition parties. Liberal Democrats suspect that it is now gearing up to blame the councils. The 2007 spending review and the budget for the next year are an object lesson in Parliamentary hoodwinking. The SNP strategy is simple: disguise, hide and obfuscate. It has made its budget choices, as any Government should do. Liberal Democrats do not oppose the right of the SNP Government to make choices—absolutely not. Our criticism is that the choices that it has made are set out in a budget that lacks detail and transparency. Quite simply, this is the most opaque budget since 1999. Budget lines have been renamed, merged and dropped without explanation. It took a fortnight for the Government to admit that. Members across the political spectrum have found the presentation of financial information on the transfer of budget lines to local government to be wholly inadequate, completely lacking in transparency and unhelpful in any analysis of the impact of the spending review. On that point, the Liberal Democrats agree with Labour. However, we will not support the Labour amendment. An amendment that supports ring fencing is an amendment that supports centralisation. Liberal Democrats trust local government and we trust local councillors. As I said before Christmas, Liberal Democrats support the principle of ending ring fencing. There is innovative thinking in local government that can be helped and promoted. I refer to thinking such as that on the City of Edinburgh Council, where the Liberal Democrats are promoting new business-friendly tax regimes in the city centre and on the waterfront. However, the Parliament should be clear on ring fencing. There has never been less time in a budget process for councils to reappraise their budgets. We know that, every day, officials are phoning the Scottish Government seeking clarification on one or other budget line. No wonder the Parliament does not know where the money will go and to whom—neither does the Government, nor local councils. Given that elected members have to set budgets early next month, the best that they can hope to achieve in the impossible circumstances that the SNP timetable allows is a budget rollover, which is much the same as last year.

I would need to come back to Mr Swinney on whether there was more information—I simply cannot give him an honest or straight answer on that, because I do not know. However, I know that all the councils have been telephoning his department to ask for clarification on budget lines, because they simply do not know what the situation is and they need to inform their members so that they can set a budget in the coming weeks. That does not suggest to me that more information was provided to local councils in the process that Mr Swinney mentioned. Mr Swinney's position is that there should be no compulsory public sector redundancies, so it is ironic that local enterprise network staff in the Highlands and Islands already know that 50 of them will go throughout the network, including some from Lerwick, Kirkwall and the Western Isles. The £40 million cut from the Highlands and Islands Enterprise budget is a cut by the SNP in investment in the area's economy. The Parliament is not a rubber stamp to approve SNP plans. We should scrutinise the budget, not have improvements to that process blocked by the SNP and the Tories. The Tory amendment goes only so far. The review of the budget process is a matter of urgency. It must consider the timescale, content and nature of the process, and it must improve the process so that committees can take more and real evidence on alternative spending proposals and increase the scrutiny of the Government's plans. The review must involve wider civic Scotland and it must act swiftly if the flaws in this year's process are to be avoided next year. We urge the Tories to support the Liberal Democrat amendment, which makes that absolutely clear. It was wrong of the Tories to block extra debates on the budget, especially given that their finance spokesman has rightly supported reform. We hope that the Tories will be consistent today, although not by simply propping up the SNP. We hope that they will be consistent on a more important issue: parliamentary scrutiny of the budget. The Liberal Democrats will give the Tories due credit if they are consistent on that point today. The budget process has been flawed. The committee reports, which have been watered down through the fair but inevitable process of seeking a consensus, will show that to be the case in the coming days. No matter how much time the cabinet secretary and his taxpayer-funded political advisers spend trying to create terribly clever  traps, the Liberal Democrats are not going there. No—the budget process and the Government's choices are flawed. I move amendment S3M-1105.3, to leave out from "regrets" to end and insert: "recognises that no party holds a parliamentary majority and believes therefore that the 2007 Spending Review was an opportunity to create a budget of the whole Parliament; regrets the SNP Government's failure to match its rhetoric on consensus with action in this Parliament; believes that the budget document is the most opaque seen under devolution and fails to provide an appropriate level of detail and transparency; regrets the Government's failure to detail how it intends to achieve the proposed £1.6 billion of efficiency savings; notes the concerns across the public sector at delays to infrastructure investment caused by uncertainty over the future of PPP; believes that urgent reform of the budget process is required to increase the opportunities for parliamentary committees to take evidence on alternative spending proposals and consider government spending plans in more detail; welcomes the resolution of the Parliament to establish a review of the budget process, and calls for this review to commence as a matter of urgency, involve wider civic Scotland, consider the timescale, content and nature of the budget process and report to the Parliament at the earliest possible opportunity in order that its recommendations can be implemented in time for the 2009-10 budget."

Liberal Democrats will pass no verdict on the financial allocations that have been made by SNP ministers until we see what the councils say. Many a finance director will pore over the detail today: I wish them good luck, for there has never been less. There might be particular disappointment in Edinburgh because the City of Edinburgh Council and MSPs from all parties have argued strenuously for action: they are to get a working group. The detail might be a slow burn for the SNP. If the figures are to be so simple and easily digested, the SNP's usual enormous quantities of spin and counter-spin will be lit up to show them as they are. Despite asserting that funds have been transferred from central budgets to local government, ministers have not provided the equivalent 2007-08 figures. Today, we have been given a snapshot that is most definitely not the full picture. We shall wait and see. The SNP has made much of its new relationship with local government. It is a party masquerading as Government, in full 24/7 campaign mode, with a determination, a vision and a pledge to manage  competently. There is nothing wrong with managing competently—indeed, it is an admirable aim—but it is hardly an underpinning approach to local government. It is hardly a philosophy. Some SNP members—Mr Swinney, Mr Mather and Mr Salmond—are small-C conservatives. They are fiscally reticent, aim to reduce public interventions in the economy and are determined to reduce the amount of money that is spent on public services. They might be described as the Irish tiger wing. However, that non-interventionist wing is balanced by the SNP's tax-and-spend socialists, who for eight years have racked up enormous policy commitments with the constant refrain of universalism. They are more the Scandinavian reindeer brigade. In many ways, that contrast between the party's two ideologically opposed wings reflects the nationalists' approach to local government today. The reductions in ring fencing and the strengthening of local councillors' powers of determination to meet local needs are good—I agree with that approach—but even Mr Swinney accepted earlier that three quarters of local government funding in the current financial year comes with no strings attached. He was, I thought, rather quiet and spoke quickly at that point during his speech. The SNP should not spin this settlement as an end to ring fencing, as that is demonstrably not the case. Some £0.5 billion of ring-fenced funding—excluding expenditure on the police—will still remain next year and COSLA awaits an announcement on the detail of other ring fencing that is to be removed. Such spending is still centrally controlled. As usual, the rhetoric is great but councils and Parliament would be well advised to dig behind the spin. If the SNP's approach to local government was simply about local responsibility and accountability, that would be good, but its overall approach is quite the reverse. It has replaced ring-fenced funding with national Government outcome agreements that will cover the entire settlement. It aims to replace the power of local councillors to determine local income by introducing a national tax. It has replaced locally mandated policies with its national manifesto—the manifesto of a minority Government. Ministers have made it clear that the number 1 priority for councils is to deliver the commitments of the minority SNP Government. The Government needs to accept that many local administrations throughout Scotland have a greater electoral mandate than the SNP Government has in Parliament. The SNP will not get away with saying "We agree with you, but only if you do what we say." Minister, that is not an historic new way of doing things. The Liberal Democrats want the end of the discredited and unfair council tax. We will propose,  and argue for, a truly local income tax instead of a national income tax. Mr Swinney should change his mind on that. He and the SNP used to support—quite rightly—a local income tax. Despite the extraordinary contention by Mr Salmond in a recent newspaper article that the difference between local and national taxation is mere detail, the Liberal Democrats will argue for and propose a real local income tax.

Over the years, many Liberal Democrats and Liberals have studied land value taxation. It is a shame that Donald Gorrie is no longer a member of the Parliament because he could have delivered an eight-minute speech on that without repetition, deviation or hesitation. I must ask Donald to come back to give Derek Brownlee some personal tuition on the matter by way of help. Local income tax is important for the reason that local councillors should have—and want—the same fiscal discipline that MSPs of all parties have argued for. It would be at best curious for this Parliament to gain more powers over the raising of finance while it removed those same responsibilities from local authorities. However, that is the Government's position. Liberal Democrats would welcome a change of position from the SNP. A U-turn back to its previous policy of local income tax would be correct. The figures that the cabinet secretary announced today will be digested in the coming days and weeks. However, on that point, I urge the SNP to show some consistency. I am told by COSLA and the local authorities—some of whom Mr Swinney met in recent days—that he will not play the blame game. In this very tough settlement for local government, where councils choose to make difficult decisions, the SNP Government in Edinburgh will not blame them for taking those decisions. That is welcome. We expect Mr Swinney to be as good as his word. That applies to his fellow ministers and back benchers, too. I trust that we will see no SNP motions in which a local council is condemned for taking a difficult decision that was caused by the settlement that it has received from the SNP Administration. However, some signs are inauspicious. On class sizes, Fiona Hyslop has been playing the blame game—my colleague Jeremy Purvis will deal with that later. The simple truth on class sizes is that the SNP promised, but cannot deliver. It cannot deal with class sizes alone; they are not its  responsibility. It is worrying for the SNP Government's new relationship with Scotland's councils that it has blamed the local authorities. That is not a good start. The Liberal Democrats are disappointed by the SNP's approach to co-ordinating transport across Scotland. In the previous session, the SNP supported regional transport partnerships and pushed for them to have more and more powers—indeed, Mr Ewing pushed for them to have more and more money. However, less than two years later, the SNP has pulled the plug on the RTPs. We will get no effective regional transport partnerships. We have also had the disgraceful butchering of Highlands and Islands Enterprise. How will local government take forward vital economic initiatives when the SNP is cutting the assistance that it needs? Only this week, the issue of the business gateway and the transfer to local authorities was mired in yet more doubt and disagreement. The numbers are unclear; councils do not know where they are at. What is dangerous about all of that is that business, which needs advice and help, will not get it. Mr Swinney should sort out that mess. It is of his own making. Given how important transport is to growing the economy, which is the principal purpose of the Government, why is there no certainty over the funding for rural public transport grants, demand responsive transport and the bus route development grant? I would mention Mr Souter, but not quite in the way that Mr Kerr did. Mr Souter regularly lobbied previous transport ministers on the importance of the bus route development grant because it did good things across Scotland. It still does. I am sure that Mr Souter will continue to lobby my successor. I wish him well in that. The bus route development grant is a good example of an appropriate mechanism for delivering better public transport services for local people. Where is it? We know not. This afternoon, and on every day in previous weeks, the cabinet secretary has done to death his concordiat. Every ministerial utterance now has the concordiat as its centrepiece. This morning, we were surprised to hear Stewart Maxwell bow to the inevitable and accept the sensible Liberal Democrat argument on sportscotland. In nearly explaining yet another SNP U-turn, he did not mention the concordiat and yet the SNP considers it to be so historic that it has commissioned a book on it from the pre-eminent Scottish historian, the professor emeritus of history at the University of St Andrews. The settlement encapsulates the choices that this Government has made. Local government will have tough decisions to make, as a result. Concordiat or no concordiat, the Liberal  Democrats will stand up for local people who are left exposed by the cabinet secretary's decisions today.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the council tax freeze is for one year only, as the president of COSLA has said? How will councils be able to take sensible decisions for the long term if they do not know how much of Mr Swinney's £70 million pot of money they will get on top of what is in today's announcement? What method will be used to distribute that money to councils? Will distribution be on a population basis, will it be based on existing grant-aided expenditure share or will it be based on whether the administration is an SNP administration? Can the cabinet secretary guarantee that no local social work service, primary school or home help will face cuts as a result of the settlement? Finally, now that he has abolished regional transport partnerships in all but name by removing their capital allocations, what will he do if a council fails to fund transport services adequately?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making towards the provision of broadband connections to homes and businesses currently out of reach of broadband. (S3O-1566)

Is the minister aware of the recent development, involving Faroese Telecom, of the laying of a fibre optic cable connecting Faroe, Iceland, Shetland and the Scottish mainland? Does he agree that that project has the potential greatly to improve broadband connections in those island areas, and will he undertake to speak to British Telecommunications about the roll-out of its 21 st century programme, which, as he knows, businesses and homes in the islands will not benefit from until 2011? Will he undertake to see what can be done to improve and increase the speed of that roll-out?

The First Minister will be aware of the outcome of the fishing discussions between the European Union and Norway earlier in the month, which were vital to fishermen in Shetland. The cod quota has been increased by a welcome 11 per cent, but the haddock quota has gone down by 15 per cent and the whiting quota by 25 per cent. With respect to pelagic stocks, the mackerel quota has been cut by 9 per cent and the herring quota by a swingeing 41 per cent. Does the First Minster agree with the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, which described the outcome of the discussions as a "mixed bag"? How much time will our fishermen get to catch the fish that they will be allowed to land? Will the First Minister outline the action that his Government will take to head off the European Commission's plans to cut by 25 per cent the number of days at sea for white-fish boats?

I am surprised that Mr Mather said that no one in the tourism industry to whom he has spoken is worried about  the loss of direct flights to and from Scotland. I am sure that he acknowledges the importance of direct flights—[ Interruption. ] The minister and his colleagues are muttering away, but perhaps they should listen—

Does the minister accept that he could find ways to augment VisitScotland's marketing budget, to allow for the development of a new mechanism for providing the direct routes that are so important to the industry?

The Liberal Democrats seek clarification from the Government following the Finance Committee's consideration of the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2007 Amendment Order 2007. The budget revision order provides that £100 million of additional capital for colleges and universities must be committed in the 2007-08 financial year. That was first announced by Fiona Hyslop on 26 October and it was confirmed on 9 November in a Government circular to colleges, which stated that the allocation was for 2007-08. Last Tuesday, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth told the Finance Committee that the money was for this year. However, after question time last Thursday, the Scottish National Party Government's special advisers distributed a table to journalists that showed that £100 million was to be delayed until 2011 and that not a single penny would be allocated for this financial year. That table, which was issued by civil servants who work for the First Minister, casts serious doubt on the budget revision on which the Parliament is asked to vote tonight. Parliament needs some straight answers. What is the status of the document that the special advisers issued? Will any additional capital spending in colleges and universities take place this financial year, or will it be delayed until the following three years? Can the cabinet secretary tell Parliament why Government special advisers showed journalists figures in which the allocation was delayed until 2011 whereas the Finance Committee was given different information? Inside a week, the Government has given two different stories on the additional money for higher education. Will the cabinet secretary tell Parliament which document is correct—the budget revision order or the table that was issued to journalists? It cannot be both.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement and I associate the Liberal Democrats with his appreciation of the hard work done by the SPPA. Given the recent appalling revelations on the inadequate safeguards for data that are held by the United Kingdom Government, it is vital that the Scottish Government does not follow suit. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the public must be confident that the Government is managing personal information efficiently and sensitively? Will he ensure that the Government's review is accountable not only to ministers but to Parliament? Because of the enormous public concern, will he agree to make the review independent of Government? Will the review consider not whether procedures were followed but whether those procedures are sufficiently secure? Does the cabinet secretary agree that the next stage in data protection should not be to create a superdatabase with citizens' personal information and biometric data? Will he guarantee that there will be no Scottish system of identity cards and no centralised Scottish database of information that would put citizens' privacy at risk? Will he ensure that this Government will not share or provide information for any ID database that is introduced by the Labour Government in London?

There can be no doubt that today Robin Harper has the best tie—I applaud his colour scheme, although we may need to apply relative stability to it in the future. Des McNulty mentioned the suggestion of the First Minister, Mr Salmond, that it was possible to walk across the North Sea on the backs of haddock. Most of us did not think that he needed the haddock. This is an important debate, and Liberal Democrats strongly welcome the fact that it is taking place at the time of the EU-Norway negotiations. That is a useful step forward, and this evening we will back the Government motion. We were surprised that Mr Lochhead did not set out in more detail the Scottish and UK position on  the EU-Norway negotiations, because that is of critical interest. I noted and welcomed the points that he made on cod—we know the position on that issue—but I hope that when winding up the Minister for Environment will deal with the serious current position of the EU-Norway negotiations and clarify the Scottish position on the matter, because important species issues are being addressed as we speak. He should also look at the different sectors of the industry, because there are different pressures. That has always been the case—there are always cycles in the inshore sector, the pelagic sector and the white-fish sector. Ministers should set out their thoughts on that issue in more detail. All that needs to be said on what has been an endless theme in this morning's discussions—who sits where in the European Union—is that Mr Lochhead will now accept, if nothing else, that it is rather more difficult to be in government than in opposition. Two other themes that members of all persuasions have raised frequently this morning are the science and discards. I agreed with Peter Peacock when he said, in response to an intervention, that science is not an exact science. [ Laughter. ] I suppose the point is that it is not exact. I hope that, when considering the science in the future, those who argued week in, week out, year in, year out, that the whole North Sea should be closed—there were many who did, including both scientists and non-Governmental organisations—will recognise that the responsible actions that were taken have led to a better position. If we always listened to the worst-case scenario on the science, there would not be one fisherman left in my constituency, in Mr Lochhead's constituency or in any other constituency in the country. There is a balance to be struck in arguments about the science. Richard Baker made a fair point about the importance of investment in science at the Fisheries Research Services laboratory in Aberdeen, at the Scottish Association for Marine Science laboratory in Dunstaffnage and at the North Atlantic Fisheries College in Shetland.

I have no difficulty agreeing with the general premise of Robin Harper's point. Ted Brocklebank, who is no longer in the chamber, and many other members from all parties, made a fair point about discards. Some  argue that that has been a problem for many years, and it has. However, the real issue is the quota management system. In a mixed fishery such as the white-fish industry, one cannot have a quota management system that does not produce discards—it is an inevitable consequence of such a system is that there will be discards. That problem must be tackled. If this morning Mr Lochhead was saying to Parliament that the task force that he is establishing with the industry and, no doubt, with scientists will consider the issue and that new options will be pursued, his comments are very welcome. Liam McArthur was right to make a point about kilowatt hours—we understand that the European Commission is currently considering such a regime. When winding up, will the Minister for Environment express a view on that proposal, because the issue is fundamental to our fishing industries around the country, especially the white-fish industry? It is important to make it clear that climate change arguments about changes in sea temperature have not been dismissed. Bill Turrell of the FRS—a scientist who is doing serious work in the area—has published a series of articles in Fishing News that indicate that climate change is a factor, although we do not know how big a factor it is. I am grateful to Mr Lochhead for the answer that he gave me about the clawback that fishermen in my constituency are facing. I hope that he will challenge the European Union on the issue. However, I hope that he will also recognise that the "Radiant Star", skippered by Victor Laurenson, was launched last weekend in Whitby. She is a 22m steel white-fish boat, which was started in January and will arrive in Shetland before Christmas. The "Radiant Star" is a real sign of investment and confidence in the future—a sign that painful steps and restructuring are beginning to pay off. Mr Lochhead criticised those changes at the time, but they are now paying dividends for Victor Laurenson and his partnership as they move forward into the future. This morning I spoke to Bertie Armstrong, who has been mentioned a great deal, about the crucial discussions that are taking place overseas between the EU and Norway. Members were right to say—Richard Lochhead was clear on the point—that those talks will set the terms for what happens in the December council. The issue that will not be sorted out at those talks but that will be sorted out in December is effort—days at sea. I hope that when winding up the Minister for Environment will set out the Government's position on that issue. As ministers know, the industry is concerned by the fact that the European Union wants a 25 per cent cut in days at sea. It is  extraordinary that we can have a debate in Parliament in which discards are the main theme and that the Commissioner for Fisheries and Maritime Affairs can appear on television on Tuesday night to talk about the issue, but that at the same time the European Union can propose a further reduction in days at sea, with the inevitable consequences that that will have for discards. Will the minister say how the Scottish Government proposes to address the issue of effort and the European Union's proposals on effort limitation? The pelagic sector is vital and is going through difficult times. I was concerned by the 8 per cent cut in the mackerel quota. I note that the Irish Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food voted against it—she said that the science on which the cut was based was questionable. Representatives of the pelagic industry who have spoken to me have expressed the same view. I hope that ministers will reflect on that point, given that there is also likely to be a 35 per cent cut in the North Sea herring quota. It is a difficult time for the pelagic industry, and we look to ministers to make real progress in that area. The quota system does not work in a mixed fishery. That is not only my view, but the view of the Commissioner for Fisheries and Maritime Affairs. We should welcome that. There is a welcome return of investment in the white-fish sector, but the recovery is fragile and costs are higher. The pelagic sector faces real economic challenges. Above all, the industry needs fish to catch and time in which to catch them. That is the test to which we Liberal Democrats will hold Mr Lochhead as he enters discussions at the December council. However, he goes with our support, and we wish him well in those discussions.

I understand the member's point, from which I take it that she does not support individual transferable quotas, which would not be good news for the Scottish fishing industry.

I take the cabinet secretary's point about new entrants. However, will he undertake to look into the European Union's decision this week to claw back money from first-time shareholder fishermen in my Shetland constituency, particularly given that the EU is not only allowing Polish fishermen to continue to fish over quota but—it would appear—allowing French fishermen to receive fuel subsidies from their Government? Will he assure me that there will be a level playing field with regard to the issues that the fishermen in my constituency are confronting?

Yes.

The Liberal Democrats have never said that. It is one of the options, as I said in my speech and as Jeremy Purvis has said. Can Mr Harvie not just believe us?

I thank Brian Adam for the honesty of what he has just said, but I cannot remember the SNP expressing it in such reasoned terms when it was in opposition. I seem to remember that the SNP, and particularly Mr Neil—who is just returning to his seat—was pretty vigorous in saying that the Government was useless and it should have spent more money. We  all remember the spending list that Mr Adam and his colleagues came up with—it was pretty legendary at the time. The Government should challenge the Opposition to say where it would find money in the budget. I did it, and I accept Brian Adam's point. The Liberal Democrats have suggested nothing more than an option, despite the rhetoric of Mr Neil and Mr Swinney, who was sitting next to Mr Patrick Harvie at the back of the chamber—he has moved on; the coalition has gone already. I recognise that Mr Neil is better at rhetoric than anyone else. No matter what the SNP's spin is, it has broken its promises on police numbers and class sizes, and it has cynically dumped students. It is important to consider this debate in the context of the gap between rhetoric and action. Although the SNP can talk the talk—and there is plenty of that in the strategy—on the budget and the economy, it has tripped over the doormat at St Andrew's house.

I must go back over the past eight years and look at all the times that Alex Neil challenged me when I was a minister—deputy or otherwise—on the numerous things that he wanted to be in the budget. I do not remember Alex Neil ever saying how he would pay for them. As Brian Adam said, very fairly, the nationalists did that only once, when Nicola Sturgeon lodged an amendment. Mr Neil has lost the argument and he should just sit there. [ Interruption. ]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Although the SNP front bench has reorganised the deck chairs, taken down a few brass plaques and moved certain quango kings around the desks, it has committed less money and fewer resources, and has made a less tangible commitment. The acid test of Government is the choices that it makes on the budget.

I will make a bit more progress and then I will certainly give way to Brian Adam. The SNP said "It's time". It certainly is time to look at what the SNP has done. To be fair, Mr Swinney was generous, but not to himself. Highlands and Islands Enterprise's funding was cut by 22 per cent, which means that £54 million will come out of economic development over the rest of the spending review period.

I was talking in real terms over the period of the spending review. I will say it again for the record: £54 million in real terms over the spending review period will come out of economic development in the Highlands and Islands. I will be very happy to give way to Mr Swinney if those figures are wrong, but that is the reality. In the areas that I really care about, £54 million less will be spent on ensuring that the development agency for the Highlands and Islands has the resources to make the difference that the area desperately needs. Instead, fewer local services will be provided for businesses, less investment will be made in business and in the area, and operations will increasingly be centralised in Inverness. That is wrong. The SNP has made a bad choice. The budget was not great for the economic development of the Highlands and Islands. Despite all the rhetoric and the many times leading up to the election that the SNP pressed me to cover the Highlands and Islands in tarmac—I remember them well; I have them in a file—the dualling of the A9, which the SNP promised to do, is not in the budget or the spending review. It said that it would upgrade the A96, but that is not in the spending review or the budget. I will be fair to the cabinet secretary—he has allocated money for central belt motorways. However, the Highlands and Islands has not been allocated economic development funding consistent with the strategy. Moreover, the cuts have come before any details have emerged about the transfer of the business gateway to local authorities or about the skills agency, which will also be sliced out of Highlands and Islands Enterprise's budget. Before the Parliament votes on the budget, we deserve to know what choices the SNP Government has made in that respect. The SNP policy of cutting such economic support might have been understandable if its policy had been to cut the percentage of GDP that is spent on public services. Indeed, that used to be Jim Mather's position. He had a point; I certainly have sympathy with the argument that Government's role in Scotland is too big. However, that is the opposite of the SNP's current position. We have been told that the budget is tight and that there is no room—even though, as we all noted carefully, Fiona Hyslop said it was the largest budget ever. The SNP's position in Government is that it should have received more from London and that it wants a higher percentage of GDP to be spent on the public sector. The Liberal Democrats are asking the Council of Economic Advisers to examine those policy contradictions and to judge whether a failure to meet our  universities' competitive needs is consistent with the SNP's avowed purpose. On the sporting field, Scotland has much to offer. With its current facilities and with what is being built, Scotland as a destination presents a winning package that VisitScotland, EventScotland and sportscotland can sell both nationally and overseas. As sport can bring real economic advantage, I urge the SNP to drop its obsession with abolishing sportscotland. After all, that body will be able to commit itself to ensuring that every part of Scotland—Mr Swinney's as well as my own—benefits from 2014. I would strongly support the positive move of breaking that promise.

I am grateful to the deputy minister for "Newsnight" for giving way. He is the most loyal back bencher on the Government benches. [ Laughter. ] I am grateful that the Government appreciates that. I hope that Mr Neil will accept that that is not what Nicol Stephen said and that the Liberal Democrats have never and will never back privatisation of Scottish Water.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We are three minutes into Mr Neil's very entertaining speech and I must say that it has nothing to do with the economic strategy of the Government.

A bigger budget.

The member supports that.

In that context, why has John Swinney decided—it was his choice—to cut £54 million from Highlands and Islands Enterprise over the period of the spending review?

On Tuesday, police in Lerwick seized heroin with a street value of £10,000. A 21-year-old man appeared from custody yesterday at Lerwick sheriff court. Local agencies recognise that there are some 400 heroin users in Shetland alone. Will the First Minister undertake to consider the resources that would be made available through the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 to local agencies, including the police, to tackle the problem? Does he recognise that some £60,000 of heroin has been discovered in Shetland since September alone through the action of local agencies including Northern Constabulary?

On 9 February 2006, Derek Brownlee said: "I admit that we consider the budget for a significant time already, but extending that time would be all to the good. Perhaps the nationalists will agree with me."— [ Official Report , 9 February 2006; c 23196.]  I was pleased to hear Iain Gray paraphrase Gladstone and refer to Neville Chamberlain. Perhaps I can bring Mr Swinney right back up to Gordon Brown. When Mr Swinney was still a member of the Westminster Parliament, he would have observed a number of Gordon Brown's budgets. In recent days, many of us have admired the amount that Mr Swinney and his Government have learned from the new Labour play book of Peter Mandelson and Alastair Campbell. We can only admire the spin that they have got across in recent days because this is truly a budget of shady figures, policies dumped and commitments ignored and whose sums do not add up. The SNP was oh-so clear in May: "Vote for us on police numbers and class sizes." Occasionally, the SNP was clear on the issue of independence. We are going to be free by 2017, we now understand. That does not rhyme as well as the ringing call to arms that Alex Neil used, which was that we would be free by '93. However, after today, the forecast will not prove to be correct, as today the SNP has confirmed that promises mean nothing, commitments can be ditched and its manifesto was not worth the paper that it was printed on. We now enter a period of new relations with local government—or do we? This, again, takes us back to the future. Just as the enterprise network has gone back to being the Scottish Development Agency and the Highlands and Islands  Development Board, so it is with local government. Instead of crude and universal capping under the Tories, we now have local decisions taken by ministerial directive. He who holds the purse strings will determine what services are delivered in every part of Scotland. The SNP might think that it is tremendously clever and some in local government might think that all is rosy and that they have more decisions to take, but if there is no money, local services will be cut. That will not be the fault of local government—the blame will lie completely with Alex Salmond and his Government. Not one local authority sets its council tax today. I would urge every local authority to read the fine print. Exactly what deal is available from John Swinney? I urge the Government to publish the figures. The concordat talks about freezing council tax rates in each local authority at 2007-08 levels. Note that it says, "in each local authority". We heard today from the minister that the rates would be determined in due course, but that commitment in the concordat is already determined. We now have government by ministerial diktat and a centralisation of decision making, which is not what John Swinney talked about today. We also note that, after weeks of the SNP saying that it would deliver on its manifesto, there will not be delivery on police numbers, class sizes or—as John Swinney said in complete honesty today—the promises that were made to students. What really annoys me is the SNP's Orwellian doublespeak. It keeps telling half truths on police and class sizes and it appears to believe what it says. That is quite a concerning sign in any Government at such an early stage. What has happened to the recommendations of the Howat report, which was published with such fanfare by the Government earlier in the summer? Are those recommendations still in play? We should be told. What of the United Kingdom settlement? What percentage of gross domestic product should be spent on the public sector? If it is less in this spending review, which is Jim Mather's position, why does the SNP argue that it needs more UK Government spending? That is a typical nationalist contradiction. The SNP says one thing to a business audience—"we want less spent on public services"—but says the opposite to the voluntary sector, the unions and public services. Earlier, John Swinney said that he had more money, in real terms, than any previous Scottish Government had had. Presumably, then, we will hear no more of that particular argument. The other side to the settlement is that the SNP's commitments are now up for negotiation. In  a letter to Mr Swinney, COSLA describes a "new category of manifesto commitments". There is nothing that is not up for renegotiation now that the SNP is in office. Let us turn to a number of important figures. As my colleague Jeremy Purvis highlighted earlier, the proportion of the budget for education and lifelong learning will fall from 7.89 per cent to 7.5 per cent. The SNP in government is reducing the priority of education and lifelong learning—that is extraordinary. The further and higher education sectors asked for £168 million in this spending review—on the basis of the settlement, they have less than £40 million. The SNP said that it would spend £100 million on students, and it will now spend only £30 million. That has nothing to do with helping students and everything to do with proving that its sums do not add up. Even on transport, the message is clear. The SNP is cutting public transport investment and increasing the amount that is spent on roads. The assessment is there—road spending is up, public transport spending is down; there is more money for motorways and less money for railways. It is no wonder that, with the help of Alex Salmond's little helpers, Annabel Goldie and Patrick Harvie, the Government dodged parliamentary scrutiny last week. Will the Tories back the budget, which reneges on the promise of 1,000 more police officers? Will the Greens back the budget that builds and pays for the M74? We will scrutinise the budget, but today's statement has confirmed that the SNP's sums do not add up. It is a budget of shady figures, policies that have been dumped and commitments that have been ignored. The people of Scotland will see the reality of the budget, and they will pass a damning verdict.

Will the member give way on that point?

Will Mr Johnstone give way on that point?

Will the member take an intervention?

An intervention? Go on!

If Mr Crawford had described my amendment fairly, I would agree with him, but he completely exaggerated our request. The amendment—which he should read, instead of reading the exaggerations that his special advisers have written for him—simply highlights the importance of committees and Opposition parties being able to provide costed assessments of their proposed alternatives. That is not too much to ask.

What a Tory sell-out that was: the Government amendment, moved by the deputy minister for finance, in the most pathetic fashion. The Liberal Democrats will hold the SNP budget proposals to account, even if others have sold out on that. We will judge the Government on how it has worked with Parliament to build support for its proposals—it has obviously done that a lot with the Conservatives. We will test whether the SNP has kept its promises to the people of Scotland and whether its sums add up on its key pledges and proposed efficiency savings. We will assess whether its budget gives sufficient priority to the real challenges facing Scotland. Liberal Democrats want an informed and transparent debate. We want that debate on the budget this month, next month and throughout this year's budget process. There must be "effective budget scrutiny", a process that is "sufficiently robust" in which there is "scope to review" the current procedures. Those are the words in the  Tory amendment today, but neither the Tories nor the nationalists want effective and transparent scrutiny of the budget because they have stitched together a grubby back-alley deal. Those parties oppose having five subject debates on the budget in the chamber in addition to full committee scrutiny. The Tories say that they are not needed, and the SNP agrees. There is no Government amendment today.

The deputy minister for finance can certainly explain why there is no Government amendment if he wants to.

Some of us made proposals last summer. Derek Brownlee says that he made proposals as well, but I have not noticed him taking any to the Procedures Committee or to any other committee in the past four months. Liberal Democrats spent eight years being attacked by the Tories and the SNP for being in a coalition with a clear document of policy—it was transparent, accountable and easily scrutinised. But today, 24 hours after the Tories agreed that there should be parliamentary budget debates, they are backing the nationalists to block such scrutiny. They are voting together—a budget stitch-up. We know now that the Tories will vote for the budget come what may. What we have today is confirmation of what many of us have believed to be in place since May: a marriage in waiting between Alex and Annabel. The ring is in Mr Salmond's suit pocket, and Annabel is halfway down the aisle. They had their lovers' tiff last week—for appearances' sake.

Tory back benchers are shifting, or rising, uncomfortably in their pews, longing to shout, "Object", but they are very hesitant over there. Now, with a sweet message from Colombo, all is well. The ceremony is back on, and the Tory page boy Derek Brownlee is pushed out today to lead the singing. Today is the last day on which there is any pretence that the once mighty Conservative and Unionist Party has a shred of principle left. It has sold out.

Not one day.

That happened on all the occasions that it happened during the spending review periods. It happened on those occasions but it is not happening this time. It did not need to be this way. The Tories said that they would voice the views of the people. They had stunts with megaphones, and they used to say minority government was good for Scotland, but they never meant it. They have fallen hook, line and sinker for Alex's charm. Oh, the fools. The Tories budget red lines last weekend were well trailed—with the SNP. We do not need red lines from the Tories; they should take 100 lines: "I will stop helping the nationalists achieve independence." Alex Salmond spent much of May, a little of June but none of September, October and November acknowledging that we are all minorities in Parliament. He was obliged to the Liberal Democrats for our leadership on renewables, he welcomed Labour's thoughts on skills, and he drooled over Miss Goldie's war on drugs. As usual with Mr Salmond, it was all spin and bluster. A minority Government it was not. There was a deal not just with the Greens but under the counter, behind the altar and over candlelit dinners at Bute House: a deal with the Tories is now in place. The Liberal Democrats will properly scrutinise the proposals that the minority Government publishes next week, even if others have sold out. We have consistently argued that, on class sizes, student debt, transport and the council tax freeze, the SNP's sums do not add up. The SNP lacks financial wriggle room because it promised to fund its election commitments from efficiency savings. Before the May election, and with great fanfare, the SNP had deep discussions with civil servants. It said that it would fund its £4.4 billion of spending with £4.3 billion of efficiency savings, so there could be no excuses, no spin, no bluster and no war of words with London. However, that was not to be. Parliament needs to scrutinise the SNP targets. We can be sure that next week's budget will contain no target on new police on the beat, nor on class sizes. Alex Salmond would never have allowed himself to be thumped at successive question times if John Swinney were about to  appear, galloping over the hill on his white charger, pulling the proverbial rabbit out of the hat. That would, in truth, be a demanding feat of equestrianism even for a man of Mr Swinney's talents. The budget will say little on those broken promises, but the Liberal Democrats will say a lot. No matter how the SNP might try to downplay next Wednesday's budget by making a pre-budget statement on the Commonwealth Games, we will hold them to account. I do not doubt that Mr Swinney wants to freeze council tax, nor do I doubt that Ms Hyslop wants to cut class sizes—I believe that they are sincere in their objectives. However, even with pre-election access to civil servants, their sums did not add up in May and they do not add up now. That is why the SNP will break the promises that it made to the electorate. This week, local government told the Lib Dems that the SNP must find at least £100 million to fund its council tax policy and £275 million to cut class sizes. The budget will also be about whether the SNP takes away resources from tackling Scotland's long-term challenges: to make Scotland the renewable energy powerhouse of Europe; sustained capital and resource investment in Scotland's further and higher education; and, as the impact of climate change hits, better and more sustainable public transport. Starting from this week, we want Parliament—in its committees and in the chamber—to ensure that the minority Government's proposals are fully scrutinised. It is a scandal and a disgrace that the Tories want the opposite. I move amendment S3M-788.2, to insert at end: "further recognises that no one party has a majority in the Parliament and, therefore, requires that the Scottish Government commits to enhancing the existing arrangements to provide early access to the civil service to support the Finance Committee and opposition parties wishing to pursue recommendations for amendments to the budget to ensure that they are fully aware of the consequences of any change proposed to the budget."

Does Mr Brownlee agree with what he said in the Finance Committee's meeting on Tuesday 11 September? He said: "I am not particularly happy for us to signal that we should not scrutinise spending as widely as possible ... we need to send a clear message that, particularly in a spending review year, Parliament can and will scrutinise any and all expenditure areas across portfolios."—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 11 September 2007; c 10.]

I take the point that the minister makes about lighthouses—in the coming weeks I will look more closely at those in my constituency. The minister referred to the Government's work with the Crown Estate. Is he able tonight to say how he views that fact that although, as a landlord, the Crown Estate takes charges for its ownership of the seabed, it now wishes to invest in port facilities at one port, but possibly not at others?

Looking round the chamber, I am tempted to say, "Wherever two or three are gathered together". Scotland's national portrait gallery currently features an exhibition called "Telford: Father of Modern Engineering". Thomas Telford designed, upgraded and built many Scottish ports. Today's ports and harbours play an essential role in Scotland's life. The sea provides transport, fishing and, in modern times, energy. Harbours are economic cornerstones of this country. In Shetland, Lerwick harbour and the council's ports and harbours, including the Sullom Voe oil terminal, are vital to island life. Some 80 per cent of Scottish ports have either trust status, like Lerwick, or are owned by public bodies, such as councils. They are all run to benefit the communities that they serve. Many are successful commercial businesses, such as Lerwick Port Authority, whose profits are reinvested in improved harbour facilities and in businesses, to benefit the wider community. Others can never be a commercial proposition. Ferry terminals or piers on small islands such as Foula can never make a profit, but they serve the people of those islands in a vital way.  Investment must continue, whether the harbour was designed by Thomas Telford in the 1800s or by firms such as Arch Henderson today. No harbour can stand still as ships get larger and need greater quays and deeper water. This week, Aberdeen Harbour Board announced a £20 million investment programme. Peterhead, in the minister's constituency, is doing much the same thing, as is Scrabster. In Shetland, buoyed by the intensely competitive marketplace for the decommissioning of oil rigs, Lerwick is looking to expand. I hope that the enormous oil jacket at the Gremista industrial estate that is being dismantled by international consortia will be the first of many. The debate is about the barriers to and the costs of investment. Ports face a series of charges that are imposed on them by the Crown Estate: payments for the leasing of the sea bed below their piers; for purchasing the sea bed for land reclamation projects; and for consents to dredge in areas where the Crown sea bed gets in the way of safe navigation. A harbour that defrays the dredging costs by using the material to build quays is charged a royalty on every tonne used. On land, landfill taxes give developers an incentive to reuse excavated material on their sites. At sea, the Crown Estate's royalty on reused dredged material has precisely the opposite effect. In Shetland, the Crown Estate collects more than £75,000 a year in lease charges from the council and the port authority. Over the past 10 years, those bodies have together paid nearly £900,000 to the Crown Estate. Lerwick Port Authority is about to embark on a major port development project to improve its competitiveness for the oil industry. The port authority will, despite comments suggesting the contrary, have to pay the Crown Estate in excess of £600,000 for that project. If the project expands—I hope that it will—those charges will rise. That money could and should be spent on investing in the ports and harbours of the constituency that I represent: in the future of the islands' economy and in the people. I acknowledge that the Crown Estate's marine policy has changed. It no longer just taxes—it now wishes to invest. There are, however, some profound questions about the Crown Estate's role. If it invests in one port and not others, the Crown Estate potentially distorts the marketplace, which in this area is highly competitive. What investment appraisal system can, after all, explain why the Crown Estate invested in Peterhead, but not in Aberdeen or Lerwick? How would the competition authorities consider such a role, and where does that leave Government guidance, which states that port investment must make a commercial return? It cannot be argued that Peterhead, Aberdeen or Lerwick has failed to invest and gain investor confidence in the past.  The question must be whether the Crown Estate's role, and the income from the charges that it receives as a landlord, is compatible with an investment strategy that raises profound questions of which port and why. Those assets are being developed by successful harbour businesses, and every penny that is earned goes back into the business. Why should the Crown Estate charge on an asset that could be managed professionally over the long term by the ports themselves? That is the business outcome that I want to see. There are other areas of concern. Salmon farmers in my constituency still question what they get from the charge that they pay to the Crown Estate—the same applies to boat owners and community marina operators. The new telecom cable from Faroe to Shetland and onwards—I am please to note that it has been welcomed by the minister's colleague, Mr Mather—incurs additional costs. The enormous potential of green energy, not just in my constituency but in those of Liam McArthur and Alasdair Allan, and that energy's transmission to the marketplace are all affected by the current regime. The Scottish National Party Government has said much about reducing regulation, and Jim Mather has argued for lower business taxes. I agree, but the Crown Estate's presence in the Parliament this week, sponsored by Jamie McGrigor—I congratulate him on that effort—is positive. So, too, was the Crown Estate's appearance before the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, and its commitment, as I understand it, to some form of increased dialogue and collaboration with Parliament through reports. I will support the Government and the minister, if he is prepared to look at reform. Liberal Democrat MPs at Westminster hope to use the much-delayed United Kingdom marine bill to drive change in this area, and I hope that the minister will support that work. The Crown Estate review working group, which has in many ways initiated a healthy debate in this area, shows that Parliament can use existing developed powers. The SNP has had a Government conference on Trident—so what about action on the Crown Estate? The Scotland Act 1998 states: "The Scottish Parliament will, however, be able to legislate to affect the Crown Estate". As a minister, I initiated consideration within Government on reform. Such issues are complex—I am sure that Mr Stevenson would tell me that. There is and there was—I make no bones about it—institutional reluctance to rock the boat, but that boat must firmly be rocked. Scotland's ports need investment—Telford would have argued for that, and I do too. However, as businesses they need to be freed of additional  taxes and charges that potentially slow and blunt their competitiveness. That is why I have brought the debate to Parliament.

Surely the best members' business debates are those in which we all learn something new. I thank Michael McMahon, Helen Eadie and Alex Neil for adding to my knowledge of matters that I did not know much about. Social enterprises are called many things. In politics, we sometimes get bogged down by jargon. I caution my good friend Mr Neil for using expressions such as "capacity building". We all use such expressions, but I am not sure how many people in the real world know exactly what capacity building is. That said, social enterprises are important. I agree with Michael McMahon's observations on the Scottish Social Enterprise Coalition, Antonia Swinson's passionate advocacy of its role and what the sector can mean for the Scottish economy. I am sure that that is one of the minister's considerations. The sector is driven by men and women who have wider economic and social goals, who want more than just money, who are extraordinarily entrepreneurial, who devise new ways of doing things and who solve problems that traditional public and private sector solutions have simply not solved. Throughout Scotland, we have an enormous role in developing and changing our country. The Government can play a  role in encouraging the sector through the initiatives that Michael McMahon described. Projects can shine when the public sector buys into them, the private sector invests in them and they design new ways of achieving solutions to problems that communities face. I want to talk briefly about something in my part of Scotland that I have never thought of purely as a social enterprise—it is much more than that. I agree with what Alex Neil said about ticking all the different boxes. Community Opportunities for Participation in Enterprise—COPE—in Shetland is a social enterprise that supports adults with disabilities to fulfil their expressed need to participate in productive business. The words "expressed need" are important. The organisation is inspirational. One exercise that all MSPs take part in is make a difference day—there is interest in volunteering and supporting it. For my sins, I worked in COPE's catering business, which provides sandwiches and other food to retail outlets around Lerwick, and its soap business, which now has an outlet in Kirkwall as well as an outlet in Lerwick. The organisation is fantastic. I do not necessarily think that I was particularly good at what it asked me to do, but I was inspired by the fact that those who lead the project have the time, patience and energy to give to people who are not as fortunate as we are, but who can be a productive part of an exciting project. COPE is more than that. It does many things. Next year, it will open a spring water business in Shetland. It takes an environmental point of view—another of Alex Neil's tick boxes. It hopes to recycle all the plastic and glass bottles that are produced and to make a difference. It is one heck of an organisation. It was the Highlands and Islands community business of the year back in 2004 and it won an enterprising solutions social enterprise award in 2005. It is making a national—a Scottish and UK—difference and an international difference in its work with St George's Trust near Lublin in eastern Poland. Later this month, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee hopes to begin an inquiry into tourism and aspects of it with which Jim Mather is entirely familiar. The exciting thing is that we will have a chance to consider businesses such as those which we have been discussing and the role that they can play. It is not just the nuts and bolts that are important—such businesses make a contribution to exciting festivals throughout Scotland. I encourage the minister to take part in that inquiry, as I am sure he will, and to answer the detailed questions that colleagues such as Michael McMahon have asked.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the latest position is on the action it is taking to minimise the impact on farmers and crofters of the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Surrey. (S3O-964)

Will the cabinet secretary reflect on the remarks that he made yesterday about the state of the welfare crisis that exists not just for light lambs but for other classes of sheep? Does he accept that the president of the Shetland branch of the National Farmers Union Scotland, the chairman of the Crofters Commission and the chairman of the Shetland Livestock Marketing Group—who are all practical farmers and crofters—consider that there is a significant issue  with the welfare of hill ewes and cast ewes in the islands? I have no doubt that that is also true in other parts of Scotland. Will the cabinet secretary reflect on that in the context of the underspend that is likely to happen in the welfare scheme? Will he consider whether he can extend the scheme as soon as possible and use the Shetland abattoir to progress the matter quickly?

Of course, Presiding Officer. The minister will be well aware of today's news, which affects Barra, that the franchise arrangement between Loganair and British Airways will end in October next year. When he considers that announcement, which does indeed affect Barra and many other parts of the Highlands and Islands, will he take it into account that Loganair's statement says that the change will have no impact on the air discount scheme, which of course assists Barra, and that the scheme should continue? Will he give an assurance that the scheme will continue for the rest of the parliamentary session?

Will the minister give way?

I accept what the minister said about the historical record. Will he elaborate on why the Government has not accepted the financial figures that the NFUS forwarded?

I only wish that my constituency had the mobile coverage that Alasdair Allan's constituency has. I also broadly agree with Alex Johnstone's analysis.  In this week's The Shetland Times , the Scottish Agricultural College adviser penned an article entitled "Is it still worth crofting?" I want the unambiguous answer to be yes; however, the industry needs short-term help to allow for a medium and long-term future. There is a crisis in the industry in my constituency, which has been caused by the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Surrey, the responsibility for which lies wholly with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs at Westminster. NFU Scotland says that Scottish agriculture faces a loss of some £50 million. To many, that is a conservative estimate, and the Government has not met that demand today. Richard Lochhead has taken a welcome step forward, but he has not recognised entirely the scale of the financial losses that are faced by crofts and farms throughout the country. Why does the minority Government not accept the NFUS's assessment of the losses that Scottish agriculture faces? I ask the minister to be specific in his wind-up speech about the reasons why he has not accepted that argument. The industry needs a hill ewe welfare scheme. Drew Ratter, the chairman of the Crofters Commission wrote in this week's The Shetland Times that "female sheep stock was pretty well unsellable, and that is going to become a bigger and bigger issue as the year end approaches." There is little or no market for light hill ewes. The industry has argued that for some weeks now, and I am disappointed that the minister has not accepted its careful argument. The chairman of the Scottish Crofting Foundation reinforced that argument to me at lunchtime today. The minister is quite wrong to say that the hill ewe issue is an economic one only; that is absolutely not the case. It is demonstrably a welfare issue. I urge the minister to rethink his position. When Richard Lochhead was in opposition, he argued that any underspend on the decommissioning scheme for fishing should be reinvested in the industry. I hope that, in the light of the underspend that is clearly going to occur on the welfare scheme, he will agree today to reinvest that underspend in the industry. I look for clarification of that in his wind-up speech. Last week, the SNP attacked my colleague, Alistair Carmichael, for not doing anything for farmers. On the same day, Alistair Carmichael brokered a cross-party meeting with the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Hilary Benn, and the NFUS president, Jim McLaren. If that meeting was not worth having, why was Angus MacNeil there? Farmers and crofters have been used as a political football by both the UK Government and—depressingly—the  Scottish minority Government. I expect better from both for the constituents I represent in Parliament. I also want the minister to stop putting undue pressure on the Lerwick collection centre to export all lambs under the welfare scheme by the end of this month. The mart staff there are doing a tremendous job; they are working very hard and trying to comply with the scheme, but Edinburgh needs to understand that there is only so much space on ships to Aberdeen and that there are other store lambs, ewes and cattle to export as well. I would therefore be grateful for a bit of understanding for those hard-working people in Shetland from the Government in Edinburgh. The industry needs short-term investment to give it breathing space for the long term. We must care that more and more sheep and cattle are disappearing from the Scottish uplands and islands. I say yes to local food initiatives, farmers markets and local food procurement in the public sector. I say yes to sorting out EU state aid so that a new abattoir in Shetland is not stopped, because that will be a hugely important investment in the future of the islands that I represent. I also say yes to a real assessment of the disease prevention regime that has been put in place. The minister has no choice but to accept—as any minister would—that the UK remains highly susceptible to outbreaks of exotic diseases such as foot-and-mouth disease and bluetongue. The inquiry that the minister has rightly set up must assess and, I hope, advocate a regional approach in future. What is the justification for stopping sheep from being exported from the Scottish islands because of a disease outbreak more than 600 miles away? If a regional approach had been agreed with vets and the authorities, we might have avoided—which would have been desirable—a welfare scheme in Scotland and, indeed, a row with Westminster. The Scottish industry needs to take a new approach based on allowing farm and croft businesses to trade unless they are directly threatened by a disease outbreak, and on a real assessment of risk. We need a regional approach that will mean that farmers and crofters in different parts of Scotland who are under no threat from things happening more than 600 miles away can operate, trade and export to markets that want our produce. The Government's job is to eradicate disease outbreaks, but not by eradicating our livestock industry.

Will the minister clarify where the funding that he has announced today will come from? Will it come from the  agricultural budget, or is it new money to his budget?

I recognise the minister's personal commitment in this area, but does she and her Government's work on language, and on Scots in particular, acknowledge the rich variation in dialects all the way from Shetland to Galloway? In that context, will she  ensure that her work helps to maintain that variation and to avoid any development of a standard Scots, given the varieties that the country has?

I presume that the minister accepts that it is not possible to save everything, despite the good works of SCAPE, the Shetland Amenity Trust in my constituency and Historic Scotland. In that context, rather than ask the minister for money, which I appreciate ministers are not in a position to say anything about, I ask her to consider the policy issue of whether local history groups could take on such sites to ensure that artefacts and sites do not fall into the sea as a result of the issues that Hugh Henry raised. Will she investigate whether such groups could take on the sites and whether joined-up work could be done by the agencies concerned if they do not have the resources to ensure the safety of the sites?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to minimise the impact on farmers and crofters of the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Surrey. (S3O-843)

Does the minister agree that, even though it comes with restrictions, the  European Union's decision to lift the export ban—and I acknowledge the Government's role in that respect—is extremely important in creating confidence in the light lamb and store lamb markets? Is he able to clarify whether any particular measures will be introduced to help with exports to the Faroes, which is a matter on which I have corresponded with him? Moreover, given the problems that I appreciate he knows about but which are currently very real, is he able to tell us how quickly the sheep welfare scheme might be introduced?

It is surely more in sorrow than in anger that we debate the motion. We have witnessed the enormous expectations, the hype, the spin, the determination, the drive and the enthusiasm—and that is just from Mike Russell—but the SNP is charged with overhyping, as Johann Lamont said, and with underdelivery. As members said, the SNP's approach is to take administrative action but to introduce little or no legislation. SNP members and ministers have criticised Opposition members for not looking forward. We are indeed looking forward. The Opposition is looking forward to the fulfilment of all those expectations—and all that spin, hype, drive and enthusiasm. However, that has not happened. As Iain Gray said, there was much clarity in the SNP's manifesto. A striking aspect of the debate has been the number of members of all parties who have quoted directly from the manifesto and then quoted ministerial remarks that suggest that the manifesto was not worth the paper that it was written on. I hope that when Mr Russell winds up for the Government he will accept that members have been quoting directly from the manifesto and giving clear examples of issues on which the SNP in Government has not done something that it said in its manifesto that it would do. In its manifesto, the SNP made crystal-clear commitments about police numbers, the council tax freeze, grants for first-time buyers, climate change and carbon emissions targets. However, there has been a volte face. The SNP's failures have been underspun and underhyped—that was  uncharacteristic of the SNP—but they have certainly been overdelivered. The SNP's position on the comprehensive spending review in London, the results of which will be known next week, perhaps offers the clearest example of what I have described. Mr Fraser called the SNP's position "a cop-out", which was fair. Mr Fraser's analysis was right. The SNP met senior civil servants of the Scottish Executive prior to the election—I remember a fair bit of publicity about that, too—and no doubt received exactly the same briefing as the Conservatives and other parties received about the United Kingdom spending pattern. The SNP's position, which is that the situation is desperately difficult now, is not coherent. The situation was completely clear in May. Mr Arthur Midwinter, an academic whom the SNP was happy to quote when it was in opposition, called the SNP's proposals "wholly unrealistic" and identified a shortfall of £2 billion. I am sure that Mr Russell will expand on that and I hope that he will reflect on Mr Midwinter's comments now that he is a Government minister. Let us be clear about the spending review in the context of the council tax freeze, because it is arguable that the local government financial position is the most serious issue that is faced by our constituencies, areas and communities. Nicola Sturgeon, who just sighed heavily—I would sigh, too, if I had said this—

I apologise to Nicola Sturgeon. I mistook the sigh for hers. Nicola Sturgeon wrote to SNP councillors in 2006 to say: "we will freeze Council Tax at April 2007 levels." That is a direct quote, which has not been taken out of context. However, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth said: "I am not making the decision. I am encouraging local authorities".—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 27 June 2007; c 40.] A desperately serious issue for local government should not be batted away in idle political chitchat. I hope that the Government will sort out its position, given the impending financial situation in which all councils will find themselves. I will pick up on one other point about changes in the SNP's position—on VisitScotland and local enterprise companies. I can take good political debate and Rob Gibson, who is not in the chamber now, was happy to enter into that. [ Interruption. ] I see that he is just returning—good for him. The other day Rob Gibson strongly welcomed the centralising of local enterprise  companies and VisitScotland in Inverness. I look forward to a continuing full debate on that matter over the next year. Policy after policy has been announced, reannounced and spun. Nicola Sturgeon said this morning—I have a direct quote right here—that she and her Government would be held to account not by the Opposition, but by the people. That confirms the SNP's view that Parliament is great when it agrees with the SNP, but it is not worth doing anything with at all when it does not agree. I do not agree with that approach, and nor—I suspect—will Parliament. More to the point, I suspect that, in the coming years, the people will not agree either. Members on the Conservative benches have today shown two of their typical positions. I am sure that we will have a good strong attack from David McLetchie—we certainly had that from Murdo Fraser. Annabel Goldie is not here today, while Derek Brownlee said once again that the SNP really is rather good, and that it does not really mean what it says on independence. I wish that the Tories would sort out their position.

Today, the SNP has put up as its ministerial team the über-loyalist Nicola Sturgeon and the über—well, Mike Russell. We always enjoy Mr Russell's contributions, and I am glad that he is back here. [ Interruption. ] Okay, I withdraw that last remark. The other night, I read—or tried to read—Mike Russell's most recent publication, "Grasping the Thistle". I tried to read it, but SPICe does not have it—the book is apparently out on loan to a Mr A Salmond, who clearly has strong views on it. There is one line from it that is important: Mike Russell believes that we need a new union, because it is a constitutional watering-hole. We are happy to look strongly at the future of this country, but I suspect that when people do that, they will find this lot wanting.

rose—

I have two questions for Mr Gibson. First, would he break European Union law? Secondly, if he is right, why did the SNP not stop the tendering process the minute that it came into power?

I am grateful to the minister for  giving way, given that he still has five minutes and that this must be the longest ministerial wind-up speech so far this session. Will he compare Keith Brown's interesting perspective on Audit Scotland with Andrew Welsh's equally interesting perspective on the use of Audit Scotland? That was an interesting juxtaposition and I am sure that the minister will want to reflect on it.

"The Crerar Review" is a weighty but welcome tome. I looked up the author's curriculum vitae on the internet and discovered that he is not only an eminent professional in his field but heavily involved in rugby. Members who are rugby fans may have noticed that, in the Samoa v England world cup game the other week, when the Samoa forward Brian Lima took out the English fly half Johnny Wilkinson and was cited by the citing officer for the game, the complaint was upheld by the judicial officer, Professor Lorne Crerar. That made me conclude that Professor Crerar is not only tough on regulation but pretty tough on ill discipline on the rugby field. However, I will not get into whether the tackle was fair because I suspect that that is a matter for a different debate. The report is indeed welcome. I thank John Swinney for recognising the roles in the previous Administration of Tom McCabe and George Lyon, who commissioned it. However, John Swinney was a little unfair to himself—indeed, to every parliamentarian—because some of the bodies that the Crerar report identifies were not created by this Parliament but were set up before it came into being. It is important to reflect on the number of bodies that this Parliament has established and the number established under the previous constitutional arrangements.  One of the statements that I found particularly important to the report's expression of the basis for its principled position on scrutiny and regulation is that "relationships to the Parliament are still evolving." We should reflect on that. The Parliament is still a new institution with a new democratic scrutiny role. If we have got some things wrong—which we demonstrably have, judging by the recommendations at which Crerar arrives—this is a good time to reflect on the nature and age of our parliamentary democracy. Like the minister, Andy Kerr and Derek Brownlee, I picked up on the following sentence from Professor Crerar's foreword: "many of the current external scrutiny arrangements are a result of assurance being required about particular public services at a particular point in time". That is code—beautifully written and elegant code—for: "When politicians have a rammy about something, especially in really difficult circumstances, the first thing that they call for is more regulation, more scrutiny and someone to be held to account." I share Derek Brownlee's view that it is easy to write from an outside perspective about the need for change—of course, it is right to do that—and whether such reactions are too common in the Government and the Parliament without considering the reality of politics at a local and national level. This Parliament and the Westminster Parliament are by no means the only places where such things happen; they are a strong feature of local government as well. As Derek Brownlee rightly pointed out, we must reflect on the need for politicians to be much more considered in their view. I hope that that will happen, but I will not hold my breath.

I accept the minister's analysis of what should happen. However—like Mr Kerr, I will give some thoughts as a former minister—I counter that, even when a service can be delivered to an extremely exacting level, it sometimes does not measure up to what the press or the Opposition demand. I am not making a  political remark but observing what I was sometimes subjected to myself when I was a minister. The other side of the argument, on which I am sure that Mr Swinney reflects both as a parliamentarian and as a citizen of our country, is that there must be room for risk taking in the design of public services. The difficulty with risk taking is that it can lead to mistakes being made and circumstances arising that do not follow the book, the regulation or the system that has been devised by a learned civil servant or local official. I ask ministers to be aware of the strong desire that the system should allow imaginative solutions to be found. Professor Crerar says in his conclusion that "there is a need for a revised model of accountability where independence from Ministers is balanced by responsibility to the Parliament." I presume that that means that ministers must let go. Mr Swinney was good enough to acknowledge that point, but it is still a brave minister who lets go. I do not mean that in a political sense; it does not matter what the Administration is. I share the concerns of Mr Kerr and Mr Brownlee about a single national scrutiny body. I am not convinced that that is realistic or desirable at this stage, given the example that Mr Kerr gave of school inspectors. The Anderson high school in Lerwick was inspected last week—that is one tough experience. I am not convinced that we can have one body that inspects both schools and prisons and is accountable in the same way for both. I am sure that Mr Swinney will reflect on that. I cannot be the only constituency member who is a bit concerned about the SPSO's delivery. Andy Kerr made this point much more elegantly than I am doing, but I am not convinced that the stage in the process that gives people a leg up into another level of scrutiny should be lost. I hope that the minister will reflect on the points that I have made. The Liberal Democrats support the motion.

The Scottish National Party wants EARL dead. The SNP, backed by its cosy coalition partners the Tories, will today try to kill a strategic transport project for Scotland. The project is challenging. It is a public transport investment that represents a commitment to Scotland's competitiveness as a destination. However, the SNP-Tory coalition does not want it. The SNP's solution is not the direct link that Scots, visitors and Scottish businesses want and that the Liberal Democrats want. This morning, the Dundee and Angus Chamber of Commerce said that the SNP's plan would not encourage businesspeople out of their cars—and Dundee's two constituencies are represented by SNP members, one of whom is a minister. We can identify a theme. Anyone who runs a business or a guesthouse in Aberdeen, Perth, Dundee or Inverness, to name just four cities, all of which are represented by SNP ministers, will now not benefit from a direct, integrated rail service to Edinburgh airport. Inverness Chamber of Commerce, an organisation that is dear to my good friend Mr Ewing, said that EARL should improve the competitiveness of businesses in the north. People who are coming from Shetland will access Edinburgh airport more quickly than people from Tayside. Can members believe that? A Gogar rail halt is not a direct airport rail link and is not the right solution. The minister gave the game away when it became clear that he does not know the costs or even where the station will be. The proposal is policy on the hoof, which has been accepted by the Conservatives, who are sitting on my very far right. If the direct rail link was built, people would leave a train that had come from one of 62 stations throughout Scotland and take a lift straight into the airport's departure hall—as people do in Oslo and Zurich and will soon be able to do in Dublin. That will not happen in Scotland. The Gogar option depends on trams. Trams were passionately opposed by Alex Salmond, John Swinney and Kenny MacAskill but are now the cornerstone of SNP transport policy—I do not know whether to laugh or cry. We will hear no more of the SNP's claim that money earmarked for trams could pay for the A9; the SNP backs trams completely. I hope that members have noticed that Mr Stevenson is shaking his head; the SNP does not know whether it backs trams or opposes them.  The SNP's so-called airport link is utterly dependent on trams. The SNP's vision for rail in Scotland and what it will spend money on is all about the central belt, as the minister made clear. The minister said that the SNP's vision for electrification is to reach those far-north towns of Dunblane, Alloa and Cumbernauld. We will hear no more about SNP spending being geographically targeted. All the money is going to the central belt, which is the opposite of what the SNP said that it would do. The Greens, like the Tories, are backing the SNP, because they do not want more people to use the airport. That is a reasonable argument, but the logic of the Greens' position is to back no public transport link to the airport. By backing a link, the Greens make their position as ridiculous as that of the Tories. I cannot be the only member who read with incredulity the Tories' press statement this morning. The Tories claim that they have always opposed EARL. That is not so; they used to be in favour of it. Iain Gray quoted David McLetchie and I will do so too. Mr McLetchie said: "the tunnel option represents a better overall outcome in terms of what it delivers".— [ Official Report , 14 March 2007; c 33140.]  I agree. The Tories are rewriting history and their position is pretty close to hypocrisy. The Tories have made a U-turn, to prop up the SNP Administration. Why do the Tories not just join the SNP? The two parties are indistinguishable these days. Mr Stevenson did not mention governance in his statement. Nor did he answer the points that were made in the motion to which the Parliament agreed in June. The Parliament can invest in Scotland, in public transport and in our ability to compete in the world, or it can vote with the SNP. The Liberal Democrats will vote for Scotland.

I thank Mr Swinney for the copy of his statement. I was a bit surprised that there was nothing in this morning's press that I could compare it with, but I could contrast it with what was in the Sunday newspapers, so rather than thanking the Conservatives I thank Scotland on Sunday for the advance copy of the statement. Mr Swinney is today abolishing 21 local enterprise companies. Why are businessmen and businesswomen who have given depth, local direction and expertise to LEC boards to be arbitrarily dismissed? Will they not feel further aggrieved when the details of Mr Swinney's arrangements become clearer? Will Mr Swinney  confirm that, rather than decluttering, he has announced to Parliament a Scottish Enterprise board; a Highlands and Islands Enterprise board; a national enterprise forum; five regional boards in the Scottish Enterprise area; two regional advisory boards; six industry sector boards; and three partnership boards for Fife, Glasgow and Stirling, and that he has invited all 32 local authorities to have a further partnership board on top of that? Will he confirm that, instead of 21 local enterprise companies, he is creating 48 new national, regional or sub-regional boards? Has not less become more? Why is the SNP abolishing all local enterprise companies in the Highlands and Islands, so that decisions will be taken not in Mr Mather's constituency or mine but in Inverness? Are VisitScotland area offices being swept away, so that accountability is not to local partners but to bean counters in Edinburgh? Will the minister confirm whether one-to-one business advice for men and women starting up new businesses will be available to non-VAT-registered businesses? Who will assist the vast majority of small Scottish businesses, among which are small and social enterprises, that have the least staff time and resources and are therefore most likely to need support? Why are council officers now to be the drivers of the nation's economic future? Does Mr Swinney accept that, far from decluttering, he has announced an economic development structure based on centralisation?

Same thing.

I share Mr Swinney's desire that any conversation of whatever variety—local or national—be conducted in a civil, intelligent and mature fashion. That does not necessarily mean that we will agree, but we will do our best to conduct it in those terms. Mr Swinney's statement could have been read in large part by his predecessor as planning minister, Johann Lamont, although that might be unfair to both of them. I note and agree with Derek Brownlee's point about the link to independence. The point about "planning for independence" is that Mr Swinney will be planning for an extremely long time if that is his role in the new Government. I will ask several specific questions on points that he made this afternoon. I noted his link to the Government's economic strategy—indeed, he has just referred to it again in response to Mr Brownlee. Why will the council of economic advisers not have an input into the spending review over which he now presides? If I am to understand the BBC reports from last night, that spending review is, I regret to say, currently being briefed to the press rather than to Parliament. I notice that the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change is beside Mr Swinney, which I welcome. How does he plan to achieve easing of congestion, strategic links and improved connections—all important objectives on which many members agree with him—when the Scottish National Party has cancelled the Edinburgh airport rail link project and wants to build more roads? That cancellation is a truly bad decision. I accept that Mr Swinney does not agree with me on that: it is, nonetheless, a bad decision. I draw Mr Swinney's attention to the report by the Sustainable Development Commission that was published last Wednesday and announced in Parliament. I am sure that he has had an opportunity at least to glance through it—I suggest that the Government read it carefully before it pronounces on major transport projects. In particular, I draw his attention to the comments on reducing CO 2 emissions and making the most of Scotland's renewable energy potential. Mr Swinney also said that economic benefits can and should hold sway over protecting vested interests or knee-jerk resistance to change. That is a sentiment and approach with which I entirely agree. Therefore, why did Alex Salmond declare last Friday green energy day but cancel a major wind farm development in Aberdeenshire on Monday? Is the reality of Mr Swinney's Government that, on wind power, it wants to oppose schemes where opposition exists, as it did on Monday? Does not it realise the huge potential for wind power in the strategic planning document  that it has announced this afternoon, not only for clean energy production but for the manufacturing industries that can go with it? Will wind farms be judged to be small and medium-sized developments rather than significant developments under the national planning framework? Does that mean that the Government's policy of a local moratorium will become one of a national moratorium? Today is an appropriate time for Mr Swinney's Government to be clear on that. Not only Parliament but the industry expects clarity, so a straight answer would be welcome indeed.

I thank Linda Fabiani for her support for the permanent return of the St Ninian's Isle treasure to Shetland. I ask her to thank Mr Salmond for his support as well—he signed Alistair Carmichael's early-day motion in the House of Commons in his capacity as a constituency member of Parliament. Does the minister know that the National Museums of Scotland has agreed to loan the St Ninian's Isle treasure to the Shetland museum on a temporary basis? Will she help us to make that loan permanent?

I welcome the First Minister's commitment to have the council's chairman appear before the relevant parliamentary committees and I hope that he will undertake to work with Parliament on the best way in which to bring that about. The First Minister was keen to mention the FSB study and the league table that is produced therein. Where, on that league table, does he expect Scotland to be in four years? What will be the council's position in relation to the existing office of the chief economic adviser, which is at the First Minister's disposal? Will the council be allowed input to standard economic publications, such as "Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland" and the "Scottish Economic Report"?

Will the minister give way?

I apologise to the minister and to his colleagues for labouring the point, but I am genuinely concerned about the possible impact on ports such as Sullom Voe in my constituency. Does he share my concern about the British Ports  Association's submission to the consultation? It is concerned that, as Sarah Boyack mentioned, the broader social, environmental and economic issues might not have been considered in the construction of the regulations. Will the minister undertake to write to members—or to place in the Scottish Parliament information centre the relevant information—and to the BPA on those points so that we can be very clear about what we are being asked to pass today?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement and his presentation of it this morning. Will he confirm that all the Howat recommendations are being assessed by the Government, except the one on Scottish Water, if I remember correctly his previous statement on the matter?  On spending commitments that he and his ministerial colleagues have made since the Government was formed, if—as I heard him say—end-year flexibility is not to be used, will all such spending decisions this year and in future financial years have to come from existing resources? Am I right to understand that some of the cabinet secretary's ministerial colleagues have ruled out using public-private partnership money—I think that he just said that to Wendy Alexander—whereas yesterday, Stewart Stevenson confirmed that PPP would be used for the M80? Perhaps the cabinet secretary will tell Parliament about the clear principle that is being followed with regard to the use of private resources. The cabinet secretary spoke about the clutter of public bodies. His colleague Jim Mather gave fair evidence yesterday to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee about such clutter, but he did not say that legislation would be forthcoming to declutter—or whatever the appropriate word is—and reduce the number of bodies. When is Parliament to be told about the Government plans for the public sector, particularly in light of what I understand to be the decision not to shelve sportscotland, despite a previous commitment to do so? I ask the cabinet secretary to expand on his point about the new partnership with local government. Surely the principle of freezing council tax rates, irrespective of whether that is a good or bad decision, will mean that no local authority has any leeway in the decisions that it makes about its income, and that the cabinet secretary will be completely in charge of councils' resources? Is that not the principle that is being established?

Where in the Auditor General's report does it say that the costs are out of control?

I thank Wendy Alexander and offer qualified thanks to Derek Brownlee for working together with us on this important issue. The Liberal Democrat, Labour and Conservative parties are prepared to put aside political differences to work constructively for Scotland. I agree with the points that Mr Brownlee made on the Forth crossing. Liberal Democrat members support the work that is being and will be done on the crossing. However, we, the Labour Party and the Conservatives will not be deflected from our purpose this afternoon of pinning down the SNP on an issue that it said it would bring back to Parliament. It has not had the courage to do so. [ Interruption. ] SNP members are shouting, but Mr Swinney should read his motion, which is not about EARL and trams but about many wider  issues. Mr Swinney, Mr Stevenson and Mr Salmond said that they would bring EARL and the trams project back to the Parliament, but they have not had the courage to do so. [ Interruption. ] I ask for quiet from SNP members.

On EARL and trams, the SNP has dug a hole for itself. Originally it supported both projects. Then SNP members changed their mind and pledged to scrap them. After the election, realising that the Opposition parties were not playing their game, they backtracked and started to spin themselves into costs being out of control. Messrs Salmond, Swinney and Stevenson claimed on the record that costs were running out of control, but they refused to publish any evidence to prove that. As the hole got deeper, they commissioned Audit Scotland to find a justification for their position. I accept Derek Brownlee's mild remarks on that point, but the problem for Mr Swinney is that Bob Black did not play ball. The Auditor General concluded that there was no evidence that costs were out of control. I am sure that Mr Swinney is writing down something useful, but he should write down that the Auditor General repeated to the Audit Committee this morning that the cost estimates were robustly prepared. I hope that Mr Swinney will quote those comments back to me when he winds up. Because the SNP would not publish the evidence to support its cost assertions and blamed Transport Scotland—the Government's own agency—for that, I asked the permanent secretary for an explanation. His letter to me this morning states that Transport Scotland provided incorrect figures to ministers. The permanent secretary tells me that those figures were corrected within a day, so presumably ministers have now been assured by their officials and by the Auditor General that the estimates are sound. Should one day's uncertainty kill a project? No. However, Alex Salmond has pronounced. A day after the publication of Mr Black's report, he kept on digging—he is already halfway to Kirkcaldy. Perhaps the SNP should keep Mr Ewing's policy of tunnelling under the Forth. The main argument that ministers are now making concerns the management of EARL. Let Parliament be clear about Audit Scotland's report. The Auditor General could have said that governance on EARL was irretrievably broken; he did not. He could have said that the matters that he identified could not be addressed; he manifestly did not. He could have recommended that the project stop because of procurement; he did not. He found no evidence for a  recommendation to stop the Edinburgh airport rail project. Any capital project at this stage in its delivery has governance issues and EARL is a complex project. What, therefore, is the SNP's plan for rail links to the airport? Perhaps in Mr Swinney's winding-up speech, which I am sure will be entertaining and robust, he will elaborate on that plan. I am sure that Mr Swinney accepts that procurement and governance will be issues no matter what the proposal. The SNP has been disparaging about the work that the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill Committee did on the alternatives.

I will give way happily to Christine Grahame, because she was a member of that committee. She will confirm that the committee found a quarter of the benefits at half the cost of the current proposal. So, the SNP alternative produces much less value for money.

I am happy to accept that, but I notice that Christine Grahame did not agree with my central proposition about the value-for-money exercise. A rail link from all over Scotland to Edinburgh airport is a good project for Scotland. Today, when the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism gave evidence at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, he spoke sensibly about the importance of infrastructure. Jim Mather quoted the four lessons of success of the Irish Minister for Finance, Charlie McCreevy, who advises as much investment as possible in infrastructure. In Dublin, that now includes an airport rail link. The SNP is wrong in its assessment of such projects' value to Scotland. Alex Salmond has made much of building a consensus in Parliament and on this issue, there is one: it just does not include the SNP. Let us be clear—if Parliament supports trams and EARL today, and the SNP stops the projects, Alex Salmond will defy the will of Parliament and no amount of spin will get him out of that hole. I urge Parliament to support the amendment in the name of Wendy Alexander.

Will the minister confirm that he is pushing ahead with Airdrie to Bathgate, the Glasgow airport rail link, Waverley station, Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine, the M74, the M80, the M8 and the AWPR but that he plans to ditch EARL and the trams and is backing away from the Borders railway? Will he confirm that at the recent election, every SNP candidate north of the Highland line, including his good self, said that a nationalist Government would switch expenditure away from the central belt and towards the north? Where is that switch?

I, too, thank Mr Swinney for an advance copy of his statement. Does he accept that two of the most important reports that have been produced on climate change were the Stern report and the report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change? Has his Government's initial thinking on climate change been influenced by those reports—in particular, by the economic analysis in the Stern report? As a member who represents an agricultural constituency—as I do—John Swinney will be aware that the NFU Scotland has launched a campaign entitled "What's on your plate?" This is the first day of the Royal Highland show at Ingliston. Is Mr Swinney minister aware that—according to the food campaign group Sustain: The alliance for better food & farming—choosing seasonal products and purchasing them locally could reduce to 376 miles the total distance that a traditional meal travels from farm to fork? That is 66 times fewer food miles than supermarket food, whose ingredients could have travelled more than 24,000 miles cumulatively. Does Mr Swinney agree that tackling that problem would be an important element to the climate change bill and strategy? Will he say how he plans to tackle it through his department or that of his colleague, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment? What specific measures will he take on public procurement—not only on food but in other areas of procurement—that will assist in reducing emissions? Mr Swinney made a point about ensuring that he works with the UK Government and wider European interests. Will he undertake to ensure that aviation is included in the European carbon emissions trading scheme? That must be an essential component of future work on climate change. Will he clarify his point about targets for the average annual reductions being based on a five-year period? Does it mean that Parliament would  not see progress on reductions until the next parliamentary session? Will he undertake to consider whether it should be a four-year period so that a Government of whatever persuasion could be held to account within the parliamentary session for which it is responsible?

That is ridiculous.

I welcome the opportunity to debate this important area of Liberal Democrat policy. I know that it comes as a surprise, given my disagreement with Mr Swinney on a number of transport projects, but I agree with him on this policy. I give clear notice that the Scottish Liberal Democrats will work with the SNP Government on the issue. Before the election we said that we would, and we will do so when proposals are brought forward. I agree with Mr McNulty on one point, however; it is incumbent on the Government to introduce proposals that should rightly be scrutinised. We look forward to playing a constructive role in that process. Council tax is a burden on the most vulnerable people—pensioners, the average hard-working family and young people who are starting out on their careers. It is unfair and unfixable. While the Conservatives and Labour are content to tinker at the edges—and remain so this morning—we seek a fair replacement that is based on the ability to pay. Under a local income tax, 70 per cent of households would be better off. The move would benefit the average family and take half a million pensioners out of paying local tax altogether.

In a minute. These are important areas on which to move forward. As Mr Brownlee fairly pointed out, today's debate is about the principle of progressive taxation. I acknowledge the Conservatives' opposition to that principle, but I must say that I have always been a little surprised that my former colleagues in the Labour Party have never supported the contention that an important element of our tax system should be progressive local taxation. I and the rest of the Liberal Democrats are very keen for Parliament to endorse the principle today. Mr Brownlee and Mr McNulty have already given a lot of attention to our position, but they did not pay as much attention to the reality of their own alternatives. As they were put to the independent review of local government finance, Labour's rebanding proposal would result in half of households paying more and no one paying less. If Scotland keeps the council tax, it must be revalued at some point; after all, it cannot be  forever based on 1991 house prices. When the council tax was revalued in Wales, there was an average additional 10 per cent hike in tax. Indeed, during the election campaign, the Labour Party admitted that revaluation would have to happen. It is certainly implicit in its own policy; if it splits the top and bottom bands, it must revalue them. If it revalues those two bands, the logical conclusion is that it must revalue all of them. How could it make its proposals work otherwise? The one argument that was advanced by Mr Brownlee that I might agree with is that, whatever system is introduced, it will have difficulties. Many of us who went through the Burt inquiry know all about that. In any case, it is very honest and brave of the Conservatives to make arguments for reform. After all, we remember their main reform in this area: Mrs Thatcher's Government introduced the poll tax some years ago, and it has not been that long since Michael Howard called it the fairest form of local taxation. Nothing in the proposals that have been outlined by the Conservatives would change that position. Even their proposed 50 per cent council tax rebate for pensioners fails to be fair. The Institute of Fiscal Studies has shown that, under such a measure, the poorest 10 per cent of pensioners would receive on average £185, while the richest 10 per cent would receive on average £470. Is that really fair? I suggest to Parliament that it is not. We hope that that a majority in Parliament will vote to allow the Government to introduce proposals on a vital issue that affects every household in the country, and we look forward to a constructive debate on what should be an essential principle of any basic tax system. I move amendment S3M-201.2, to leave out from "does not support" to end and insert: "believes that local income tax, which is based on ability to pay, is a fairer system of local taxation than the discredited and unfair council tax and notes the position of the Green Party in regard to land value taxation."

When Mr Mather was at the all-energy conference, did he take the view that I have heard from the oil and gas industries, that part of the potential of the supergrid proposal, which he knows much about, lies with oil and gas installations in the Norwegian sector of the North Sea? Could Mr Mather update the Parliament on how that proposal is developing?

I welcome Rob Gibson to the front bench. I see that Mr Mather's surprise is nearly as great as mine, but I am pleased to see him there. I want to make several observations about Scottish and Norwegian commercial co-operation in general, but will first reflect on my ministerial experience of Norway, which was principally coloured by a powerful visit to Bergen a couple of years ago to mark the 50 th commemorations of the Shetland bus links between my constituency and the west coast of Norway in particular. We visited the small town of Telavåg, which was cleared by the Nazis during the war as a reprisal for sheltering British commandos and Norwegian resistance fighters. For me, one of the most important and powerful moments during that visit was when I spoke to veterans who were small boys in that village during the war. They were cleared with their mothers to another part of Norway and never saw their fathers again. There is a local museum there, which I encourage Rob Gibson and the minister to go and see when they visit Norway. It gives a powerful view of our contemporary history. During my visit I also went to see the Hitra, which was one of the motor torpedo boats that sailed through the winter months between Scalloway, in Shetland, and the Norwegian coast, taking British troops and Norwegians back to the mainland of Scotland. Her Majesty Queen Sonja of Norway was in Shetland on 31 May to take part in the opening of a new museum and archives in Lerwick. We Shetlanders were very taken with the attention that she paid to that important part of our history. I share the sentiments behind Rob Gibson's central point in his opening remarks about the historical ties between our countries and the importance of their enduring over many years to come. When she was in Shetland, Queen Sonja also spoke movingly about the loss of the Bourbon Dolphin and the support that Shetland showed to the many Norwegian families who were tragically affected by that. I thank the Norwegian consul general and the Norwegian ambassador, who were in Shetland on that occasion, not only for being there and for being good friends of my constituency, but for attending the party that we held that night to celebrate the opening of the museum and archives. The less said about that, the better. I wish to take up two issues with the minister. The first is the possibility of a Shetland to mid-Norway to Rosyth ferry link, which is being  investigated by several agencies in my constituency, principally the Møregruppen company. That is potentially an important development for tourism and in commercial terms. Instead of heavy goods vehicles piling all the way down through Norway to the greater Oslo area, as was described to me the other day, there is the potential for them to go by sea to Rosyth and, subsequently, on the Zeebrugge ferry to mainland Europe. I have written to Mr Swinney about the matter, but I ask whether the minister can update me tonight—or in the future—on what he can do with Fife Enterprise and other agencies, such as VisitScotland, in respect of that proposal. Secondly, Mr Gibson and Mr Gray spoke about the idea of a supergrid. I share Mr Gray's enthusiasm for that project, particularly in respect of the potential for renewables in my constituency. The recent report from The Northern Energy Initiative, which was commissioned by Highlands and Islands Enterprise, considered the Norway-Scotland connections for power transfer. As I am sure Mr Gibson is aware, the green certificates to which he referred have less value in Norway than they do here. I ask the minister to consider that. I also support Mr Gray's central point that, parallel to the work that the minister might undertake with Norwegian ministers and the work that is continuing at official level, strong work should be undertaken with the UK Government to make progress on these matters. I hope that Mr Mather will be able to provide responses to those general points.

The minister said "overruns on other projects"—I wrote that down carefully. Will he tell members what those other projects are?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve access to legal aid in Shetland. (S3O-202)

Those measures, which were initiated under the previous Administration, are welcome. Will the cabinet secretary look into the cost to legal practices of actions relating to family matters, such as divorce and child protection cases, that are defended in court hearings? I understand that such cases account for most of the time and dedication of legal practices. Is the cabinet secretary aware that only one legal practice in Lerwick undertakes civil legal aid work? Will he look into that and find out what can be done to assist? Finally, does the cabinet secretary understand that access to legal aid is an absolute right for many of my constituents but that, as a result of the geography, they find it difficult to access local solicitors, which clearly does not help them? Often, my constituents must travel to Aberdeen or further afield to instruct solicitors and seek advice.

I welcome the minister to his position. As a representative of a fishing constituency, like him, I will support him where he can achieve substantial progress on behalf of the fishing interests that I want to represent properly in the Parliament. I think that the minister described his meeting with Mr Bradshaw as cordial. Does he accept that that relationship is fundamental? Has he been able to build on the relationship that Ross Finnie, his predecessor, had with Mr Bradshaw, under which Mr Finnie was able to lead on behalf of the Scottish Executive in bilateral meetings at the agriculture and fisheries council? Will he tell us  whether that will continue or whether the relationship will be enhanced?

I, too, welcome Linda Fabiani to her new role. It was not that many years ago that we sat together on the Holyrood progress group, which I thought took considerable bravery on her part. I am pleased to see her in her new job. Is Linda Fabiani aware of the importance of commercial film and television production in Scotland, which has the potential to be a great economic activity? Does she acknowledge the particularly important part played by the Scottish Highlands and Islands Film Commission in attracting new films and television productions to Scotland? Will she undertake to ensure that Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the other agencies involved with the commission work together constructively to achieve more in this important area of work for the country?

Will the member give way?

The difference between me and the SNP is that I did not instruct Audit Scotland to carry out such an inquiry.

Is it "maybe yes" or "maybe no"?

Following Mr McLetchie's point, will the Conservatives tell us whether their position today is "maybe yes" or "maybe no"?

More delay.

Will the member give way?

I agree with the principle that Mr McLetchie has outlined to Parliament, but surely the logic of it is that the SNP Government should review every project and not just two.

Of course no Government is tied by the previous Government—Mr Johnstone is right to say so. That is why Mr Stevenson should review all the transport projects and not just two of them, as he would do if the amendment in his name or his position on transport were in any way credible. As for Mr Stevenson's roads policy, he had better look at the answer that he has signed off to a recent parliamentary question on roads, which I suspect contradicts his response to Patrick Harvie's intervention. Mr Stevenson said that he will review every roads project. Charlie Gordon, who I cannot see in the chamber, asked a parliamentary question about the M74. The minister has just said that he will review that project. I hope that he will confirm that in his closing speech. I hope that Mr Gordon and other members for Glasgow, including my colleague Robert Brown, have heard that. The Tories will prop up the Government today, so let us be clear about what the Tories are doing. They appear to be a bit lukewarm about the trams and EARL. They do not really support them. However, they believe that the Government should tell the Auditor General for Scotland what to do. That is the Tory position.

No. Sit down, Mr Brownlee—the Conservative party's speaker would not give way to anyone. The Tories' position shows Mr David Cameron's green credentials for what they are: fraudulent and opportunistic. The Parliament and the public will clearly see what the Tories are truly like. In last week's debate, the Tories did not mention trams or EARL, because they do not care about those projects at all. My party cares about those projects, as does the Labour Party. The Greens used to care about them, but goodness knows what the Greens believe now. I saw Stewart Stevenson cuddling up to Patrick Harvie. Mr Stevenson might come to rue the day. Mr Stevenson and the First Minister, Mr Salmond, are here, as is Mr Swinney. In the past week, each of them has stated—on the record and as ministers, with everything that that entails and everything that goes with their positions of office—that the Edinburgh trams and EARL projects have cost overruns. Last week, I challenged Mr Swinney to come up with any evidence for that whatever, and not one jot of evidence has been published.

I would have considerable sympathy for the views of the cabinet secretary, Mr Swinney, and of the First Minister, Mr Salmond, who is speaking from a sedentary position, if they published all the information, not just the information on the Edinburgh trams and EARL projects. The decision that is being made is a political one, and the Government is trying to find the evidence to support it.

Indeed. Another important point about the Auditor General relates to what the SNP spin doctor said in The Scotsman yesterday. It reported that "A spokesman for Alex Salmond" stated "we want to bring order, rigour and robustness to the decision-making process." The spokesman said that it would therefore be important to introduce the Auditor General. The report continued: "However, when asked about whether there was any evidence of cost overruns, he"— that is, the SNP spin doctor, whom we are told is now on £100,000 a year— "said this was for the review to investigate." As for Mr Swinney's line that the information is all available, it appears that the Government is using the forthcoming review to cover up for the fact that it has no information whatever to justify its decisions. There appears to be a new definition of consensus in the Parliament. If the Tories agree  with the SNP, that is consensus. If the other parties back the SNP, preferably after a highly charged subject debate, that is consensus. However, if the Opposition parties agree with each other but not with the SNP, that is apparently not consensus, and Mr Salmond opposes it. He clearly said on the record last Thursday that the SNP is going to ignore votes that it loses. The SNP does not care about Parliament's view unless Parliament is consensual and agrees with it. Well, we do not agree. I move amendment S3M-127.2, to insert at end: "and notes with concern the decision to involve Audit Scotland in reviewing the Edinburgh Trams and Edinburgh Airport Rail Link projects, particularly given the short timescale in which Audit Scotland is to undertake the review, the lack of detail provided to the Parliament on the terms of reference for the review and the possible implications for the independence of Audit Scotland."

Will the minister take an intervention?

If the minister wants to review projects, why is he reviewing only two? Why does he not review all projects?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As you know, I lodged an emergency question about last night's Government announcement that it would order Audit Scotland to investigate the financial position of Edinburgh trams and the Edinburgh airport rail link. I accept your right to reject my question, but are you in a position to inform Parliament about the reasons for the substantial issues that have arisen since last night and which the Government has not clarified? Those issues include the independence of the Auditor General, the remit of the inquiry, the fact that it will last just 10 working days, and whether the report will be published as it is made available to ministers or whether they will receive an advance copy. Given those important and fundamental questions, and the short timescale with which the Auditor General has been asked to comply, will you advise Parliament and members how they will be able to receive answers to those and other questions?

No MSP or political party would disagree with the idea of making Scotland wealthier and fairer. Where the Government is making the right noises, the Liberal Democrats want to provide ideas and constructive support; where it is getting it wrong, we will provide spirited opposition. I congratulate John Swinney on his reception in the press—I appreciate a political honeymoon when I see one. Never again will I accept the SNP moaning about its press coverage. Indeed, given that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing announced yesterday, on "Good Morning Scotland", a plan that had previously been announced by Andy Kerr, I look forward to welcoming my own reannouncements in due course. I recognise Mr Swinney's points on business rates and regulation, although, in a hustings that was attended by me and Jim Mather before the election, when Mr Mather was asked to name the regulations that he was going to cut, he could not even name one. Mr Swinney's invitation to us all today was an interesting illustration of how a Government that was good at talking the talk before the election now expects us to come up with the answers after the election. I wish to concentrate on a couple of specific issues, so I will not cover the range that was touched on by Mr Swinney, Wendy Alexander and Derek Brownlee. First, in splitting higher and further education from the business portfolio, the SNP has created not joined-up government but disjointed government. I disagree fundamentally with the Tories on that. At the University of Dundee, live cells have, for the first time, been filmed dividing, which could lead to viewing and defining the moment at which cancer strikes. Pioneering microscopic techniques capture a point at which a new nerve cell is generated, providing the potential for damaged cells to be repaired or replaced. Dundee university scientists hope artificially to induce a cell to become cancerous, which could lead to techniques for preventing the disease from spreading in real life. The scientists involved have described it as a eureka moment. Such innovation in Scotland's universities is a strand to creating a wealthier Scotland and to hitting growth-rate targets, but the test of how we build on that lies in the Government's support for the higher education sector. Failing to invest would damage the development of Scotland's high-skilled workforce, which is not only a strand of success but a strategy for success, yet the SNP, unlike the Lib Dems, did not commit to extra resources for Scotland's universities and colleges. How will the SNP's growth rate, which Mr Swinney has made clear this afternoon, be achieved without continued and sustained investment in the  country's skills? Dundee university should be sustained in its areas of expertise, and that should happen throughout the higher education sector. The Lib Dems would encourage the minister to invest in Scotland's universities the £168 million extra over three years in the spending review-to-be. That would continue the enormous progress that has been made in recent years. Mr Swinney was blunt—refreshingly so, one might argue—when he published the Howat report last week. With one exception, all the Howat recommendations are in play in Mr Swinney's spending review. Among many other cuts that Mr Swinney will have to consider, Howat wants to cut £130 million per annum from the overall lifelong learning budget. Potentially, that means fewer students at Scotland's universities and colleges, and it almost certainly means less money for universities. That is one Howat recommendation that I suggest Mr Swinney refuses. I suggest another area in which Mr Swinney should drop a measure that, far from building Scotland, will harm the country's developing economy. All parties have wish lists, pet projects and things they want more than others. That is the stuff of politics. Mr Swinney has—rightly—made much of proper, objective, rational policy making, based on making the right decisions for the right reasons. His leader, the First Minister, has made much of building a consensus in Parliament and of creating alliances and support for policy areas and projects. On Edinburgh trams and the Edinburgh airport railway, there is consensus and support from my party, from Labour, from the Conservatives and from Margo MacDonald, who I am sure is listening, even if she is not in the chamber.

I do not know about the Greens. What can one say about them? The First Minister cannot describe the need for consensus on the one hand and ignore it on the other. I hope that Mr Swinney will not force the Parliament to come together tomorrow night on the issue, but if the SNP does so, so be it. I have been on the receiving end of many taunts about the will of Parliament. We look forward to seeing what will happen over the next few days. I hope that Mr Swinney will not cancel those projects, which—despite his remarks—have been subject to rigorous assessment by parliamentary committees in the past three years. I do not agree with Stewart Stevenson, who said on the BBC at lunch time today that "costs were running out of control".  That was an inappropriate attack on Transport Scotland, on Transport Initiatives Edinburgh, and on the transport professionals who have worked on the projects during the past three to four years. I hope that the Government will state what advice Mr Stevenson—and indeed Mr Swinney—got before making that remark in public. If it was not based on official advice, why did he say it? We expect the Government to publish the exact advice and I challenge Mr Swinney to publish it immediately. It is no good inventing a justification in order to make a political decision, but I fear that the SNP is doing that. Even if Mr Swinney does not care for my observations on the tram or the Edinburgh airport rail link—that is his right, and I fully accept his right to disagree with me absolutely—he should not discount the views of the Confederation of British Industry, individual businesses or the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, whose convener, Ron Hewitt, said today: "We are concerned ... that the cancellation of either project will seriously inhibit the growth of the Scottish economy". I hope that, on the basis of his assessment, Mr Swinney will consider that point carefully. My colleagues will talk about different aspects of the vast range of subjects that are covered by this afternoon's debate, and particularly about the enterprise network. Those important areas have been touched on already and they will be touched on again. I finish with Mr Swinney's own test—reducing bureaucracy; a less-cluttered institutional landscape; and the best use of finance. Those things are fair in delivering the policy objectives that many members throughout the Parliament would share. All that I would say on that is, "Don't bring political baggage to that assessment." Governments are always judged on the decisions that they make and on what they do. That is how we on the Liberal Democrat benches will judge the Administration.

I apologise to the minister and to other members for having to leave early this afternoon due to commitments at home in Shetland tonight. So far, successive new ministers have jumped up and down in Parliament to offer barrowloads of warm words, a great belief in consensus and a commitment to make not decisions but statements. This morning, an SNP back bencher congratulated Mr Lochhead on his caution. The SNP Government has raised expectations and declared that it can change the world, but it has done little. The Government has hit the ground prevaricating, and now we are debating an approach to government. The cabinet secretary is a man of action—he has certainly demanded it for eight years. I have a series of questions for him; if he answers some questions, that would indicate that his Government and his department are prepared to take decisions. That is what Government is. I was often criticised, not least by Mr Swinney, for making decisions. Whether or not members agree with them, at least I made them. When the previous Scottish Executive introduced its efficient government proposals, Mr Swinney—now a cabinet secretary—described them as "drivel" and said that real efficiency would require something "a great deal more imaginative".— [ Official Report , 2 December 2004; c 12586.]  We know that Mr Swinney is committed to efficiency; he said in December last year in the chamber that he wants service improvements, not service cuts. He must therefore have been a little disappointed when he read the recommendations of the Howat report. He did not confirm, in response to my earlier question, whether he accepts those recommendations in their entirety. I am sure that we will want to pursue that vigorously over the coming weeks and months.

I accept the minister's reply. However, despite more people being involved in a debate about decisions, it still comes down to the fact that ministers are paid, employed and put in the Parliament to make decisions. It is time that they decided to do exactly that. Does he—indeed does his Government—support a £60 million cut in  health capital spending? Does he support cutting trunk road maintenance by £67 million per annum? He has reiterated the position and has turned his back on a saving of £182.8 million per annum through the mutualisation of Scottish Water. Does he support the Howat report's recommendation that the cities growth fund should be abolished? What about the Scottish National Party's policy of giving £2,000 housing grants to first-time buyers? On page 106, the Howat report says: "We see no reason for the continuation of general grants to individuals". Mr Swinney's conversation on that subject could be quite interesting. Gaelic is a subject dear to the hearts of not only my good friend, John Farquhar Munro, but new ministers, including Mike Russell, who is no longer in the chamber. Page 61 of the Howat report says: "No SMART targets are in place. There is no basis to judge what difference the budgets make to the development of the Gaelic language." We will be interested to learn the Government's position on that. To be fair to the cabinet secretary, I do not expect full answers today—the Howat report is 181 pages long, after all. However, the Parliament expects the minister to make clear when he will indicate which recommendations he will back and which he will oppose. What is the minister's approach to government? Howat recommends an "'independent' challenge function", with a minister for finance without any other responsibilities. As other members said this morning, and as I made clear when we debated the First Minister's recommendations last week, I must assume that the SNP has ignored that recommendation, given Mr Swinney's enormous set of responsibilities. There is a further recommendation in Howat that bears further consideration. The report is against initiatives. I will not be the only member to be entertained to learn whether or not Mr Swinney will stop all initiatives by ministers from this day forward. I hope that that point will be addressed in the winding-up speech. We know that Mr Swinney is devoted to efficiency. Therefore, he will not stop at the meagre savings that Howat proposes. If I have got his figures right, the cabinet secretary intends to deliver £4.3 billion of savings in three short years. Parliament will expect other imagined, or imaginative, proposals to fill that gap. I am not the only member who looks forward to hearing in detail over the coming months how the cabinet secretary proposes to keep to his principle of efficiencies, not cuts.  The Institute for Fiscal Studies was somewhat understating the position when it described the SNP's efficiency plans as "difficult to achieve." Professor Arthur Midwinter—who is tough on us all, in fairness—might have been closer when he said that the SNP's proposals should "carry a health warning." Even if the SNP could fill the gap, there are further issues that must be addressed in Parliament. The SNP has underestimated how much its own policies will cost. Mr Swinney did not describe that this afternoon. It has yet to be confirmed—perhaps the minister can enlighten Parliament in his summing-up—whether the Executive intends to press ahead with its plans to write off all Scotland's accumulated student debt, abolish loans and replace them with grants, at a cost that we know will be at least £1.7 billion, not £100 million, as the SNP claimed when it was in Opposition. Does the SNP intend to deliver the promises of the Minister for Community Safety to dual every A road in the country by cancelling one train line, while still managing to pay for a new toll-free Forth crossing and bullet trains between all the major cities of Scotland? Even rough estimates suggest that we would need five Howat reports to be able to pay for all those proposals. Once a third of the total of all those imaginative savings have gone to graduate debt, what will be left for investment in universities and colleges—an area of expenditure on which the Government of which I was part was very proud to deliver? The SNP manifesto did not pledge one extra penny for that important area of expenditure. How many new schools will be built under the Executive's budget? Where will the money come from to make Scotland a renewables powerhouse, as the First Minister pledged yesterday? The cabinet secretary must explain—the First Minister failed to do so yesterday—how he intends to meet the funding gaps. What is the Government's position? Is it Howat plus, Howat minus or Howat not at all? The Parliament would welcome a clear exposition of the cabinet secretary's position.

In the spirit of fairness and decency, will Mr Swinney tell members whether he will accept the Howat report in full?

I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth for his statement and in particular for his remarks about sub-postmasters and sub- postmistresses throughout Scotland. The Liberal Democrats strongly agree with what he said; indeed, with one or two words deleted, his statement could have been made by practically any party in the chamber. As an islander, I also agree with what he said about zonal policy. We know all too well what zonal policy means in Parcel Force terms. Does the cabinet secretary accept that the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry is proposing the closure of post offices throughout Scotland because of the UK Government's decision to remove services from our post office network? The closure of post offices is very much the making of the Labour Government. Bryan and Ann Law run the post office on the island on which I live. Their shop is integral to their business. Does the cabinet secretary accept that they will lose all their business if the closures go ahead? That would be a loss not only to an island or a rural community, but to the fabric of society, which we want to enhance. Will he therefore look closely at whether Scottish Executive and local authority responsibilities and services can be brought closer together? Will he undertake to bring speedily to the Parliament an illustration of how such an initiative would work and how it would be progressed? Will he report to the Parliament on the matter? Will he say precisely how he will ensure that the fewest—if any—post offices will close?

indicated agreement  .

John Swinney is a fair and decent man. I reflected this morning on Mr Swinney's fairness and decency as his ministerial Volvo swept past the bus that I was on. The Liberal Democrats do not oppose the appointment of ministers that the First Minister proposes this morning. It is his right to bring forward a Government today. However, the motion in his name allows us to question the enormous and unwieldy department of finance and sustainable growth that he proposes to give to Mr Swinney to manage. Enterprise, transport, finance, local government, planning and climate change—it would take four minutes just to read out Mr Swinney's responsibilities. The separation of enterprise and lifelong learning is wrong. Donald Dewar agreed to the change in 1999 as Jim Wallace argued that such a radical and progressive approach to government was needed to drive forward the economy. The change was widely welcomed by the business, university and college sectors. The coming together of business and further and higher education, led by one Cabinet minister, should be preserved. We therefore do not agree with the First Minister's approach. We are also concerned that Scotland's biggest industry, tourism, will now have to compete for attention with climate change, transport, infrastructure, energy and planning, to name but a few areas. When the previous Cabinet was appointed, Kenny MacAskill called for more powers for the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport. Only a few months ago, he made the case for having a "distinct minister for culture". Fergus  Ewing has previously called for a Cabinet minister for tourism "so that the buck stops with one person."— [ Official Report , 22 September 1999; Vol 2, c 651.]  Now the portfolios of tourism, culture and sport are being thrown to the four winds. Those are not the only examples of today's Cabinet line-up having little resemblance to the ministerial wish list that we heard from the former Opposition. What happened to Fiona Hyslop's pledge to have a minister for voluntary organisations? What happened to Rob Gibson's plea for a minister for the marine environment? I trust that the First Minister will explain why the Scottish National Party demanded so many more ministers when it was in opposition; and why, now that he has the responsibility of appointing ministers, it has abandoned the plans that it said were so important. Within Mr Swinney's enormous department, the new post of minister for climate change will certainly be a challenging role. Despite the title, and despite the SNP manifesto's plans for our nation's roads, we will assume that Stewart Stevenson is at least broadly against climate change. The central point is that the Government cannot both tackle climate change and cancel public transport projects. The First Minister will be very wrong if he cancels the Edinburgh airport rail link and Edinburgh trams projects. As for the Greens, who will support today's appointments, I point out that building new roads while cancelling rail projects is not very green at all. Those of us who have dealt with transport matters in the past few years are genuinely sad to lose Mr Ewing from that noble area of Government policy. However, as he will be Minister for Community Safety, we know that Scotland's neighbourhood watch schemes will be in good hands. If anyone can marry transport and climate change, it will be Mr Stevenson. Many of us thought that he was already a minister in the previous session. There are not many jobs that Mr Stevenson has not already done. In fairness, I suspect that a transport minister with a pilot's licence is a first and I congratulate him on his appointment. Mr Swinney is also to be supported in his huge department by Mr Mather. Presiding Officer, I presume that you have planned the installation of a PowerPoint projector and screen for the first economics debate. If not, a liberal sprinkling of Mr Mather's fiscal fairy dust will solve all our problems. The First Minister's structure needs rethinking, and the Liberal Democrats urge him to do that.  Government is about doing. Expectations on the ministers are very high. We genuinely wish them well in their work. They will be judged on what they do, not just on what they say. I move amendment S3M-26.1, to leave out "John Swinney".

In our current roads programme to 2012, we are delivering improvements of £50 million on the A9, more than £30 million on the A96, £16 million on the A82 and £19 million on the A830. Those figures do not take into account the significant levels of annual repair and maintenance works on the trunk road network throughout the Highlands. In addition to the current investment of more than £115 million, work is now proceeding on the A9 from Perth to Blair Atholl, on the A82 from Tarbet to Fort William and on the dualling of the A96 from Inverness to Inverness airport. We are delivering an extensive and comprehensive multimillion pound package to provide the strategic investment in road and rail that is required to meet the needs of communities and businesses in the Highlands. We have set out in "Scotland's Railways" our aspirations for faster hourly train services between Perth and Inverness. Scottish Ministers are committed to ensuring that all our rural communities receive investment based on geographical diversity and a fair and rational analysis of need.

I do not agree with Mr Ewing's analysis. I do not think that the £115 million that we are investing in our road network is to be blithely ignored, as he thinks. Mr Ewing would  have some shred of credibility if he did not spend his time in this chamber saying that he would cancel projects in order to invest in the immediate dualling of roads in the Highlands while also saying that they might not be dualled tomorrow, but some time in the future. To be credible, one has to have a policy—Mr Ewing does not have a policy. The Scottish National Party's sums do not add up. I will point that out every day of the coming campaign.

Given that I have no stations in my constituency I, unlike others in this end-of-season debate, cannot be parochial about rail, which is probably just as well. I accept members' concerns and their desire to do more on rail and to see more improvements and a better rail network throughout the country. I do not always agree with Murdo Fraser, but I agree absolutely with him and others who argued in favour of rail being both complementary to other transport modes and a strong alternative to the car. Rail cannot always absolutely displace other forms of transport, but we have to find ways to provide it as a choice, so that we can address wider climate change issues—on which there is probably general cross-party agreement—at the same time as ensuring that we provide the systems for people to use the car, which is still a necessity in many parts of Scotland. Alex Fergusson is right: for every member who raises a rail issue there is a member who argues the importance of certain road links in Scotland, as Mr Fergusson has done consistently in the two years in which I have been Minister for Transport. That will not stop—nor should it—as we develop our country's economy. I suspect that that is where some of us have a philosophical difference with our Green colleagues.  We all spent quite a lot of money this evening. I saw a few worried looks when Sandra White was holding forth on £200 million here and Mark Ballard mentioned another £15 million to £30 million there. To be fair, Roseanna Cunningham said that one station would cost only £1 million, but we all spent a bit of money. There are choices to be made. I would love the transport budget to grow even more, but any Government has to make hard choices about rail versus other investments. With the greatest respect, Chris Ballance got the tone wrong. This Government has put 70 per cent of its transport budget into public transport. We have ensured that there has been a fundamental switch in expenditure in that regard. I would have thought that those of us who believe passionately in ensuring that public transport alternatives exist would support that, rather than denigrating it as Chris Ballance did, which was a great shame. I do not and will never agree with the Greens' heads-in-the-sand policy on EARL. The link to Edinburgh airport is one of the most important projects that we will take forward. Those of us on the Executive benches and, to be fair, the Conservatives, who supported the project in Parliament last week, were absolutely right and I hope that we get the project done. I feel strongly about it and I do not agree with either the SNP or the Greens about it. Mark Ruskell made a good speech. I agreed with many of his arguments and he made powerful points. I believe that a renaissance in rail is happening. We are ensuring that the investment is there and will continue to do so. As I said earlier in the debate on the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill—Mark Ruskell also made this argument—stations must be transport interchanges where we can ensure that different modes of transport connect. I accept what Roseanna Cunningham said about circumstances where that is not happening. We do not have it right everywhere by any means. However, we will take forward the options in different localities in Scotland to the best of our ability. I take the point that Rob Gibson and others made about regional transport strategies. I understand members' concerns. As we said at question time last week, when Mark Ruskell pursued the issue, there will be opportunities to ensure that the transport strategies reflect the needs of local people. However, hard choices will always have to be made about transport expenditure. For every occasion that Mr Gibson has raised the issue of rail in the north, Mr Ewing and others have raised the issue of investment in roads. They have every right to do that—I would never attack that—but that is what choices are  about and we will have to continue to take that approach in the coming years.

It is important that there is consistency between documents. That is in the interests of regional transport partnerships and their constituent councils in respect of transport planning and all that goes with it. Many of the arguments that colleagues across the chamber have made in the past couple of years have been about ensuring that, in relation to health and education, the decisions that we make about the location of new schools or health facilities take into account the transport needs of people who have to use them. It is important that we address those points.  I say to Mark Ballard that I am aware of the E-Rail resource and am grateful for the information about it that he provided to my office earlier today. Earlier in the year, I took part in a cross-party discussion with the City of Edinburgh Council and I support its intention to refresh the business case for the project. However, I hope that Mr Ballard accepts the caveat that, no matter how small that project might appear to be, choices have to be made with regard to how we spend the money that we have available. There is much to be done to make our railways truly world class, but the foundations have been laid by this Government. We are committed to the major projects and the minor enhancement schemes that many members are, rightly, passionate about. I hope that we can take the opportunity to achieve our aims at that local level and in relation to the larger projects that we are dealing with.  Meeting closed at 17:56.

Cathy Peattie made an excellent point about the 100 separate improvements to the code of construction practice that were identified by the committee on the basis of the evidence presented during the passage of the bill. That is what this place was recreated to do. The fact that so much work has been done by so many individuals, both in the committee and in the Parliament generally, is one of the important points that we must reflect on as we consider our procedures and look towards the new mechanism for handling capital transport projects in the future. I welcome Karen Whitefield, Mary Mulligan and Bristow Muldoon's consistent and sustained arguments in favour of the measure that we are passing today. That has been important from a number of perspectives. I will deal with a number of issues that have been raised. First, I say to Mary Mulligan that I am aware of the concerns that she expressed about the Edinburgh to Bathgate service. I will ensure that First ScotRail know of those concerns and, more to the point, act upon them. She also made a not unfair observation about train anoraks not liking stations. We have had similar debates in other places and no doubt will do so again in future. It is a fact that in dealing with the obvious desire to improve city-to-city connection times we have to consider the number of stops that are on a particular line. The point that Mr Muldoon and others have made repeatedly in the chamber and in committee debates is that when there are four rail lines between Edinburgh and Glasgow we will be able to do much more about connecting the communities in between Glasgow and Edinburgh and about improving journey times, which I know is a cross-party wish. I say to Mark Ballard that we will invest more in car parks and in better bus links, but I do not want a rail station to be only a rail station: I want them all to be—as far as we can achieve—proper transport interchanges, so that people can move between different modes of transport.

We are certainly examining the affordability of our rail network generally. A fare  review, which will inform ministerial decisions on the matter later in the year, is now under way. I take Mr Swinburne's point about many of the people whom he represents, although we all have a general concern to make further progress on the issue. I thank Donald Gorrie for his warm words. I see that, unfortunately, he has now left the chamber. Liberal Democrat ministers have not always enjoyed such support from Donald, but we certainly do today. Although it will be on the record rather than to him in person, I wish him a happy retirement and particularly give my best wishes to Astrid at this time. I have, as I am sure we all do, a number of constituents who write to me in exacting detail on many issues. Donald Gorrie may become such a constituent in the coming years. Jeremy Purvis mentioned home-loss payments. I say to him and to other members that I am very disappointed that we have not been able to come to final conclusions on that matter. As he and the committee know, the matter is under active consideration. The Deputy Minister for Communities wrote to the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill Committee about that on 15 February. I earnestly hope that we will come to conclusions on the issue as quickly as we possibly can. I understand the points that members have raised on the subject. Alex Neil—who is also not in the chamber at this point—and other members asked about integration with bus services. As Mr Gallie might have already pointed out, all parties gave firm commitments to take forward the necessary work no later than 18 months before the rail service is due to operate. It is important to emphasise that.

May I finish these couple of points and then give way? David Davidson also raised timetabling issues. As the evidence to the committee has shown, the new direct service will take only 42 minutes to reach Glasgow from Bathgate. Currently, the journey takes one hour and 25 minutes on average. Colleagues have spoken about the sheer drive behind the project, and that is the sort of improvement that could be made to timetabling. Mr Adam made an interesting wind-up speech on behalf of the Scottish National Party. He restated his party's opposition to connecting Edinburgh airport to our rail network. His is not a position that we support in any way whatsoever. The problem is that, one day, the SNP says that the saved money could pay for Waverley station—as Mr Ewing said today—but, another day, Mr Adam starts to talk about Aberdeen crossrail. We never quite know what the SNP's transport policy  is. I am sure that Mr Morgan can wind up and help us with those points. I always enjoy transport debates, because we hear so many views from the SNP benches as to what it should spend money on. As Mr Morgan will be winding up—and as Alex Neil mentioned this morning's opinion poll—I hope that he will deal firmly with such misplaced optimism. The Airdrie to Bathgate line is an important project for Scotland, and I hope that the Parliament will support the bill this evening.

Such a young Parliament, so many historic events. I pay tribute to Phil Gallie's years of public service. I understand that he was with Cunninghame District Council for four years, during which time—my good friend and colleague Cathy Jamieson tells me—he was affectionately known as "the local Tory". He spent five years at Westminster, where he lived through the Major years—I remember watching him on television during the debates on Maastricht. Of course, he has also spent eight years in the Scottish Parliament and has made some mention of Europe and the ECHR in every year. I suspect that Mr Gallie did not think that his career in the Scottish Parliament would end with a debate on the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements (Scotland) Bill, which is perhaps not the most exciting piece of legislation on which to end a career. However, I was encouraged to hear from Mr Davidson that Mr Gallie has aspirations to election to another place. He will not expect me to vote for him if he seeks election to the European Parliament but, by gosh, it will be fun watching him if he gets in. On behalf of everyone on the Executive benches, I pay tribute to Phil Gallie for his time in public life and I wish him all the best, whatever he chooses to do in the future. [ Applause. ] The rest of my speech is somewhat dull, so I will get on with it. I thank Mr Gallie and his colleagues on the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements (Scotland) Bill Committee, including Janis Hughes. She and I served on a committee back in 1999—I forget which one, but it does not matter—which was great fun. I thank her for all her work as a parliamentarian. I thank the committee clerks, the promoter and advisers for their efforts. The construction of the railway is a key commitment of our partnership agreement, so we fully support the motion to pass the bill. The railway will bring many benefits to Scotland: it will put in place a necessary public transport connection to the key economic centres of Glasgow and Edinburgh and, when it is operational, it will give people in North Lanarkshire a direct service to Edinburgh and people in West Lothian a direct service to Glasgow. The railway will provide benefits to the economy of £716 million when we factor in the latest housing projections in West Lothian. It will encourage more investment: the promoter estimates that through opening up new opportunities for business up to 1,500 jobs will be created in the area that will be served by the railway. It will encourage a move away from cars by providing a fast and reliable service to city centres.  In its consideration stage report, the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill Committee asked for clarification of a number of points. I will deal with those now. I can assure Parliament, in response to a point that Mr Gallie made, that Transport Scotland is actively monitoring and assessing the performance of the promoter in all areas of the project. The issue of stakeholder engagement is part of the discussions at the regular meetings between Transport Scotland and the promoter, at which progress and performance are assessed. The promoter has recently developed a stakeholder engagement plan, to which it must adhere. That will be part of the gateway review process that we have discussed in Parliament on several occasions. The promoter must also engage with all interested parties in an open, constructive and proper manner. I assure Mr Gallie and his colleagues that if that were not the case we would take action. I also assure Mr Gallie and Parliament that the lack of clarity on housing issues in North Lanarkshire does not in any way affect the economic case for the railway. The bill was introduced on the basis of conservative estimates of housing, which used information that was provided directly by the council. As Parliament knows, the project has a very positive benefit to cost ratio. It will be good news for the project if, as is the case in West Lothian, more housing is planned than was originally assumed. That will reinforce the case for the railway. However, the fact is that the railway is needed now. I assure Parliament that Transport Scotland will ensure, through its regular meetings with North Lanarkshire Council and West Lothian Council, that the impact of new housing continues to be assessed. As I discussed with the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill Committee at one of its meetings, the railway will cost £299.7 million at 2006 prices. As I have said before, there is no new money for additional measures but, at the request of Transport Scotland, the promoter is currently undertaking the necessary detailed work to develop and design the specification for the proposed stations at Plains and Blackridge, which will give us the detailed assessment of the design, the environmental impact and the costs at both station sites. As Mr Gallie said, that report will be ready at the start of the new session of Parliament. Transport Scotland has started discussions with the councils on the stations and funding. Consultation of local community groups will be carried out in an open and transparent manner and all local interests will be involved. I know that that was an issue of concern to constituency members.  This Government has been getting on with the business of rail after years of neglect. More than £1 billion has been invested in the major projects—that is continuing and committed investment. The Larkhall to Milngavie line has already improved local access to employment and education. The latest figures show that 340,000 passenger journeys per year have happened because of that investment, which is an increase of 53 per cent in patronage against the projection. The Waverley station infrastructure works will be completed by the end of 2007. That project will allow four more trains an hour into the station, which will bring clear economic benefits and ease congestion for rail users. The Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line will open and reconnect Alloa to the Scottish rail network. I know that the Presiding Officer has a close and long-standing interest in the project, which will help to ease road congestion and take freight trains off the Forth rail bridge. The trams project here in our capital city will transform Edinburgh. We have this month approved the draft business case and awarded the moneys that will be necessary for vital utilities work. Glasgow airport rail link and Edinburgh airport rail link have both concluded their Parliamentary processes. They will bring enormous benefits not only to those airports and cities but to Scotland as a whole, and the Borders railway will breathe new life into Midlothian and the Borders. It will improve access, open up employment and housing opportunities and increase potential economic development. The Airdrie to Bathgate line will provide a reliable and sustainable public transport link to our major economic centres. It is an essential element of this Government's £3 billion capital investment programme in transport. I strongly urge Parliament to support the motion in Mr Gallie's name and to make a significant contribution to a positive vision for public transport in Scotland.

I have nothing to say.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  Amendment 2 moved—[Phil Gallie]—and agreed to.

All seven regional transport partnerships' strategies will be submitted to Scottish ministers for approval in keeping with guidance issued in March 2006.  Ministers are of course accountable to Parliament through the normal mechanisms.

I have no doubt—I am sure that Mr Gibson shares this view—that the proposals that come from the north and far north in respect of all modes of transport will be exacting and will make considerable requests of local and central Government in developing projects. I do not believe for a minute that regional transport partnerships will disregard any views from elected parliamentarians in this place or from local people, constituent councils, community councils and other bodies. We have been clear in our guidance that RTPs should ensure that the widest possible consultation is conducted in respect of the transport services that we all agree are essential in the far north of Scotland.

It would be inappropriate for me to comment on a strategy that is still in its final stages. We will look closely at the strategy when it is submitted, in terms of both the project that Mr Fraser mentioned and the wider issues that it raises. The whole purpose of regional transport partnerships in the area that Mr Fraser represents, as well as throughout Scotland, has been to focus on the development of transport priorities that recognise the concerns of businesses and local people about how they are to function properly and to take into account essential spending issues at regional and central Government level, irrespective of who is in power.

I would be very surprised if proposals came forward from any regional transport partnership that had not been subject to some scrutiny by local communities and some detailed consideration by constituent local authorities, community councils and other such bodies. If there is an example of that, I am sure that it will be picked up in our assessment of the strategies that are developed and produced throughout Scotland. If the member wants to raise specific issues, I am happy to consider them.

I can certainly give Mr Stone that assurance. As he knows, we visited the Berriedale braes last year and looked closely at the engineering solutions and their budgetary implications. I was pleased, on the member's invitation, to be able to meet local campaigners, some of whom have campaigned on the issue for many years. We will continue to look at the project. The formal position with regard to the whole A9 is of course that it will be considered as part of the strategic projects review. That is the correct way to take forward the project, so that is what will be done.

I welcome this evening's debate and thank Mike Pringle for raising the name of David Begg. David Begg taught me economics some years ago—and I will not take any intervention from Mr McLetchie on that. David Begg was always entertaining as a lecturer and I still find his contributions on transport informative. I do not always agree with him, but he certainly always has a view. I appreciated Kenny MacAskill's return to transport issues. I was thinking, Mr Tosh, that you, I, Mr MacAskill and Sarah Boyack used to discuss transport issues right back at the start of the merry debate. I suspect that the Scottish National Party regrets the day that Kenny MacAskill gave up that portfolio. I do not necessarily agree with him, but he certainly speaks more coherent sense than his successor with the transport portfolio.  I say in passing that Mr MacAskill has a problem to do with new buses. He might not have heard the SNP's transport spokesman explain during last week's debate on the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill that the SNP would cancel EARL, trams and lots of other things, all to pay for buses in Edinburgh. The SNP would also use that money to pay for the replacement of the Forth crossing and the upgrading of the A9, the A82, the A96 and any other road around Scotland that it could think of. When Mr MacAskill was the SNP's transport spokesman, the party at least had a policy. Its policy is now whatever Mr Ewing thinks of on the day that he is standing up in Parliament. I appreciate Mr MacAskill's point about problems with a particular rail service into Edinburgh and I will read what he said in the Official Report . If there are significant delays and disruptions and people are not getting seats on that service, I will look into the matter. However, although I do not discount the problems that might need to be addressed, I remind the member that rail passenger numbers have grown by 28 per cent in the past two years and that we are moving forward strongly, by investing in delivery and ensuring that people benefit from alternative transport options. I take Colin Fox's point about the need for choice, so that people can leave their cars at home. In fairness, I suspect that members of all parties will agree on that point, even in the run-up to an exciting election. There should be investment in transport infrastructure, whether it is in bus priority measures, the Borders railway, which Jeremy Purvis mentioned, or park-and-ride facilities such as Mr MacAskill and Mike Pringle mentioned. Such investment aims to enable people in urban areas—where most people in Scotland live—to leave their cars at a particular point and use public transport. We seek to progress such an approach through our national transport strategy. In that context, we expect regional transport partnerships to put sustainable development principles at the core of their strategies, which are being concluded and will be put to us in the coming weeks. Economic growth must remain our overarching objective, but it is right that environmental considerations should be at the heart of transport strategy. We might disagree about the pace and importance of the approach to environmental criteria, but I assure our friends the Greens that environmental considerations are very much at the core of the approach and will continue to be so. The regional transport strategies will rightly be assessed on environmental and other criteria. Substantial transport investment, led by the Scottish Executive or by local and regional organisations, is being pursued in the SESTRAN  area. Waverley station is being upgraded to help to service the growth of employment in central Edinburgh. The Borders railway will also support employment in central Edinburgh and help to address the development needs of the Borders. The Edinburgh airport rail link will provide connections not just between Edinburgh and the airport, but to the whole of Scotland. The project is intensely important and ambitious for the country and I am pleased that most members support it. Trams will usher in a new era for local public transport in Edinburgh.

I am interested in and will closely consider any proposal from the private sector to assist us with heavy rail, light rail or transport investment in general. I have no ideological objection to considering such proposals. Dublin's light rail tram system, Luas, is washing its face operationally on the basis of developer contributions, which are being used to extend the line and make the system an even greater success for the city. The approach is working: people are using Luas and businesses are investing in it because of its success. I hope that friends and colleagues in the Scottish National Party will, quietly and with no publicity, hop on a plane—that will not please Mr Ballard—or a ferry to Dublin to have a wee look at what is happening, because Luas is doing great things for Dublin. I hope that trams can do the same for Edinburgh. The SESTRAN area is diverse and covers not just the city, about which members have spoken passionately, but rural areas in the Borders, and its transport and associated challenges are equally diverse. A one-size-fits-all approach will not work, so the regional transport strategy that is devised must address the area's many competing and different requirements. A principal aim of the regional transport strategy is to promote a programme of transport policies and investment to accommodate the growth of and the investment that is being made in Scotland's capital. We will work with SESTRAN to deadlines that I accept are tough, and I look forward to receiving its approach to transport in that respect. The three park-and-ride sites that are mentioned in Mike Pringle's motion are being taken forward under the powers of the City of Edinburgh Council and Midlothian Council. I understand that the site by Sheriffhall has, as Mike Pringle pointed out, been under construction since last July; the site by Straiton is at tender stage; and the site at  Lothianburn is still at the outline design stage. It is important that the Sheriffhall and Straiton sites are open later this year, and I readily appreciate the concerns expressed not only by Mike Pringle and his constituents but by David McLetchie about the current problems of commuter parking. However, the projects will be taken forward as part of a balanced integrated strategy that puts the environment at its centre. They are important not only to Edinburgh, but in how we develop national policy and find the right solutions for different parts of the country.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

Scottish ministers wish to see the best service on the Gourock to Dunoon route that is permissible under European law. That is why the Executive is pursuing with the European Commission the suggestions put forward at the meeting of elected representatives with an interest in the Gourock to Dunoon ferry service, which I chaired on 8 February. Meanwhile, Caledonian MacBrayne Ltd will continue to operate the existing vehicle and passenger ferry service until alternative arrangements are put in place.

Dave Petrie's colleague, Mr McGrigor, attended the meeting on 8 February at which these issues were very fully discussed. I am sure that Mr Petrie will wish to talk to Mr McGrigor to ensure that the Conservatives have a consistent position on the matter. As far as new investment on the ferry service is concerned, this Government has invested considerable sums across the Clyde and the Hebrides, and will continue to do so.

I congratulate all the members who have utterly routed the SNP today. Every argument from the SNP has been destroyed by  members of all the other parties. The SNP's position, as just summed up by Brian Adam, is ridiculous. Scott Barrie made a good point when he mentioned the fact that people will be able to jump on the train in Carnoustie and get off at Edinburgh airport. David McLetchie, Bristow Muldoon and I share a passion for golf. I hope that, the next time the open comes to Carnoustie, Tiger Woods might choose to join the rest of us in using the rail link. I rather suspect that he will not, but at least he will have that option. Bristow Muldoon and Charlie Gordon talked about electrification. The current design of EARL allows for electrification, should there be a positive decision to electrify the line. I take colleagues' points on that. There are significant challenges to be resolved with the existing tunnels on the core route, as well as the programme of those works, but we will take that matter forward. The points that have been made in that connection are reasonable. I share Bristow Muldoon's analysis of the SNP. Brian Adam was unkind not to give way, because all that Mr Muldoon was doing—indeed, all that many other members were doing—was analysing the SNP's position, which has been found wanting. The most pertinent point on tunnels was made by Margaret Smith. Members may remember Mr Ewing's big interest in tunnels in the previous debate on the bill. That interest remained until he proposed a tunnel for the Forth replacement crossing. He has been silent on the matter today.

In a minute. If Christine Grahame thinks that tunnels are difficult to construct under live runways and active airport conditions, she needs to get down to London Heathrow a bit more often, where terminal 5 has just been completed. The tunnelling and the extra links that have been made there show that it can be done. Perhaps Christine Grahame does not want to accept it, but the point of our involvement with BAA Scotland is that it has that expertise. It is part of the project, which will allow that aspect to happen.

As we would expect in any transport project, the promoter has been in dialogue with the insurance market.

The member dismisses the factual way in which a commercial company has to operate. The SNP knows nothing about the commercial world. The promoter has done what any responsible organisation or promoter would do.

I am answering the point. The promoter has already received an indication that the project is entirely insurable in the commercial world. I hope that that deals with that. Charlie Gordon and others expressed concern about the type of train that will be used, but I assure members that the train manufacturers are considering the matter. Siemens has modelled the route with a train that is currently in service in the UK—it is the 185 Desiro, for those who are knowledgeable about such things—and Bombardier has also looked into the matter.

I bow to Margo MacDonald's knowledge of the North sea, the engineering expertise that was necessary there, and the cat fighting among SNP members as to their position on the project. I thank David McLetchie and David Davidson for their support for the project. I take David McLetchie's point about the capital programme, but when the Parliament considered the overall capital programme in March last year, I made it clear that, if there is a significant change, ministers will report back to the Parliament. We made that commitment and I hold to it. Mr McLetchie was brave to mention David Cameron's air taxes, which possibly fall into the secret documents file that David Davidson mentioned. I have no doubt that the Tories' proposals for higher air taxes will be fully debated in the coming weeks. We must finish with the SNP. We noticed that the party's list members from the Lothians were not here this afternoon to hear its dreadful arguments. It is extraordinary that the SNP's position on EARL is now that the money should be used for bus services in Edinburgh—that was Mr Ewing's argument. Before, the SNP was going to use the money for a replacement Forth crossing. As Iain Smith and others pointed out, it was also going to use the money for a number of roads throughout Scotland. Bristow Muldoon reminded  us that the SNP would also cancel the trams project and spend the money on buses in Edinburgh. Gosh—we are going to have one heck of a bus network in Edinburgh under the SNP. In a previous debate, Mr Ewing said that his number 1 priority was a replacement crossing of the Forth. He cannot spend his time in Inverness promising that the SNP would dual the A9, A82 and A96 and also promise a replacement crossing of the Forth, but that is Mr Ewing's ridiculous position. The SNP has U-turned on its support for the EARL project. It has lost the argument and its position is ridiculous. I urge the Parliament to listen to the reasoned arguments that were made by members of all parties other than the SNP, and to support the bill.

He is making it up.

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Ewing believe that Network Rail is wrong to have made the Edinburgh airport rail link part of its route utilisation strategy?

Yes you have.

I am very glad about that.

I thank the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill Committee and its convener, Scott Barrie, for their work on the bill. I pay tribute to the committee clerks, the promoter, the advisers and my team for the progress that they made in bringing the bill to its final stage today. The construction of a direct rail link to Edinburgh airport from throughout Scotland is a key commitment in the partnership agreement. The Government whole-heartedly supports the motion and we will deliver this exciting project for Scotland as we grow our economy. Public transport has suffered years of neglect, but our record of investment in it is strong. The Larkhall to Milngavie line carried 325,000 people in its first year; the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line will open in the summer; and substantial work on the Waverley station upgrade is under way. Other projects include the Borders railway, the Airdrie to Bathgate line, the Edinburgh tram project and the Glasgow airport rail link. All those have completed their parliamentary process or will have completed it by the end of March. As Scott Barrie said, the benefits of the Edinburgh airport rail link are clear. The project has a benefit to cost ratio of 2.16:1, so for every £1 that is invested we will get back more than £2. That will amount to £1.35 billion over 60 years. The airport will be linked to 14 local authority areas with a total population of 3.2 million people, which is 64 per cent of Scotland's population.  Some 62 stations throughout the network will be directly linked to Edinburgh airport.

We considered the matter closely and we do not envisage that there will be anything other than a very minimal impact in relation to the Glasgow airport rail link. I am sure that Pauline McNeill was hinting at that. It is important to note that Glasgow and Edinburgh airports serve different markets and have different routes. In many cases, they complement each other rather than being in competition. I hope that the assurances in respect of both the aviation market and the rail industry are understood. They were clearly laid out in the evidence to the committee. The Edinburgh airport rail link will remove 1.7 million car trips from the roads, which will help to tackle the environmental and economic impacts of congestion. Scottish businesses that compete in global markets, such as those in tourism, financial services, biosciences and life sciences will find that there is easier access into and out of Scotland. EARL will make Scotland a more attractive place to visit and do business. To oppose, prevaricate or dither is not an option. The Government will not do that. We will act and deliver. The project's importance has been recognised by many, but I will quote just three. The chief executive of the Inverness chamber of commerce said that he sees "benefit coming to the North of Scotland from the EARL project. EARL should improve the competitiveness of businesses in the North". BAA's Edinburgh airport manager said: "It is an exciting and ambitious project and we look forward to continuing our work with TIE and Transport Scotland to help take the plans forward." David Parker, the independent leader of Scottish Borders Council, said that the Borders rail link "will connect us with the rest of Scotland and Edinburgh's international airport". The number of passengers who use Edinburgh airport is predicted to grow from 8 million in 2004 to 23 million or more by 2030. That estimate might be optimistic, but the airport will undoubtedly grow, so we need a genuine public transport alternative to the car. This rail link is the only rail option for the airport that represents value for money and meets our transport objectives of promoting economic growth and social inclusion and creating  sustainable transport alternatives. The other options that were evaluated did not have the same benefits as the current proposal. They increased the journey times, fewer people would have used those options, and leaving the car at home or in the office car park would have been less attractive. As the committee's convener rightly said, the EARL project will create an important transport interchange at the airport, and people will be able to transfer between air, rail, tram and bus for their onward journeys. The easier it is to move between different forms of transport, the more that will happen. It will also mean quicker journey times between Fife and Glasgow, as it will avoid the need to change at Haymarket. The rolling stock—in which members have shown an interest—is available to meet our requirements. Companies that make trains have the production capacity to meet our needs. The rolling stock programme—which is not about just this project, but spans the whole rail network—will meet the internal cabin layout needs of the new trains that will serve the airport. That is a point that the committee focused on extensively. The new trains will have luggage space, will be easier to access and will deliver on the timetable aspirations to which Pauline McNeill referred.

I cannot give Mr Adam that answer today, as we have only just entered the rolling stock procurement programme—as I have said repeatedly in written answers to parliamentary questions and in the chamber at question time. He will know from the answers that I gave earlier that the procurement exercise is under way and will be formally resolved early next year, when we will lay out exactly what is to happen. Of course, Parliament will be fully involved in that process. The projected outturn cost of the Edinburgh airport rail link is £497 million at 2004 prices, and the projected outturn will be in the range of £550 million to £650 million, depending on inflation. The current anticipated cost is £610 million. There has been no real-terms price increase in the cost of the project. We will deliver to budget, and the budget is dependent on a robust business case now and at every stage in the future. For the avoidance of doubt, I make it clear that the form of contract will be completely different from that which was used for the Holyrood project—I thought that members would want that firmly on the record. A rigorous process of change control is  in place, and there will not be the same outcome. As the committee's convener said, the Government will fund the major part of the project; however, important contributions will be made by Edinburgh Airport Limited, a crucial partner in the project, and through trans-European network funding from the European Union. Airport rail links are vital to any European city and any country that must compete. The list is long: London, Paris, Barcelona, Oslo, Stockholm, Copenhagen and, soon, Dublin. Edinburgh is no different. The Opposition can talk down Scotland, our engineers, our capital and our ability to get things done—that is for them; it is not for this Government. Today, Parliament can proclaim its confidence in the future of rail or it can be negative, insipid and defeatist. This Government wants Scotland to compete, and I urge Parliament to vote for the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill, for better public transport in Scotland and for a successful Scotland.

In the next few weeks I expect to receive the final report into possible short and long-term improvements on the A720 Edinburgh city bypass at Sheriffhall roundabout. Agreed short-term improvements such as signal adjustment and localised improvements at the junction will be taken forward straight away and the study's longer-term findings will feed into the current strategic transport project review. In addition, the trunk roads incident support service, which for the past 18 months has been successfully trialled on the Glasgow motorway network, will be extended to cover the Edinburgh city bypass from 1 April. That move will aid the early and efficient clearance of incidents and hazards that can cause traffic delays.

Perhaps that is Mr Home Robertson's idea of being pleasant and  encouraging me to give him a better answer. He obviously did not listen to my previous reply. Moreover, the last time I looked, there were Labour ministers in the Cabinet, and they and Liberal Democrat ministers collectively agree on the strategic projects that should be taken forward. If Mr Home Robertson has a problem with that, he should take the matter up with the Labour Party.

Mr Brownlee makes a reasonable point about how traffic flows—

Calm yourself, Mr Swinney. As I was saying, Mr Brownlee makes a reasonable point about how traffic might flow. Indeed, it is one of the aspects covered in our modelling. The investment in the Borders railway line is a crucial means of reducing dependency on cars and giving people in the area public transport choices. That is important not just for the Borders and Midlothian, but for the various links to the strategic rail network throughout the country. We hope that the project will help with the congestion issues that we must confront.

Ports and harbours around Scotland make their own and continuing assessment of the effect of severe weather on infrastructure and shipping. Wick harbour authority has been in contact with the Executive about the recent significant storm damage, and we await further information from it with regard to possible funding under the fishing harbour assistance scheme.

The local member, Jamie Stone, has already raised this matter with me, and I have undertaken to look closely at any potential for responding quickly to such matters in Wick harbour. I know from my experience in harbours that tackling these matters quickly is of the utmost importance. We will look closely at any application to find out how we can most efficiently use resources. That said, I hope that Mr Gibson understands that the grant schemes have particular constraints.

I absolutely agree with Mr McGrigor's point about the RNLI and I am sure that he shares my view that it plays an essential role in many of our coastal communities. Indeed, I have a strong connection with the Lerwick and Aith branches in my constituency and very much respect their work. Just last weekend, I attended a retirement do for a former RNLI skipper in my home town of Bressay. I take the member's point about the wider impact of the weather on shipping at sea. I am sure that he is aware that the technology—the electronic equipment, the forecasting techniques and so on—on board most forms of shipping down to the smallest vessels has progressed tremendously. Nevertheless, I take his point about the importance of secure harbours. We will continue to work on the matter with port authorities and harbour trusts.

Transport Scotland, in close partnership with the Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership and the north-east Scotland transport partnership, is working on a jointly funded multimodal study to examine the needs of the transport corridor between Aberdeen and Inverness. The study will identify a range of options for consideration in the strategic transport projects review, which will report next year.

I absolutely agree that we need ambitious proposals for the transport infrastructure for all modes of transport in the Highlands and Islands, but I do not accept the premise of the question—that there will be no investment. One of Mr Lochhead's colleagues, who is sitting behind him, has been saying in the local papers that there will be and has been no investment in roads in the Highlands and Islands. That is not the case; what the member said is an absolute misrepresentation of the facts. Mr Lochhead may shake his head, but £40 million is currently programmed to be spent on the A96. That shows the beginnings of a real programme to improve a road that needs to be improved. I absolutely recognise the wider point of the importance of the link between Aberdeen and Inverness, and I hope that the SNP recognises the importance of doing a proper study on the matter. That work is being done by NESTRANS and HITRANS and is the right way forward. As I have said repeatedly in the chamber to Mr Lochhead and other members, the strategic transport projects review is the right way in which to make the final decisions. Any Government, even one that Mr Lochhead would aspire to be part of, would have to carry out such a review. What a Government cannot do is promise £4.5 billion of commitments—that is the SNP's current total—and go on to say, "This is what will happen." Let us be real about spending on public priorities.

I have never rejected the case for a Nairn bypass. I hope that Mr Ewing will not misrepresent my position on that issue, as he always misrepresents my position on roads policy  in the Highlands and Islands. I will read the Inverness Courier this weekend, and I will ensure that it adequately reflects my position—if Mr Ewing misrepresents my position, he should be in no doubt that I will correct him, and that I will do so every week between now and 3 May. Mr Petrie made a legitimate point about the A82. The trouble is that ultimately choices must be made about the trunk road network in the Highlands and Islands and throughout Scotland. SNP members want it all. If Mr Petrie is saying that the A82 is the Conservatives' priority, I accept that at least there is a fair degree of prioritisation in Conservative policy.

We are pushing health boards and regional transport partnerships to work together, involving local authorities, on improvements to public transport links to health facilities.

I agree with Paul Martin's central point about the need for transport links to be available, accessible and affordable to the people who need to travel to attend the health facilities to which he referred. National health service boards are required to work in partnership with our new regional partnerships and to ensure that transport needs assessments are carried out. If Mr Martin has a particular concern, I will be happy to consider it and to speak to the Minister for Health and Community Care about it. I am aware that NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, in conjunction with the local authority and the Strathclyde Partnership for Transport, has developed an evening visitor bus service to the main Glasgow hospitals, which I hope will go some way to assist Mr Martin's constituents.

I am sorry, but I cannot give Elaine Smith a precise answer to her question today. I will be happy to write to her with details from my department, and I will of course check  what is happening in other portfolios in relation to the points that she raises. I will do that as quickly as I possibly can.

I cannot tell Alex Neil today when it will be published. As I said to Elaine Smith, I am not aware of the particular circumstances. I will write to Mr Neil as best I can with the information he requires.

Will Mr Fraser give way?

Will the member give way?

When looking at the timing of such issues, it is important that Mr Fraser reads out the full quotes, which, as usual, he did not. If he believes what he reads in the Daily Mail , he is a better man than I am.

I do not read the Daily Mail , so if that is what it said, that is what it said. I set out our position at the beginning of the debate and in response to an intervention from Mr Fraser. However, we now need some clarity from the Tories. Does Murdo Fraser support David McLetchie's position or not?

The executive director of the RAC Foundation for Motoring wrote the other day:  "Parliament is right to debate road pricing. Our research shows that motorists accept the principle that it could be fairer to pay for the roads according to the amount of time spent driving in congestion rather than the current system of taxing fuel and vehicle ownership. But the government needs to change the way the debate is presented." In fairness, the reference is to the United Kingdom Parliament, but we should have no less a debate here in the Scottish Parliament. I thank those members—notably Charlie Gordon and, in fairness, Brian Adam—who have entered today's debate with a positive spirit. The only party that has not been up for the debate is the Conservative party, because, as Mark Ruskell rightly said, it simply wants to jump on an anti-toll bandwagon. However, I will point out its hypocrisy in a moment, when I quote what all its spokesmen have said on the subject. Mr Ewing pointed out a number of alternatives to our scheme, which I thought were rather modest. However, I thank him for his praise of First ScotRail, which I will be sure to pass on. Mr Ewing makes the right decision about transport choices in taking the train to Glasgow. Of course, under the Liberal Democrat-Labour Government, the number of rail passengers has risen by 28 per cent, and investment in rail has been and will continue to be considerable.

I strongly believe in expansion, as Mr Ewing knows. The strategic projects review gives us the opportunity to consider those issues carefully—Mr Ewing shakes his head, but it does—and it will happen, because of the timing issues. We have been over those issues in recent times and I am sure that we will go over them again. Jeremy Purvis quoted Alex Salmond from 1995. The point is that, since 1995, congestion has got worse, our climate change challenges have increased and petrol prices have risen, mostly because of the Tory fuel tax escalator—that is why Alex Salmond was right in 1995. I want to ensure that I quote Mr Ewing accurately, when he said in The Herald on 20 February that road pricing was "plainly a possible system". I agree with Mr Ewing, so I hope that we can have a reasoned cross-party debate. Christine Grahame made a good knockabout speech that was great fun, but I will make two points about it. First, the SNP and Christine  Grahame in particular are against the Edinburgh airport rail link, so she would deny the people whom she represents in Edinburgh and the Borders the opportunity to get to Edinburgh airport by train.

No. Those of us who have argued strongly for EARL believe that it will be a great improvement for Scotland. Although the SNP used to support the proposal, it is now against it. We will take no lectures from Christine Grahame about that. My other point—

Stewart Stevenson has not been here for the debate, so why does he not be quiet? Rightly and fairly, the First Minister is asked every week about matters that are the responsibility of his Government, but the SNP also asks about matters that are not his responsibility. The suggestion that I cannot have a view about powers for this Parliament is absolutely ridiculous. I say to the Tories that they should be careful what they say about e-mails and petitions. I am grateful to The Sun newspaper for the following quotes. Quite fairly, that paper has been keen to ensure that my e-mail address is in the public domain rather more than it might have been otherwise. I received two messages from a gentleman called Frank—it would not be fair to give his e-mail address, although I have it here. In his first message, on 20 February, he said: "Hopefully the whole country will see that it's another tax-raising idea—as if we haven't been taxed enough." He e-mailed me back the very next day to say: "Apologies for my email yesterday, I take back everything I've said. I based my opinion on a biased media article." Come on, the Tories, we need to get some real analysis into the debate.

I will come to Murdo Fraser in a minute. Many members, including Charlie Gordon and Mark Ruskell, referred to some real analysis, but let me deal with the Tories. I thought that there was a bit of back-bench Tory rebellion on the matter—Annabel Goldie kept her head down, but David McLetchie ripped up Murdo Fraser's policy. It is important to examine the views of David Cameron, to whom Bristow Muldoon rightly referred, Chris Grayling, George Osborne and, of course, the deputy leader of the Scottish Tories. I will put their words firmly on the record. Let me start with the former Prime Minister John Major,  who I note represented his party last night as Margaret Thatcher's bronze plaque was unveiled in the members lobby in the House of Commons.

I do apologise—it was a statue. How could I have made that mistake? John Major said in 1994: "I do not expect to have people dancing in the streets in delight at the concept of road pricing but if you look at the environmental problems, you can see the impetus behind the policy and the necessity." Chris Grayling said just a couple of months ago: "I do think that an element of road pricing and the increased use of road charges will be a part of the strategy of any future Government".—[ Official Report , House of Commons, 5 December 2006; Vol 454, c 223.] I liked the other Chris Grayling quote from 6 April last year: "I've said very clearly I regard Conservative transport strategy for the next three years as being pretty much a blank sheet of paper." Murdo Fraser has rewritten that strategy.

No, it is not. As I said at the outset of the debate, and as I repeat now, road pricing can work only if there are alternatives and not just increasing motoring taxation. I thought that I made that position absolutely clear at the start of the debate. I have made it clear again now. Murdo Fraser had a good try at deflecting me from Tory quotes, which is fair enough. I have a quote from David Cameron, who Bristow Muldoon mentioned, but I will finish with Murdo Fraser. I apologised for my intervention on his speech a couple of weeks ago—[ Interruption. ] We will be interested to listen to his speech in a moment. He said: "If the minister had listened to my speech, he would have heard me saying that we support national road pricing in principle."— [ Official Report , 8 February 2007; c 31913.]  Let us have clarity now about the Tories' and Murdo Fraser's toll tax.

This is a great opportunity to debate the issue. I particularly thank my good friend Fergus Ewing for inviting me so vigorously to join the debate; I did not know he cared. I am genuinely touched by that. I welcome the opportunity to deal with the scaremongering and utter misinformation from the Tories. Mr Davidson accuses me of proposing a toll tax. Not only do the Tories have form when it comes to poll taxes, but Murdo Fraser's position, as Jeremy Purvis has just shown, is also for a toll tax. That would be Murdo's toll tax. If David Davidson wants to misrepresent my position, I will misrepresent Mr Fraser's position.

No. That is not my position, but I am very pleased that the Conservatives have put on the record in Parliament their support for road user pricing. We all heard that and it is on the record. The Scottish National Party heard it, the Liberal Democrats heard it, Labour colleagues heard it and even Conservative back benchers—who are a little bit quiet at the moment—heard it. Let me be crystal clear. Must we tackle congestion on Scotland's roads? Yes. Will Scotland's economy grow if the country's roads are gridlocked? No. Does this Government want higher taxes on motorists? No. Did members hear me? I said no. Will there be a road pricing pilot if that means extra motoring costs with no alternatives? No. Do we need a proper, balanced discussion of the options that are open to the country to tackle those issues? I believe that we do, and I think that Murdo Fraser believes so, too; he admits, and has just confirmed, that his position and that of the Conservatives is to support road user pricing in principle.

No. Mr Davidson did not give way to Mr Rumbles, although he was asked four times to do so. Mr Davidson can hardly expect to jump to his feet now and intervene. We want to tackle congestion, not to penalise motorists. I am disappointed but hardly surprised by the Tories' failure to provide any real alternative in their motion. Mr Fraser has once again confirmed that they have such an alternative, which is the debate that the whole chamber wants to have on road user pricing. We will take the climate change challenge seriously. We will consider using road pricing—with the UK Government and using our devolved powers—as a mechanism to address traffic congestion. The solution to congestion and climate change is not more motoring taxes. People will not accept that, but they will consider a balanced approach. They will consider road user pricing charges if they are balanced by cuts in motoring taxation. A BBC poll on Tuesday asked what would make road user pricing acceptable. In response, 55 per cent said that it would be acceptable if the money raised was invested in public transport, while 53 per cent said yes to road user pricing if the money raised was used to cut other road taxes. When the Secretary of State for Transport was asked by the BBC on Tuesday whether, in the light of that poll, the UK Government would reduce other road taxes, he said: "We've said this is obviously an issue we would have to look at in the years before making a decision about a national road-pricing scheme." I welcome that statement.

Mr McLetchie can barrack me as much as he likes. Road pricing as a replacement cost, not as an additional cost—as Mr McLetchie tried to say on Radio Scotland; I listened to him carefully this morning—could be a win-win for Scotland. For the avoidance of doubt, I re-emphasise the words "replacement cost", not "additional cost". There is congestion in our cities—I think that most rational people would accept that that is the case—so people need real alternatives to the car. We are investing record amounts in public transport. We are building new rail lines and investing in the provision of bus and tram services—all of which will help to reduce congestion—and we will invest more. Under road pricing, we can tackle congestion by giving people  better public transport choices.

We know that Mr Fraser finds it attractive, but the rest of them are not looking too comfortable at the moment. However, it is not for me to speak for the Conservatives. I am sure that they will provide clarification in the fullness of time. In rural Scotland, the car is still a necessity, not a luxury, and congestion is not the problem. Therefore, rural motoring should become cheaper under a road pricing scheme. That would recognise that public transport choices are not so readily available. Mr Davidson raised one fair point, so let me deal with the serious concern that Big Brother would be watching us. Road pricing need not intrude on personal privacy—that would depend on the system that was chosen. There are options that respect personal freedom and which do not track a vehicle's every move. The concerns are legitimate, but those options would not infringe on privacy. Congestion and the reliability of journey times are increasing problems. In 2005, almost a quarter of all peak-hour journeys in Scotland were reported as being delayed by congestion. Yesterday, we published a report on congestion data. It found that in the most congested parts of the trunk road network, traffic was increasing at one and half per cent per annum, while congestion was increasing at four and a half per cent per annum—that is three times the rate of increase for traffic. We must look at the options for developing the economy. It is sensible that transport policy considers road user pricing, but above all that must mean that we tackle congestion while not penalising motorists. I move amendment S2M-5598.2, to leave out from "opposes" to end and insert: "welcomes the Scottish Executive's massive increase in funding for public transport since 1999; notes the growing problem of traffic congestion in Scotland and the impact this has on the economy and the impact of pollution on health and the environment; notes the lack of an alternative from the opposition parties to tackling congestion; notes that the Executive does not support penalising motorists, and believes that the potential benefits of all new measures to tackle congestion, such as road user charging, need to be fully assessed, tested and evaluated in order to keep Scotland moving."

I am delighted to respond to the debate, which has been secured by Nora Radcliffe, on transport in the north-east. Participants in transport debates tend to be divided into those of us who believe that there is much that we can do that is positive and those who believe that we are all doomed. That has been rather graphically illustrated tonight, although far be it from me to say who was in the doomed category, and which of us genuinely care about the future of our country and our economy and how we will move forward in the world. I agree with all who argued that transport is integral to the economic, environmental and social well-being of the north-east, as well as to those of the rest of the country. I join Nora Radcliffe in commending the joint initiative of the Aberdeenshire environmental forum and the Aberdeen city environmental forum in their work on the transport strategy for the north-east. Transport is vital to us all, which is why the Executive published the national transport strategy in December 2006, to map out the long-term future for transport in Scotland. Although I do not agree with Shiona Baird's conclusions, there is one point on which I might agree with her. We do—and will—take seriously the compelling evidence on climate change, which is why this will be the first Government to introduce a carbon balance sheet on transport emissions. It is why we have made emissions reduction one of the three strategic outcomes for transport policy over the next 20 years. That recognition of the role that transport plays in emissions shows a significant move forward. I cannot accept Shiona Baird's criticisms of NESTRANS. Most members here—certainly members who represent constituencies in the north-east—would pay tribute to its work and its positive engagement with communities. Nora Radcliffe made a good point about the importance of ensuring that consultation means something; NESTRANS has done that. I agree with those who have argued positively in favour of its work in considering issues such as congestion and air quality in Aberdeen and the surrounding areas. On roads, I answered Richard Baker's point about the Haudagain roundabout very fully during question time last week. Hardly a week goes by without that roundabout being mentioned. I am  sure that Mr Adam may wish to refer to the detailed reply that I gave Richard Baker last week.

I have dealt with the matter. I want to deal with many points tonight.

The member may not like it, but I dealt with it, and I dealt with Mr Baker's question last week. On David Davidson's very fair point about road safety, one of the drivers—that is probably the wrong word—or focuses of what we have done with Aberdeenshire, Aberdeen City and Moray Councils on the pass plus scheme has been the representations that many members from the north-east have made in relation to the worrying number of accidents involving young people. That is why we have taken forward that initiative, which I strongly hope will pay dividends. On the specific issues that have arisen from the debate, we will continue with NESTRANS to support quality bus services in the north-east, including the important interchanges in Inverurie and Peterhead, and the new park-and-ride facilities to the south of Aberdeen at Banchory. I accept members' points about the importance of moving forward with demand-responsive transport—or, in other words, public services that meet localised needs—and finding ways to develop that. We have got to make a real step change on that in the future and I am strongly committed to that. On local rail, I strongly support the feasibility study on Aberdeen crossrail. I am pleased about the reopening of Laurencekirk station. It is important to recognise that some of the train services in Inverurie with which Nora Radcliffe is familiar arguably begin that process of crossrail. I absolutely accept the argument from some members for more of that process, but I believe that we are beginning to see development, which is a tribute to those who are involved, including local agencies and the franchise operator, First ScotRail. I remain a supporter of the efforts to improve the quality of intercity rail services to Aberdeen. On the Department for Transport's retendering exercise for the east-coast mainline franchise, I am very much aware of Nora Radcliffe's representations on continuation of the uninterrupted service from London to Aberdeen. I spoke on Monday to Tom Harris, the United Kingdom minister who has responsibility for rail, and I can give Nora Radcliffe an assurance about the specification for the tendering: I know that the  continuation of uninterrupted services to and from Aberdeen is included as far as four companies are concerned. That applies to Inverness, too, so I hope that members from the Highlands will acknowledge that. It is important that the Aberdeen service, which is important to the north-east, continues to ensure connections between main business centres on each side of the border. Those connections should be enhanced, and the shift from road to rail should be encouraged through improved journey times and connections. We must be realistic. As most members—although not all—have rightly argued, we cannot simply do away with road transport. If we are to avoid stifling of economic growth, it is important that we take traffic out of city centres, where necessary, and that we deal with pinch points in the network. That is why we support the Aberdeen western peripheral road, as well as upgrades to the trunk roads in the region. When I was up in Nora Radcliffe's constituency the other day, I took the opportunity to open the £5.5 million straightening of the Hatton bends, in Stewart Stevenson's constituency. I was pleased to meet Mr Stevenson on that occasion on the A90 between Aberdeen and Peterhead. I hope that that will give the lie to the suggestion that nothing ever happens outside the central belt. That was an important investment for the area. I accept Nora Radcliffe's point about the Souterford bridge in Inverurie. She was able to show me the situation there the other day. I have asked Network Rail to engage with Councillor Alison McInnes, the chair of NESTRANS, and Aberdeenshire Council on the matter. I want to ensure that a meeting on that happens urgently. I also take Nora Radcliffe's point about the Inveramsay bridge. We will, through the strategic transport projects review, look closely at the possibility of removing the traffic lights there. I know that Nora Radcliffe and others have made correct observations about the concerns that have been expressed over local roads being impacted upon by traffic that should be on the trunk road. We need to deal with that. I take the points that were made by Nora Radcliffe and others about Megabus and Citylink. In our representations, we have very much followed the principle that the focus should be on the passenger, not simply on the perfect market solution. We hope that those representations will be heard. It is important that we have a balanced and integrated transport strategy. I commend NESTRANS and the other agencies on their work, and we will do all that we reasonably can to make their intentions a reality.  Meeting closed at 17:38.

We are working with Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council to complete the Aberdeen western peripheral route, which will remove through traffic from the city. We will continue to work with the north-east Scotland transport partnership to improve transport infrastructure and tackle congestion.

I take Richard Baker's point about the Haudagain roundabout. Anyone who lives in the north-east or travels through the area, as I do, appreciates the roundabout's importance and the difficulties that motorists and heavy goods vehicles and the freight industry must contend with. I assure Mr Baker that we are working closely with Aberdeen City Council on improvements and additions to the roundabout, which are tied to the redevelopment of Middlefield. The council has carried out a part 1 Scottish transport appraisal guidance assessment and a part 2 assessment is under way. Proposals that emerged from the part 1 STAG appraisal include a single-lane or lane-filter road connecting North Anderson Drive and Auchmill Road through Middlefield. Those proposals and other measures will continue to be considered.

I welcome the chance to make a brief speech in the debate. I acknowledge the cross-party support for the motion that was initiated by Maureen Watt on the importance of school transport safety and give the assurance that many members have requested that we will stress to the Department for Transport the specific points that have been raised in the debate and the more general observations on the legislation, which is reserved, as members have said and as the motion points out. We will certainly take the matter up in a number of ways with the department. It is important to consider the efforts that we are making. As Mike Rumbles and Stewart Stevenson said, school transport safety is not simply a reserved matter. We should consider the powers that we have to take action. It is important that we make every effort to meet and bring down our road casualty targets. The current target for 2010 is to reduce all road deaths and serious injuries by 40 per cent—the target is a 50 per cent reduction for children. In 2005, fatal and serious casualties were 39 per cent below the 1994 to 1998 average and child fatal and serious casualties were 56 per cent below that average. There is progress, but we must not be complacent, given the context of the incident that Mike Rumbles spoke about or the general points that were made by Linda Fabiani and other members. Ensuring the safety of children on our roads is paramount, especially on journeys to and from school. I will deal with the steps that we are taking in this area. We are grant funding local authorities to help safeguard children by introducing a 20mph speed limit around all schools. The most recent figures from local authorities show that those schemes are now in place at seven out of 10 schools in  Scotland. The motion also seeks to ensure that all school buses are fitted with seat belts. Legislation on that point is of course the preserve of the United Kingdom Parliament, but education authorities have a statutory duty to provide school transport and they are required to have regard to the safety of pupils. Our guidance covers both pupil and bus safety issues and advises on contracting with transport providers, including stipulating the maximum age of vehicles that are to be used for school transport. The guidance also covers matters that are reserved to the UK Parliament, such as the statutory provisions regarding seat belts, school bus signs, hazard warning lights and the use of vehicles that are in a fit and roadworthy condition. Therefore, we take seriously Stewart Stevenson's point about ensuring that the approach to safety is a complete package for local government, and education authorities in particular, across the country. Although the guidance is not mandatory, the legal requirements must be complied with. Although not all types of bus are required to have seat belts fitted, it is open to education authorities to specify, in negotiating school transport contracts, that only vehicles with seat belts should be used. The Scottish Consumer Council's report on school transport contracts, which was published in 2005, was helpful in that it commended that point and others to local government. Among other issues, the report raised the possibility of a good-practice guide, which we have taken forward in conjunction with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and following concerns raised by the Education Committee. We expect to receive a report on a range of bus and pupil safety issues within the next few weeks. We believe that the good-practice examples that are included in the report will help authorities to drive up the quality and standards of school transport, thus making it more attractive to pupils and parents. It will also provide local authorities with enough further inducement to secure school transport contracts that meet the wishes of parents and pupils without recourse to further legislation. It is important to recognise that bus and coach travel is very safe in this country and deaths and serious injuries are fortunately relatively rare. Seat belts offer passengers increased protection, even though I take the points that Mike Rumbles and David Davidson made about the assessment of the incident at Netherley. The majority of minibuses and coaches are fitted with seat belts and some buses are also being produced with them. A European Union directive envisages that the new rules on buses and coaches will apply to every passenger over the age of three. The UK Government has not extended the legal  requirement to use seat belts to children under 14 on the larger buses and coaches because of the difficulty of enforcement. It is generally the driver's duty to ensure that child passengers under the age of 14 wear seat belts, but there is a practical difficulty in making bus and coach drivers responsible for ensuring that children are wearing seat belts. The Department for Transport proposes to conduct further consultation and will prepare additional regulations to reflect the outcome. I will ensure that the views that have been expressed this evening are fed into that consultation. We take these matters very seriously. As Linda Fabiani and others made clear, child safety is an extremely important issue. No one wishes to compromise on achieving all that we can in that area and I will certainly ensure that we take these matters forward to our discussions with the Department for Transport.  Meeting closed at 17:39.

That is probably a bit unfair on poor Mr Adam, Presiding Officer. Before I comment on the brief debate that we have had this afternoon, I advise the Parliament, for the purposes of rule 9.11 of standing orders, that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Transport and Works (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill. I welcome the comments that were made during  the debate. A number of Phil Gallie's points might have been slightly outside the direct scope of the bill, but they were nevertheless good entertainment. He made a serious point about tramline 1 and I undertake to look into the matter. Phil Gallie was not on such good ground when he talked about the economy. Last night, I listened to a Radio 4 programme presented by Giles Brandreth, whom the Conservatives will know well as a former colleague in another place. He interviewed former Chancellors of the Exchequer including Norman Lamont—we stress the first syllable in Shetland, unlike people in London—or Lord Lamont, as he is now. He was asked some rather pertinent questions about how he dealt with the psychological and political pressure of black Wednesday. I am afraid that some of us still remember that. I am sure that Phil Gallie remembers it, so when it comes to economic management—

Well, I suppose that we should bear in mind what happened at the following election. However, I should get back to the issue in hand, otherwise I will never get to it. I publicly thank the many interested individuals, public bodies, private corporations and associations that responded to our consultation exercise and freely gave of their time at workshops and bilateral meetings. Their contribution and advice were genuinely appreciated. We are making legislation on behalf of people across the country, and it has been improved by finding solutions and discussing them with people and practitioners in this area. I also thank my officials Frazer Henderson, Andrew Brown and Catherine Wilson, not least for putting up with me on this bill. They certainly deserve a lot of credit for that. Moreover, given the nature of the business, the draughtsmen and the legal team have done an awful lot of work, and I hope that the illustrative draft secondary legislation, which was provided to the Local Government and Transport Committee early in Parliament's consideration of the bill, was genuinely helpful. Many people in the Parliament have also done a lot to ensure the bill's success. In particular, I thank Sylvia Jackson, her Subordinate Legislation Committee and their officials for their considered scrutiny. In response to a point that she raised  earlier, I confirm that we have no intention of using the power conferred by section 27(6)(aa) to empower the making of subordinate legislation. Although an order under section 1 may authorise the making of byelaws, that is specifically provided for in paragraph 13 of schedule 1. The Executive very much doubts whether a court would interpret section 27(6)(aa) as sufficient to authorise provision allowing a third party to make subordinate legislation and believes that something much more express would be required. I am sure that Sylvia Jackson understands the issues in that respect. I also thank Donald Gorrie and his colleagues on the Procedures Committee for their interest, and Bristow Muldoon and the Local Government and Transport Committee for their scrutiny and, in particular, for their supportive and comprehensive stage 1 report, which made the bill's passage so much easier. Finally, on Trish Marwick's comment with regard to her experiences on the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee, I think that Phil Gallie made a fair point. Members are here to scrutinise—in, at times, an awful lot of detail—the minutiae of proposals. After all, we are spending taxpayers' money and such work is key to why we are here and why this place exists. I hope that, with this bill, we have managed to get the balance right in moving forward from a process that appears outdated when set beside modern parliamentary conventions.

The member makes a fair point. I referred earlier to the consultation that we carried out when we were drafting the bill. In that consultation, we felt it important to take a lot of advice from people who had been through—or who were going through—the private bills process, particularly in relation to proposals involving transport infrastructure, to ensure that any front-loading of the mechanism covers such matters. We will have failed if we do not get those aspects right, because people must have confidence in the system. I hope that we have achieved a consensus this afternoon and that Parliament will support the motion at decision time.

Parliament recognises that transport is fundamental to our society and to having a socially just and economically vibrant Scotland. We have driven forward changes to transform transport delivery and transport infrastructure across the country. We have created regional transport partnerships, and we have provided national concessionary travel to older people, young people and people with disabilities. We are delivering ambitious road and rail developments and we are placing even greater emphasis on public transport solutions. Last year, we launched the national transport strategy, which provides, for the first time, a single comprehensive national statement of our transport priorities and plans for the future. We will soon determine the projects that will deliver that strategy, but today we are providing the process for authorising those projects. We need to ensure that the process that we use to deliver projects is appropriate, effective and efficient in terms of time and cost. We must give a better deal to promoters, to objectors and, certainly, to MSPs as they carry out their appropriate role of scrutiny and take up their rights to object and comment. We want the bill to strive to improve process efficiency, but not at the expense of compromising scrutiny, transparency, fairness or the primacy of Parliament. The debates and discussions on the bill, including the debate this afternoon, have rightly focused on those matters. Following detailed interrogation, the bill has not been found wanting. It will improve scrutiny through use of public examination. It will improve transparency and fairness through greater provision of public information and participation. It will strengthen the primacy of Parliament by ensuring that all transport developments that are of national importance will now be subject to the affirmative procedure. This is a good bill that focuses on improving a process that has been subject to an old private bills procedure that many of us have found to be demanding at all times. I commend the bill to Parliament. I move,  That the Parliament agrees that the Transport and Works (Scotland) Bill be passed.

It is important to look closely at amendment 11, and I am sure that David McLetchie has had that opportunity, even in his darkest moments. I can assure him that the new "pages" of law are in fact paragraphs. New paragraph (zza) of proposed new section 54A of the Harbours Act 1964—I know that David McLetchie is familiar with that one—provides for definitions. Paragraphs (zzb) and (zzc) seek to improve the provision of access to information and the making of representations and paragraph (zzd) will introduce new paragraph 10A into part I of schedule 3 to the 1964 act. As regards the remaining new paragraphs (zze) to (zzg), which are, of course, consequential, I hope that David McLetchie will recognise that they are paragraphs, not pages. He will therefore appreciate that the Scottish Executive is doing its best not to have gold, silver, bronze or any other kind of plating.  Amendment 7 agreed to.  Amendment 8 moved—[Tavish Scott]—and agreed to.

Amendment 5 seeks to improve targeting of information. We have decided that it is inappropriate that a newspaper advertisement must be placed each and every time we decide to dispense with rules or require compliance with additional rules. We believe that we have to ensure that we most appropriately inform people who may be materially affected; where only a few people will be affected, they could receive individual notices rather than be informed via a newspaper. Amendment 6 has been lodged for technical drafting reasons. It seeks to make more precise the cross-reference to provisions within section 9 and, in so doing, to confirm that Scottish ministers are to send notice of their determination to make or not to make an order to every statutory objector that makes an objection. Amendment 8 is consequential on it, to maintain consistency in the drafting. I move amendment 5.  Amendment 5 agreed to.

The amendments follow through on the commitment that I gave to the Local Government and Transport Committee to return at stage 3 with amendments that will implement European Council directive 2003/35/EC as it relates to the Harbours Act 1964. The directive—otherwise known as the public participation directive—extends the amount of information that is to be made available when a development that requires an environmental impact assessment is being proposed, and the ways in which that information is published. It seeks to ensure that members of the public, as well as bodies that have environmental interests, have the opportunity to participate in the environmental decision-making process. It also provides for a legal right to challenge the decision. Similar changes were made recently by regulation in respect of roads, and changes for projects to deliver rail and other guided transport systems have been reflected in the drafting of part 1, with details to be laid out in secondary legislation. Amendment 14 will ensure that we implement the provisions of the public participation directive before June; if we did so any later, we would leave ourselves open to possible infraction proceedings. Amendment 15 will ensure that in implementing the provisions of the public participation directive we do not breach the legitimate expectation of developers that have current applications. The transitional arrangements confirm that we will not be changing the rules or procedures for existing projects. That is a standard approach. I move amendment 7.

I want to finish making this point. I also said: "Given the front-loading exercise and the significant top-line parliamentary scrutiny in the context of the national transport strategy"— and other aspects, "it will simply not be necessary to have yet another process."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Transport Committee , 3 October 2006; c 4048 and 4053.]  I wholly concur with Alasdair Morgan, who said in his submission on the bill to the Procedures Committee: "the SNP is anxious that whatever procedure is introduced in the above bill is one which considerably reduces the delays"— I think that that is Tricia Marwick's point— "currently accompanying public transport projects, particularly in relation to rail. In that respect I am not convinced that we do need two bites at the cherry in Parliament in respect of approving Executive action and I feel that approval of the final draft order is probably sufficient."

That argument would be fair if the debate represented the Parliament's only scrutiny of the Government of the day's national planning framework. However, as we have discussed ad nauseam in committee, it absolutely will not be the only scrutiny. I hope that Tricia Marwick reads the evidence on the matter, because we went over the issue a number of times. As I said to Chris Ballance, the debate is not the only process; a number of steps will be gone through. The front-loading exercise—I know that is dreadful jargon—will involve consultation and projects will be considered by communities and, I am sure, by many regional and constituency members. In addition, there will be a political process, which will provide much opportunity for debate and full, active scrutiny before the Parliament debates the NPF. I want to talk about fairness. The practical proposal in amendment 16 is that the Parliament should by motion debate an individual project within three months of an application being made, which means that the Parliament could conduct a formal debate during an objection period. I hope that Maureen Watt will reflect on the significant problems that such an approach would give the Government. The Parliament might debate a project's merits before it had been subject to independent examination by a reporter or while an inquiry or hearing was going on—I am sure that  that is not what Maureen Watt wants to achieve. What message would that send to the parties concerned? People would ask what was the point of pursuing the process if the Parliament was going to arrive at a decision without hearing the evidence or arguments. Amendment 16 is not consistent with the formal processes in relation to people's right to object. On the basis of that point and wider points about the inevitable and proper parliamentary scrutiny of national transport plans and other plans, I ask Maureen Watt to withdraw amendment 16.

We should remember that the purpose of the bill is to replace the existing private bill process; it seeks to dispense with the arcane special parliamentary procedure and to bring a degree of conformity to transport developments that are subject to ministerial orders. The bill therefore deals with roads, harbours, rail, trams and inland waterways. Airport developments are not included on the list, because they are bound by an appropriate regime between planning and airport legislation. There is no requirement for airport developments to be subject to the private bill procedure. We have made changes to the process for rail, trams and canals because Parliament requested improvements to that process. I am surprised that Maureen Watt lodged her amendments at this stage. It is not particularly sensible to propose a fundamental principle of legislation based on one airport in one part of Scotland, when the existing processes include mechanisms for dealing with the issue that the member raises. Amendments 2 and 3 are well intended but unnecessary. The bill was drawn up in accordance with the requirements of the environmental impact assessment directive, and promoters will be required to produce an environmental statement in accordance with that directive; I refer Maureen Watt to section 12(7) of the bill. As the member knows, our proposed secondary legislation was made available to Parliament last year; indeed, she has seen it in committee. The draft secondary legislation sets out the specific requirements in respect of environmental information. Our proposals confirm the need to supply such information, including on the impact of proposals on climate. For that reason, the amendments are inappropriate and unnecessary. It is important not to forget the Environmental Assessment (Scotland) Act 2005, which makes all public plans and programmes subject to strategic environmental assessment. That means that all development plans, regional transport strategies, the national transport strategy and the national planning framework will be subject to strategic environmental assessment, including  requirements concerning the consideration of climatic factors.

After this morning's debate, Maureen Watt should be careful about pushing an environmental line. Let us be clear: existing legislation covers the issues to which the member refers. As I indicated, they are covered by strategic environmental assessment, which was introduced under the 2005 act. If the member has concerns, she should consider that legislation carefully.

Applications to extend runways are dealt with by the planning process, under the legislation to which I have referred. It is important to look at the issue in that context and, as I am sure Mr Ballance would wish, in the context of the environmental checks and assessment that will take place. That is the point that Maureen Watt is making, but the checks that she seeks are already in place.

I understand that the planning process covers all eventualities and that there would, therefore, be formal consultation and the opportunity for formal expression of opposition. I will check the point that Mr Gallie makes about airport boundaries and respond to him on it. As part of future reviews of the national transport strategy, the Government is developing a carbon balance sheet that will present the impact of all Scottish transport policies and projects that are expected to have a significant impact on carbon emissions, whether positive or negative. I agree with Maureen Watt about the importance of addressing climate change. The bill and the associated subordinate legislation will deliver what she seeks to achieve. On that basis, I ask her to withdraw or not to move her amendments.

Amendment 4 is a technical drafting amendment to improve references. The term "Crown interest" is used twice in section 3. Amendment 4 ensures that where the term is used, it attracts on each occasion the definition as set out in subsection (3). Amendment 9, too, is technical. We realised that we had inadvertently omitted a cross-reference. The amendment rectifies that and ensures for the avoidance of doubt that all pertinent information about orders must be placed in the annual report, which will be published and laid before the Parliament. I hope that Ms Watt will accept that assurance. Amendment 13 is a technical and consequential amendment that is required because of changes that we made at stage 2 to make harbour authorities a statutory objector. I move amendment 4.  Amendment 4 agreed to.

I take the issue seriously. It reflects a legitimate point of interest that has been raised, in different forms but in the same manner, at committee proceedings and elsewhere. First, on the point on which David McLetchie and Tricia Marwick have just reflected, I bow to the superior knowledge of my colleague Johann Lamont, who was responsible for the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. Not only will we have a full parliamentary debate on these matters before the parliamentary process begins, but the committees will be heavily involved in taking them forward and  scrutinising them to the utmost extreme. It is important to reflect on Parliament's engagement in the process.

In a minute. I assure Chris Ballance that it is not the case that there would be a three-minute speech for and a three-minute speech against. Ministers would be held accountable for every part of the proposal and ministers would be questioned on every part of it in detailed evidence sessions. I hope that that provides the assurance that he seeks.

That is why I made the point on the role of committees. The kind of scrutiny that the member describes is not provided by general parliamentary debates; the Parliament's bread-and-butter work is done in the committees. I strongly advocate and will always support the committees' right properly to scrutinise all such issues. I am sure that they will do so in the context of the national planning framework and will look into the detail behind it in relation to an individual committee's responsibilities. I hope that Mr Ballance accepts that assurance. I do not accept that only the debate in Parliament would cover the wide range of projects; detailed scrutiny would take place in the committees. As Maureen Watt knows, I stated in evidence to the Local Government and Transport Committee: "If the bill is enacted, transport proposals will continue to be subject to scrutiny, from the strategy documents, beginning with the strategic projects review, through to the infrastructure investment plan and culminating, for nationally significant projects, in the national planning framework."

We have recently published our rail policy document "Scotland's Railways" as part of the national transport strategy. The document examines the options for building on the improvements that we have already made to rail services to encourage more people to make the shift from private car to the train and to encourage many more businesses  to shift from transporting goods by lorry to moving them by train.

I have some understanding of Diageo's products, but I will say no more than that. I take seriously Christine May's point about the company's desire to move more products by rail. It would be welcome if it made that project happen and expanded the use of rail in place of lorry miles. I assure her that I will ask officials to examine the project closely to see whether our freight facilities grant mechanisms could provide assistance, if that is appropriate to the development of the project. We will examine closely what assistance we can provide.

I will be happy to provide John Scott with further detail on Transport Scotland's current plans for the area. On the development of the part of the rail network to which he referred, he is right to point out that significant advantages will flow from GARL. We hope that GARL will allow better optimisation of the rail track both for passengers and for freight. I will be happy to discuss that further with him.

Stewart Stevenson makes a good point. I believe that last Friday's highways of the sea conference in Kirkwall—which, unfortunately, I could not attend—was useful in developing some of the practicalities behind that project. He also  makes a good point about the need to develop railheads at ports. The ports sector perhaps does not always get enough attention in general transport policy, given what we could achieve with our ports and given how important they are in developing the Scottish economy. We need to ensure that ports are used for business development, especially exports, by ensuring that they provide linkages to both the road and rail networks. I look forward to further development of the highway of the sea project not just for sea freight but potentially—dare I say it—for Arctic oil. One proposal that emerged from the earlier consideration was that Arctic oil could be transhipped in the northern isles, where there is a lot of expertise, as it has been done for the past 30 years or so.

We do not publish initial findings. We will publish the study's supporting papers next week and the final report when ministers have received it and considered its recommendations.

Because Scottish National Party members know nothing of government—and never will know anything of government—they do not understand the difference between a draft report and a final report. As we discussed with some hilarity this morning, the SNP has plenty of draft reports of its own. We greatly enjoy reading and making fun of those reports, because none of the sums in their policies add up and because they show that the SNP flip-flops on every transport project that it possibly can. We will take the right decisions at the right time and in the long-term interests of the country.

As of 1 February 2007, approximately 15,000 national  entitlement cards had been issued in relation to the young persons concessionary travel scheme.

I am aware that concerns have been expressed about the ability of some people to access the card. That is a serious issue, which we are addressing through publicity and work in schools and other areas. We will continue with such work, but if Marilyn Livingstone wishes to raise any specific issues I would be more than happy to look into them.

Will the member give way?

It is entirely fair for Helen Eadie and other members to argue for the economic and traffic modelling assessments to be as robust as possible. Indeed, members across the chamber, including Mrs Eadie, made that very point during last Easter's debate on this subject. At the time, it was felt that there had not been enough assessment of traffic flows on the Forth road bridge and the amount of traffic that went to other parts of the Lothians, to workplaces or to other destinations. I hope that I can assure Mrs Eadie and other colleagues that the toll impact study will carefully draw out such aspects. After all, if we are to invest in a replacement crossing, we must ensure that the multimodal aspects are dealt with and the destination information is complete. Moreover, in response to points made by Bristow Muldoon, Helen Eadie and Iain Smith, among others, about providing alternatives to the car, we need to ensure that such alternatives are realistic and affordable and get people to where they need to be at the right time.

We have received numerous drafts, but—

Oh, good gosh—grow up! We have received numerous drafts, but ministers have not yet received the final report. If—heaven help us—Mr Ewing got into Government, he might come to understand the process. I presume that even in the SNP's world there are draft reports before a final report is issued.

Indeed. However, I will come to the SNP's various flip-flops—or drafts—in a minute or two. I return to the serious point that colleagues have raised about the multimodal work that we are carrying out and the need to deal with public transport issues. I believe that Marilyn Livingstone, in particular, highlighted that point. We need to continue to invest in and improve the rail system in Fife to provide an alternative to the car. I respect Scott Barrie's concerns about the current situation, and I am happy to take up any operational issues or problems with the franchise operators and Network Rail. However, considerable investment has been made in the area. For example, in response to Fife members' comments that services for commuters must be improved if we are to provide alternatives to car use, I point out that 29 new high-quality trains have already been introduced on to the network and that platforms on stations on the Fife circle have been extended. I respect members' concerns and will continue to work hard on the matter. I was interested by Murdo Fraser's lack of illustration of the Tories' flip-flop on this policy. It seems that they are in favour of tolls—just not these. I have dug out statements made by Chris Grayling—who, for members who have not heard of him, is the shadow Secretary of State for Transport at Westminster—that show that he is four-square behind tolls and national road user pricing. I happen to think that he is right, but the Tories up here should hold the same position. Mr Fraser quite clearly said that he was against road user pricing.

I think that all members will agree that whatever is in the Tories' manifesto, the Tories will continue to be irrelevant in Scottish politics at the next and subsequent elections. I turn to the SNP's policy. Draft reports have been mentioned. Bristow Muldoon and—to be fair—Mr Fraser and other members picked up on  an important point about the SNP's consistency. It is important to deal with the facts of the SNP's policy. The SNP supported tolls until Christmas 2005; indeed, I could read out to members numerous quotes that prove that support. In November 2005, it said that it supported "a thorough and wide-ranging consultation process on the issue of tolls on the Forth Road Bridge". On 18 January 2006, Nicola Sturgeon said that any increase in tolls on the Forth road bridge would be unacceptable.

I want to finish, because it is important to get what was said on the record. Nicola Sturgeon said: "the SNP says loud and clear £1 is enough." I cannot remember which of my colleagues made the point that the SNP did not at any time differentiate between tolls on the Tay and on the Forth. The issue was always tolls on the Tay, but the issue has now become tolls on the Forth. Helen Eadie was right to ask why we should believe that the SNP's actions are anything other than political opportunism.

The member will simply have to wait and see. That is the great thing about manifestos. The sums that are involved have been mentioned. When Mr Ewing winds up for the SNP, he should clarify the SNP's sums. He has committed his party to spending £2.1 billion on dual carriageway upgrades on the A9, the A96 and the A77, and to building a new Forth road bridge. To be fair to him, I think that he said unequivocally the other day that there must be a tunnel, irrespective of any arguments that might be made about what would be right from an engineering point of view. I have a quote from him from The Scotsman . The SNP's proposed investment in the A82 is utterly unaffordable, and it has made other public transport commitments that add up to £6 billion. We should consider the £300 million commitment for the Waverley station expansion and the £300 million for Scotland-wide rail improvements.  Another classic commitment has been made, which I do not think Mr Ewing knows about—he certainly does not talk about it in Inverness. We know that he spends a lot of time criticising the spending of money in Edinburgh and Glasgow and that he always wants money to be spent in Inverness, but Mr Salmond did not let him in on a secret: Mr Salmond has committed the SNP to a £4 billion bullet train between Edinburgh and Glasgow. I look forward to telling people in Inverness about Mr Ewing's transport spending commitments. The debate has dealt with important issues, some of which are lighter than others. A straight choice is involved if we want to take realistic decisions on transport. The Government advocates a course of action that is right; the Opposition advocates a politically expedient course of action.

Wait and see.

The one thing that I will not talk about is whipping Helen Eadie. [ Laughter. ] That was highly inappropriate of Tricia Marwick, who really should not have gone there. That was quite unfair to Helen Eadie.

Do not tempt me, Mr Swinney. The debate is not about fairness, but about votes—the SNP will say anything for votes. Until Christmas 2005, the SNP supported tolls. Do SNP members want to hear direct quotations about their support for tolls? How many direct quotations would SNP members like about their support for tolls? They used to support an airport rail link for  Scotland's capital, but now they oppose that. They used to care about climate change but today, in Scottish environment week, they say unequivocally, "Carbon? Let's have more of it." The SNP's only consistent feature is that it flip-flops day in, day out—anything for votes. The SNP is politically opportunistic and is not fit to govern. On today's evidence, it is not even fit to be in opposition.

I want to make some progress. Our policy is to retain tolls on both the Tay and Forth bridges. All the traffic modelling and research that has been done throughout the earlier review showed that removal of tolls from the two bridges would lead to increases in traffic. That was particularly the case at the Forth road bridge, especially in the morning and evening peak periods—a point that I noticed Tricia Marwick just does not want to accept. Those peaks would spread to become even longer than they are now. More traffic leads to more congestion, which leads to more delay for travellers. That inevitably has a knock-on effect on traffic emissions as people wait in even longer queues. At the close of last Easter's debate, Parliament decided that we should do more detailed work on the impact of keeping tolls. Last summer, I invited anyone who so wished to submit factual evidence, and 90 people responded, including just eight MSPs. Although it has been helpful to see those responses and to learn about the views that are held, it must be said that we gained very little in the way of hard facts from the exercise.

Tricia Marwick should give me a moment. Please—a moment. A full report of the responses that were received will form part of the overall toll impact study report. Ministers do not yet have that report, but I will publish the evidence report next week.

SNP members do not want the report, then they do want it, but then when I say that it will be published, they still do not like it.

Christine May was, indeed, one of the contributors. Once we have concluded our  specific work—on economic modelling in particular—we hope to publish the report in the foreseeable future. There have been interviews with major employers, local authorities and public sector organisations in Dundee, Fife and the Lothians. The published analysis will show that those who responded are not concerned about the financial level of the tolls. Of much more concern to them are increasing traffic levels, increasing congestion and—of course—the separate issue of the viability of the Forth road bridge crossing. Our consultants have also been carrying out detailed traffic and economic modelling work in relation to the tolls, as was asked for by Parliament. That work is much more complex than work that was done previously—I make that point to Christine May. There is still work and analysis to be done.

To answer that point I would have to go and look at my history books. Mr Gallie will have to forgive me because I do not have an instant grasp of what was in every leaflet in that election. However, I do remember what the Tories said just last year in the by-election in that very same place: they said that they would provide a second Forth bridge—with tolls. I therefore do not know what Mr Murdo Fraser and all the other Tories are doing here today, because they were in favour of tolls then. The Tories specified that the second bridge would be tolled, so I hope Mr Fraser will address that point in his speech. He is in favour of tolls and we look forward to hearing about it. The early indications suggest that concerns about the possibility of significant increases in traffic over the bridges are well founded. In December last year, we published Scotland's national transport strategy. One of the three strategic outcomes that the strategy focuses on is the reduction of emissions from transport. The Stern review, published last October, showed that if no action is taken on emissions there is a more than 75 per cent chance that temperatures will rise by more than 2°C and a 50 per cent chance of temperatures rising by 5˚C. The United Nations intergovernmental panel on climate change's report was published last week.

In a minute—I want to finish this point on the environmental arguments.  The report concluded that there is a 90 per cent probability that global warming is being caused by human emissions of greenhouse gases, and it made similar predictions of potential temperature rises. Emissions from transport in Scotland will not change the world. Nevertheless, the equation here is simple: removing the tolls will increase congestion, which will increase emissions, which will increase our impact on the global environment. The SNP is in denial about that.

I am speaking now, and more to the point—[ Laughter. ] What I really care about is the environment. I notice that what we have here is the SNP—

We know that the Tories do not care about the environment, because they never did anything about it when they were in Government, but the SNP's position is really interesting. SNP members are all shaking their heads, but we have seen the Stern report and the UN panel's report. I know Mr Fergus Ewing's position: he does not care about the environment, but I respect him because he has always made that absolutely clear. However, I thought that other SNP members had some understanding of the environment and cared about it, but they want to increase congestion and increase the level of emissions in our country. They will do nothing about the environment: this Government will. The SNP is in denial on the issue and, unlike the SNP, we will not ignore reality. When I spoke on this issue last March, I said that we have to be able to justify a change in policy on the basis of facts. That is still the case. We gather facts and we take the right decisions for the long-term benefit of Scotland's economy and environment, and for the benefit of Scotland's travellers. They are long-term benefits—not benefits for the coming May. When we have the final report of the study that Christine May asked about, ministers will examine it and publish the findings. This Government supports national road-user pricing across the UK. Such pricing can help to address congestion and important environmental issues. When we get to that stage, individual bridge tolls will not be required. Then, and only then, will I jump on the SNP bandwagon.  I move amendment S2M-5535.2, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert: "commits to a replacement crossing across the Forth and calls on the Cabinet to commit to preparatory work to start immediately; calls for the case for abolition of the tolls on the Fife Bridges to be considered in the light of the commitment to the new crossing; notes that the SNP's sums do not add up and that under its current plans the SNP would not be able to afford to lift the tolls and pay for the construction of a new crossing; notes that its proposals do not address the impact of congestion or other environmental, social and economic impacts, and notes the importance of a sustainable transport policy, including smart tolling and investment in public transport to meet the long-term needs of Scotland."

I thank Karen Whitefield for securing the debate. Society's expectations on such issues have risen—a fact that came out in the points that were made earlier about legislation passed in another place at another time. We are more demanding. Members' comments from around the chamber have reflected that, and rightly so. We have to take such issues seriously, and I refute the allegation that nothing has been done. I will touch on that in a moment. Most stations in Scotland were built more than 100 years ago. They were not designed for people in wheelchairs or people with disabilities. As a result, one third of our stations today are not fully accessible. I accept the scale of the challenges. We are addressing the challenges on three fronts: through the funding of major projects; through a specific Great Britain-wide scheme; and through the First ScotRail franchise that has been mentioned. To answer Karen Whitefield's and Alex Neil's points, all new stations that are being built as part of our investment in the rail network will be wheelchair friendly. Alloa station on the new Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line will have level access; Haymarket in Edinburgh, which is being redeveloped, will have new lifts installed; and, later this month at Lockerbie station, work will start on the new footbridge and lifts, which will be available for use by November. The UK Government's strategy for improving access to the rail network was announced in March last year. We are working to that strategy and are currently funding major improvements at six stations, including those at Dalmuir, Stirling, Kirkcaldy, Mount Florida and Motherwell. Network Rail has developed detailed designs and has ordered the lift for Motherwell station. The programme costs between £1.1 million and £2.7 million for each station, which is a not inconsiderable investment. The 2006-07 programme for more minor works covers 54 stations, so it is not true to say that nothing is happening. The Equal Opportunities Committee has a close relationship with the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland and has taken evidence from it on this issue. MACS is consulted every year on the draft programme of work. That is a  highly effective way of ensuring that the programme takes relevant issues into account. Through franchise arrangements, there are quicker ways of improving facilities for disabled people. First ScotRail spends some £250,000 a year on small-scale alterations and additions to existing stations. For example, new parking spaces are provided for disabled people, as are pick-up spaces, dropped kerbs and handrails. I re-emphasise—and I hope that members will accept—that MACS is very much involved in the process. When designing programmes, we engage fully with people who are directly affected and have legitimate needs. I accept that our programmes are long term and I accept that that does not assure members that, for example, a lift or particular facilities can be provided now. However, we are committed to providing access to the rail network for all passengers.

I agree. That is why the proposals on access for all are dealing with six stations right now. If we were carrying out the minor works only, Mr Welsh's criticism would be legitimate. However, we are doing other works as well. In addition, at every station that we are completely redeveloping or building afresh, we are ensuring absolute compatibility with the needs of people with disabilities. I accept that there are not that many such stations, but there are some. At Shotts, First ScotRail has plans to provide two disabled parking bays, dropped kerbs, and a small ramp at the platform for eastbound trains.

I am happy to give Karen Whitefield the assurance that she seeks. She will not be surprised to hear that my briefing tells me the point that she has just made. I apologise—I was not aware of that before tonight. There have  indeed been the difficulties that she mentioned. I will certainly ensure that the bodies that she mentioned work together to progress the scheme. I understand that First ScotRail has written to the group of landowners to seek their permission. There are 108 of them, which seems an awful lot, but I guess that that reflects the complicated nature of land ownership in the area. The letters were hand delivered last Thursday and responses are coming in. We will do our level best to ensure that that part of the process is concluded as quickly as possible.  I accept that we need to make more progress. As I said, it is now more of an expectation in society that we deal with the legitimate needs of people who want to access Scotland's developing and growing rail network. We will do that through the measures that I have outlined and, in particular, we will seek to solve the problem that Karen Whitefield mentions in her motion.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

I might also comment on the Conservatives' record in government.

Tenders for the scheme at Glenairlie will be invited in May and construction should be completed by July 2008. In addition, Amey, on behalf of Transport Scotland, is carrying out safety improvements at a number of locations on the route. Works between Sanquhar and New Cumnock, involving the provision of high-friction surfacing at bends and signing and lining with vehicle-activated signs, are on-going. Twenty-five per cent of the work has been completed and the remainder will follow as soon as the weather permits. Works to the north of the A75 junction at Lincluden and at the B743 junction at Mauchline are programmed to start as soon as the weather improves. They include high-friction surfacing, signing and lining and the cutting back of foliage. Safety-fence works are currently at the design stage; 10 sites will be upgraded to meet current standards by March 2007.

I am sure that Mr Fergusson agrees that there would not be much point in carrying out the works unless they assisted in driver awareness. There cannot be any point in investing in small schemes—or indeed in larger schemes—unless they meet that objective as well as a number of other objectives in relation to  safety on the trunk road network. I can assure Mr Fergusson that I am happy to consider any further programme. While I recognise the importance of that, I hope he accepts that it must be done in the context of accident prevention work and, indeed, the statistics, some of which he has drawn our attention to this afternoon.

I saw nods from various members behind Mr Morgan. I agree that at times this is difficult to understand. It does not matter whether a scheme is a small safety scheme of the kind Mr Fergusson and Mr Morgan mentioned, or a motorway construction; in taking forward any scheme, a Government of whatever persuasion has to go through the processes that are laid down in statute. I can send Mr Morgan as much statute as he likes, if he wants it. We could reform the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984—that is an option open to any Government—but that course does not go without some complexity, and it would certainly take some considerable time in Parliament. I will remain focused on ensuring that, in using Transport Scotland, we drive works forward as much as we can. We have the statutory processes that, as Mr Morgan knows, are used by many local people when they wish to object. If we were simply to remove those processes, I suspect that we would all come under some pressure. There are some balances in the arguments, although I accept that at times those balances seem difficult to understand.

Transport Scotland officials have asked Network Rail to progress the work done on Blackridge station during the initial technical feasibility study. Transport Scotland aims to have that work completed in time to allow the process of any necessary consultation and Scottish transport appraisal guidance analysis to start as soon as possible in the new session of Parliament.

I would certainly be interested in proposals from the private sector on planning gain that would help with the costs of building the station to which Mary Mulligan refers. As she knows, we are considering using the Transport and Works (Scotland) Bill, which I hope will have completed its passage through Parliament, or a local measure—a compulsory purchase order mechanism that involves the local authorities concerned—to progress matters. I take the member's points about the wider funding issues, which will form an important part of the overall assessment of the case.

I would have thought that the Scottish National Party would be interested in a budgetary process that meant that we had a budget, that we kept to it and that we sought to deliver as much as possible from it.

Many of Mr MacAskill's party spokesmen and colleagues—including Mr Stevenson, who shouts out from the front bench—tell me that we should not be spending money as we are; indeed, they want to cancel many of our transport projects. Perhaps for once they should applaud the fact that we are getting on and delivering transport projects.

Officials in the Executive have been in continuing contact with officers from Falkirk Council and West Lothian Council about that local roads project, which has included regular correspondence with Falkirk Council on the grant for land acquisition that was made available in September 2005. The Executive has not met SESTRAN specifically to discuss the A801, although it meets the organisation regularly to consider a wide range of transport-related matters.

I understand that the current position is that SESTRAN has committed £220,000 to land acquisition and design work. The estimated cost of completing the upgrade of the road link in question is some £9.5 million. It is important that progress is being made on the acquisition and design issues. I also understand that Falkirk Council has acquired land from three landowners. A deal of work is now being done. I am happy to write to Cathy Peattie with the latest estimates from the agencies involved.

I am aware of the freight industry's concerns about the road. I assure the member that they have been brought to my attention. Indeed, we discuss with the freight industry the issues and concerns it raises about roads right across Scotland. The member will not be surprised to hear that the Avon gorge road is not the only pinch point that the freight industry has identified. We deal with those issues as best we can in taking forward our roads programme. I take the member's point about the interchange and the importance of the environmental calculation. I hope that he recognises that the whole purpose of setting up regional transport partnerships was to enable those partnerships to make good judgments on the transport priorities for spend and support in their areas. That is why I do not think that it is appropriate to brush off the commitment that SESTRAN has made—I hope he was not doing that; it is a positive step in taking the matter forward.

Transport Scotland expects a response from the Office of Rail Regulation imminently.

It is important to recognise that the Office of Rail Regulation is the responsible body in this area. It is an independent body that was set up some years ago to act as the mechanism that Governments north and south of the border use in these situations. Because the ORR is independent of government, it can look at issues consistently across the country. As I said, the ORR will reach its decision imminently. Clearly, we will know the decision only at that time.  I accept Mr Barrie's points about the improvements that the new line will bring for freight movements around Scotland. As he knows, the new line will free up paths across the Forth rail bridge, the result of which will be better rail passenger connections from Fife and other areas.

I am happy to ensure that the Parliament is informed of the ORR's decision. I have no concerns about the viability of the line. It is important that sensible judgments are reached on the matter. We are investing heavily in the line not only because of the advantages it will bring for rail freight movements around the country, but because of the improvements it will bring for passenger travel.

I would have thought that, by now, Mr Ewing would have worked out how the system works. He claims to be the Scottish National Party's transport spokesman, but all he does is flip-flop from one transport issue to the next. He should know how the system works. If he does not yet know that the Office of Rail Regulation has those responsibilities, I suggest that he goes away and finds out how it works. I do not know what the SNP's current policy on the Office of Rail Regulation is, but I presume that it will have changed by tomorrow, given its policy on everything else. However, if Fergus Ewing finds out what the Office of Rail Regulation's role is, he might be better informed and ask a better question next time.

I thank Tricia Marwick for her much more considered question. She obviously has more knowledge of the matter than her colleague, Fergus Ewing, and I can only suggest that they have a meeting now and again to discuss their respective knowledge of it. I assure her that  Transport Scotland, as the agency of the Government, regularly meets the Office of Rail Regulation to discuss a number of issues, including the one about which she asks.

A decision is expected next month.

I will be happy to consider the issues relating to the dedicated bus service that Margaret Smith mentions and to ensure that they are fully taken into account when the business case is assessed. Margaret Smith will be aware that accessibility is one of the issues that must be considered under the Scottish transport appraisal guidance when any business case is assessed. The integration of heavy rail services, the tram system and Edinburgh's excellent bus services will therefore be looked at in the final consideration of the business case, which, as I said, is expected to be decided on next month.

As Mr Chisholm knows, the current funding is for the first phase of the project. However, I understand what he has said about Granton and the later phases of the project. He also knows that further developer contributions would help that element of the project. Significant investment is already taking place in private sector housing and business opportunities by a number of organisations and companies, including Forth Ports plc, which I met recently met to discuss the matter. I, too, noticed that the SNP was the only party in the council chamber that opposed the project. That approach is in line with its transport policy of flip-flopping on everything.

Mr Ewing works himself up into righteous indignation on the tram project, as he does on all projects. It would be great if he concentrated on keeping to the positives. I notice that Mr Ewing, the Scottish National Party's transport spokesman, did not concentrate on that party's policy flip-flop on the issue: the SNP used to support the Edinburgh trams project, but it is now opposed to it. On every transport project, Mr Ewing tries to find some small issue so that he can say that the project is good or bad and so justify the SNP's policy of changing its mind. The only consistent thing about the SNP is that it changes its mind.

I hope that we can make further progress on this exciting project, not only for Edinburgh, but for the whole of Scotland. I give Susan Deacon the assurance that she seeks. One important aspect is to consider what is happening internationally, which some parties are keen to do. If we examine the Luas scheme in Dublin, we find that the project is now making an operational surplus and is transporting people throughout the city of Dublin. The scheme has achieved that by expanding and by levering in more developer contributions. That is an exciting possibility for our capital city, too.

I was just thinking about how I could work in the interisland ferry home to Bressay. After Mr Ewing's speech, it is clear that I would have no difficulty in doing that. I will respond to the debate that Colin Fox has sponsored on the provision of local bus services. Members have, on the whole, reflected the importance of those services to communities in Edinburgh, with slight—or rather, considerable—deviation at the end. The debate has been informative. I suspect that the view of all members is that it is not the job of the Minister for Transport—God help the good people of Edinburgh—to set the bus timetable, so I will confine my remarks to some of the themes that have emerged. Apart from a small dose of ideological purism from members throughout the chamber, several important points have been made about bus operators and the measures that they need to take to respond to communities' needs. We have published the national transport strategy and last month we published our action plan for buses in Scotland, which I saw Mr McLetchie reading carefully during the debate. Those documents made it clear that we regard bus services as vital. I welcome the opportunity to reinforce our message that the Scottish industry needs to redouble its efforts to ensure that local services are high quality and meet people's needs. Local authorities and regional transport partnerships support that work by providing bus priority measures, transport interchanges and effective ways to cut journey times. As flexible, cost-effective and high-occupancy vehicles, buses promote and provide sustainable mass transport, reduce congestion and promote economic growth and social inclusion. I agree with what Colin Fox said about that. Buses achieve that by providing links that enable people to get to and from employment and to access shops, leisure facilities and public services.  Buses are the principal, most frequently used and most widely available mode of public transport. The public sector contributes to their financing and to bus and road infrastructure. As several members said, Scotland has successful and innovative bus companies and has the headquarters of two major transportation companies that have interests not just throughout the UK, but throughout the world. That should be a sign of some success. Kenny MacAskill's assessment of Lothian Buses was fair. Other members mentioned the national awards that it has won—it has not just won Scottish awards—as a bus operator. The company is successful and I give due credit for that success. Over Scotland as a whole, we have seen passenger numbers grow in recent years. Local bus services carried 477 million people in 2005-06, and passenger numbers have grown in six of the past seven years, giving an increase of 13 per cent over the figures for 1998-99. Under the current arrangements, the provision of local bus services is generally a matter for individual bus operators, which use commercial judgment on service routes and frequencies. The issue of commercial judgment has been raised by members of all parties this evening. Colin Fox clearly does not like that approach and calls for local authorities to be allowed to regulate bus routes and timetables. Mark Ballard also made that point. That option is already available to local authorities. Let me deal with a point that David McLetchie made. Under a quality contract, a transport authority could determine what local services should be provided and could specify routes and the standard and quality of services and fares. I take the point that was made about the Local Government and Transport Committee's report of a year or so ago. There are many reasons why no transport authority has produced proposals for a quality contract. The procedure is inevitably complex, as it would involve controlling a market that is currently open to any operator. That complexity will be addressed as we implement the bus action plan. We have discussed the matter with the industry. Where there are concerns about fares, frequencies and the level of services, the powers to address matters already exist. Fares and frequencies can be addressed through quality contracts, and councils can support routes with low patronage if they see them as socially necessary. We do not need full regulation to tackle such problems in the bus market; we need to use and refine the existing framework. Colin Fox also demands free transport. It is fair to reflect on the cost of that and on the point that Mr MacAskill made about priorities. I had the  figure of £500 million in mind, but I respect Colin Fox's figure of £1.3 billion. As Mr MacAskill said, there are choices to be made in local government and in national Government, and those moneys could not then be spent on schools, hospitals or tackling crime. Government is about determining priorities; I hope that Mr Fox will reflect on that. We need a comprehensive bus network in which sustainable bus services are delivered to a high quality. Our bus action plan sets out to deliver on that vision. It identifies the fact that a step change is needed in the quality of bus services and the associated infrastructure if we are to meet the needs of current bus users and, importantly, if we are to attract more people out of their cars. There are high-quality services in many parts of the country. However, to make buses more attractive we need better road layouts to get them through congested areas quickly and make the bus the vehicle that gets people where they want to go on time. If bus services are to meet people's needs and attract passengers from the car, action is required on three fronts. Transport planning must be more effective; the bus industry must develop, innovate and respond to local people's needs; and where buses or companies are failing, we need effective implementation of the regulatory regime. The 17 action points in the bus action plan are designed to achieve that change.  The national transport strategy sets three strategic outcomes: improvements in journey times and connections; reductions in emissions; and improvements in quality, accessibility and tackling affordability. Buses have huge potential to address each of those outcomes. The Government does not believe that all bus routes and timetables should be regulated by local authorities; we believe that no one size fits all and that different solutions apply in different places. That has been mentioned this evening. I am confident that the actions that are set out in the bus action plan will improve the experience for bus passengers and that they are the starting point for a major drive on buses over the next few years.  Meeting closed at 17:54.

In awarding grants under the rural public passenger transport grant scheme, we ask local authorities to specify vehicle standards. It is a requirement of grants made under the rural community transport initiative that vehicles are fully accessible.

I recognise the points that Mr Gordon makes, and certainly his point about what has been achieved in the west of Scotland. It is important to recognise and build on that success. He makes a number of pertinent points about the length of contracts and what we can do in relation to school transport contracts and the national concessionary fares scheme. As he knows, we are investing a considerable amount of public money in the delivery of a successful scheme throughout Scotland, and in doing that we can work with the bus operators to deliver more buses of the kind that people have come to expect and wish to see in all parts of the country. We will consider the point about contracts and I am happy to keep Mr Gordon up to date with the progress that we make both in proactive discussions and in any formal contract arrangements that we make in future.

Mr Davidson will be familiar with the national transport strategy and, more important, the bus action plan within that. I stress the use of the word "action" in dealing with gaps that may exist in different parts of the country. Many of these matters are to be built from the ground up. In other words, it is for local authorities and community groups to design the services that they want and to consider the type of bus that best meets their needs. Clearly, a 50-seater bus will not necessarily suit more rural locations, because of the roads and, more important, the level of need. We have invested heavily in facilities through a number of mechanisms, and we will continue to do so. I would be happy to consider any particular examples that David Davidson might have.

The latest projections using the transport model for Scotland suggest that traffic volumes will grow by 22 per cent between 2005 and 2022. The national transport strategy is addressing traffic growth on a number of fronts through three strategic outcomes: improving journey times and connections; reducing emissions; and improving the quality, accessibility and affordability of public transport.

We will strongly work towards meeting it. Under the national transport strategy—I hope that Mr Ballard might give us some credit for this—we will develop a carbon balance sheet to develop the carbon impact of projects and policies. That measure is very much designed to make progress in this area, in addition to strategic environmental assessments, which I know Mr Ballard's party supports and which will govern the introduction of transport policies and specific projects of a nationally significant scale across the country. Those are important developments in tackling this serious issue. It is important also to reflect on the spend and on the spending profile, which has changed since the coalition was formed. We are moving towards, and delivering on, a target of 70 per cent of our transport spend on public transport. I strongly argue that, over the longer term, that will make a considerable difference.

Mr MacAskill flip-flops from one side of the argument to the other. He is on record as supporting Edinburgh trams, but I heard him on Forth One just the other morning saying that he was against them and that they were a complete waste of money. We disagree with that view, and in the City of Edinburgh Council there will be cross-party disagreement with that view in the coming days when the council supports the scheme. The scheme will be important for our capital city. It represents a vision for our capital; clearly the Scottish National Party has none. We will build on that vision and ensure that the scheme is an important contribution to improving public transport choices around Scotland. That is the decision that this Government has taken.

Transport Scotland is working with the police and other agencies to promote safety on the trunk road network. Portable vehicle-activated speed warning signs have been introduced at various locations throughout the trunk road network.

I agree with Mr Fergusson's points about the effectiveness of the mechanism. I would be happy to have Transport Scotland discuss with Dumfries and Galloway Council the most appropriate way to bring forward such measures, assess their effectiveness and consider their roll-out. I will instruct that that happen, and I will ensure that Mr Fergusson is kept up to date. I am also interested in examining the mechanisms that have worked in different parts of the trunk road network and in investigating whether they can be used at the sort of locations in which Alex Fergusson is interested. I undertake to keep him up to date with progress.

I agree with that analysis. The location that Mr Swinney describes is an example of a mechanism that is working and assisting in tackling—let us be frank—driver behaviour. I am happy to consider the suggestion that such signs be used on different parts of the trunk road network, in particular at the junction that he mentioned. I am sure that members would also want to bear it in mind that we ask Transport Scotland to regularly examine accident clusters across the trunk road network in order to make recommendations for future remedial actions and to address issues such as Mr Swinney and Mr Fergusson raised and the need for physical infrastructure improvements. We will continue to do that.

We ensure that the contract for trunk road operators across Scotland includes a heavy burden in respect of road safety issues and therefore on working with communities and local police services. I would be happy to take up the points that Mr Purvis has raised, but I assure him that we take road safety very seriously in designing robust contracts for our trunk road network and the operators thereof.

Transport Scotland is an executive agency of the Scottish Executive and is therefore included with all other Scottish Executive bodies in the annual budgeting process, which is considered and approved by the Scottish Parliament.

As I am sure Mr Brownlee would expect, ministers are ultimately accountable for every departmental spending decision and are collectively accountable for all Government spending decisions, which are rightly scrutinised by Parliament through the Finance Committee and, in respect of transport expenditure, by the Local Government and Transport Committee. Ministers are ultimately accountable, therefore they make the decisions.

I hope that Mr Adam will expect any Government to take decisions on the basis of evidence and, in the case to which he refers, to take decisions on the basis of a proper analysis of the traffic circumstances in the city and the multimodal implications of wider investments that Government makes. It is not right to make on-the-hoof commitments on transport or any other portfolio and Mr Adam should not expect us to do so.

The Scottish Executive is aware of the free bus scheme in Hasselt, but has not carried out any detailed examination of its operation or outcomes. Our policies on improving public transport are clearly set out in our recently published national transport strategy.

Well, well. It is important to put on the record the conflicting evidence on the benefits that were achieved in the Hasselt scheme. Although it is fair to say that bus patronage increased 10-fold, a large proportion of that modal shift was from walking and cycling to travelling by bus. Instead of being fully analytical, it is easy to be simplistic in one's analysis, as Carolyn Leckie was. In six out of the past seven years, bus passenger figures have risen across Scotland. I would have thought that Carolyn Leckie would have supported and applauded that—obviously she does not. Rail passenger numbers have increased by 28 per cent in the past two years. Carolyn Leckie may shake her head, but those are the facts of the matter. Facts are something that her party—whatever it is called these days—has great difficulty with. Would not it be great if everything could be free? However, the rest of us have to live in the real world.

This is a matter for the ring 'n' ride provider.

I appreciate the issues that people in Jean Turner's constituency confront. The problems that she describes are, of course, serious to those who are affected. A number of mechanisms and funding streams are used to support the Strathclyde partnership for transport, particularly with regard to demand-responsive transport, of which the ring 'n' ride service is an example, and other helpful services. However, on the design of those services and the decisions about budget allocations for their funding, I hope that Jean Turner will accept the principle that I believe in strongly, which is that it is better that such decisions be made at local level rather than their being imposed from Edinburgh. Local delivery agents are much better placed to assess what will work in their areas. We will, of course, be happy to consider some wider examples, but it is important that, when attaching budgets, we let local delivery agents make the right choices about what will work in their areas of Scotland.

I expect the upgrade of the Raith junction to start in 2009 and be complete by 2012.

I cannot, off the top of my head, give an answer about the economic impact of the project. However, the economics of the junction have been considered as part of the appraisal that was done under the Scottish transport appraisal guidance. I will look closely into the matter and try to provide Mr Neil with a more detailed answer. On Mr Neil's first point, I accept that there is considerable disruption in the area. Many of my colleagues talk about it in many moments in many days, so I take the point seriously. We are doing everything we can with regard to the situation, but unfortunately the nature of road design, road construction and the formal processes that must be gone through—with which most members are all too familiar—mean that we must have the kind of timescale that, at this time, we judge to be the right one.

Transport Scotland implements an annual programme of road safety improvements as well as a number of larger schemes, most of which bring road safety benefits. The assessment of road safety schemes, prior to implementation, is undertaken in conjunction with a number of agencies, including the police. All schemes are subject to a road safety audit following implementation.

I understand the points that Mr Purvis makes. I gather that vehicle-activated signs are being installed at the junction to improve driver awareness. I hope that that will be a step forward. On 12 December, Transport Scotland received a detailed letter on this matter from the chairman of NHS Borders. We are looking closely into that and will see what further measures can be taken in conjunction with NHS Borders.

An assessment of options in taking forward the Maybole bypass is currently under way. The study will be complete by spring 2007 and the priority for the preferred route will be considered as part of the strategic projects review.

I assure Mr Gallie that bypasses are mentioned in the national transport strategy. I had a spirited discussion on this very subject with my friend and colleague Mr Wilson some weeks ago, in which he put persuasive arguments about tackling journey times and congestion and improving the accessibility of our transport network. Mr Wilson and others have made compelling arguments why we must still consider in the future the appropriateness of a bypass as a particular solution in a particular part of Scotland. Mr Gallie is right that the Maybole bypass was not mentioned in the national transport strategy—of course, it was not the purpose of that policy document to do so. I assure him that the bypass is being considered as part of the projects review, on which I will keep him and Parliament up to date.

The Scottish Executive is currently consulting on two specific amendments to the regulations governing the blue badge scheme. The closing date for the consultation is 29 December. Responses to the consultation will be published by 4 February 2007. We will subsequently make appropriate amendments in a statutory instrument.

I welcome the initiative that Jackie Baillie has taken on an important issue of public concern, especially for those who are principally affected by such abuse. I am aware of the incidents that she mentioned in the City of Edinburgh Council area and the successful investigation that the council has had in recent days. That success is a tribute to all the officers who have been involved in sorting out the problem. Our own research in this area will be published next spring. It seeks to find and alleviate the problems caused by abuse of street parking. We will look closely at the research and we will monitor Jackie Baillie's bill.

Local authorities have those powers and it is important that they use them in conjunction with other agencies. The incident involving the City of Edinburgh Council that Jackie Baillie mentioned is an example of agencies working together successfully to alleviate a particular problem. I hope that other local authorities will look at that success and assist those who are directly affected by the concerns that we all share to tackle this problem.

I am grateful to Karen Gillon for raising that issue. I was not aware of it and will be happy to look into it and see what measures can be brought in immediately to deal with that specific problem. I will write to her on that point.

Glasgow is indeed a great European city and, as members have said, there is every reason to support the bill to encourage the trend to make it and wider Scotland more sustainable—despite what the Greens say—and more economically developed as a result of the better transport connections that we create. Even if the number of passengers using the airport remained the same, there would still be an argument for investing in the airport rail link, given the points that Gordon Jackson and others made about the number of people who use cars but who could switch to rail and about the increased competitiveness that rail links give great European cities. That argument will continue to apply as the number of people using the airport grows, to a greater or lesser extent. Gordon Jackson's jigsaw analogy was a fair assessment of what must happen. I say to Charlie Gordon, Bill Butler and other members who raised the issue of Glasgow crossrail that SPT is undertaking further work on the demand forecasts for crossrail services and evaluating their operational impact on the wider rail network. We anticipate that that work will provide the basis for a business case for crossrail, which will be considered alongside other transport investments in the strategic transport projects review.  I say to David Davidson and Bill Aitken that, as others have said, construction industry inflation is common to all transport projects. Andrew Arbuckle illustrated the numbers involved. On Mr Davidson's specific point, the bill had to be right. I am sure that the Tories would have been the first to criticise if a bill had been introduced to Parliament that was not right. I say to Margaret Jamieson that the 10 months spent on the parliamentary process has been a valuable learning experience, not just for her committee but for Parliament and our assessment of how the system will work. I take seriously the points that she made about the Transport and Works (Scotland) Bill, which is currently proceeding through Parliament, and the code of construction practice and the noise and vibration policy. We will reflect on the committee's views and make judgments about the best way to tackle those issues. I would have greater respect for Mr Adam and other SNP members in articulating their support for crossrail and its connections to GARL if it were not for all the quotes from their transport spokesman and other SNP spokesmen, such as: "the wrong route, in the wrong place and at the wrong price." Paisley North SNP constituency association formally objected to the bill. The transport spokesman of Mr Adam's party said that the project was a mini Holyrood in the making. I would take the SNP's support for GARL and crossrail much more seriously if it were not for the contrary remarks made on the record by Mr Ewing locally and nationally time and time again. GARL is an important project for Scotland, Glasgow and Glasgow airport, and I encourage members to support the bill.

I thank the convener of the Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill Committee, Margaret Jamieson, and her colleagues, the promoter of the bill, advisers and committee clerks for the work that they have done to get the bill to this stage. I take the point that Margaret Jamieson made about the bill process taking 10 months.  The undertaking has been complex and has required a great deal of rigorous evaluation. The construction of a direct rail link to Glasgow airport is a key commitment in the partnership agreement, and the Government strongly supports the motion in the name of Margaret Jamieson. Growing Scotland's economy is the Government's first priority. We are not taking a piecemeal approach to that; rather, we have proposed fundamental, integrated changes to our railway system and investments that must be made if our railways are to make a significant contribution to the integrated transport system in Scotland that we all want. The Glasgow airport rail link is an essential part of that programme. As Glasgow airport continues to grow and the number of passengers continues to rise, we must ensure that viable and sustainable public transport options are available. Let me deal quickly with some of the nonsense that we have heard from some people about the impact of the Edinburgh airport rail link on the Glasgow airport rail link. I provided evidence to the committee on that issue in September and again in October. In response to a request from MSPs for further information, Transport Scotland provided a technical note of the modelling work that was undertaken by Scott Wilson Railways Ltd, which was commissioned by PricewaterhouseCoopers. The modelling work that was asked for was provided, so I suggest that the conspiracy theorists should grow up. The modelling work was based on assumptions from the Department for Transport aviation white paper and provided a range of scenarios. It was not intended to provide a definitive view, but was used as part of a series of work to inform Government on the airport rail link projects. A full assessment of options is what Government does. It is easy to quote selectively from any report, but my evidence to the committee made it clear that the impact of EARL on GARL, and vice versa, depends on a range of factors. Those include forecast air passenger growth, the market that is served by each airport, and the service availability and frequency at each airport. The complete analysis of the business case for both airport rail links is robust and the impact of the one on the other is considered to be minimal. Both projects were required to undergo regular business case assessment before the release of public money. That will continue to be the case.

The study was commissioned by Transport Scotland in pursuit of its assessment of  the airport rail link options available to the Government. The Glasgow airport rail link will provide an important contribution to economic growth in Renfrewshire, Glasgow and throughout Scotland. The link will be good for local residents, airport workers, tourists and Scottish business. The promoter estimates that Paisley will benefit directly from an additional 675 jobs and 650 jobs will be brought to Glasgow and Renfrewshire. The Glasgow airport rail link will cost £160 million in 2004 prices. Last month, the promoter reached an agreement with BAA under which the airport owner will be fully involved in the delivery of the rail link. That will provide enormous benefits in managing the project and in ensuring that costs and risks are kept under control. Scotland and Glasgow will lose out if we do nothing. Cities in Europe compete for investment and business opportunities in a highly competitive environment. The rail link will greatly enhance Glasgow's competitiveness. Companies locate in cities with good transport links, so we must invest in those improvements. When it was announced last week that Barclays' wealth will create a further 500 jobs in Glasgow, the company stressed the importance of Glasgow's accessibility and its direct links to other financial centres. If we are to attract and keep businesses in Scotland, we need the Glasgow airport rail link. The project is integral to the Government's approach to transport. We are committed to putting in place the transport infrastructure and connections that will allow Scotland to compete, and compete well, in the global marketplace. I hope that Parliament will endorse that vision this afternoon.

We are committed to spending £200 million on upgrading the A8 between Baillieston and Newhouse to motorway standard and improving the associated trunk road network. That work, which is expected to improve general traffic flows in the area, will commence in 2009. Transport Scotland is working with the owners and tenants of Strathclyde business park to improve access to and from the park.

As Michael McMahon knows, we are considering possible solutions in the area, but any solution must achieve the objective that he and I share of cutting down peak-time traffic congestion. The traffic modelling that has been carried out, which Mr McMahon knows about and which has been shared with the owners and operators of the park, has not been helpful in that regard. A number of meetings have been held to discuss how best to move things forward and to reanalyse the situation to find out whether specific short-term measures could improve traffic movement in the area. We will continue to discuss the matter and I am happy to keep the member up to date with progress.

Desperate political posturing.

It is important to consider what I said in my letter to Mr Gallie and the two constituency members concerned. Mr Ewing should look at the facts and stop trying to invent a political argument when there is none.

I take Mr Neil's point, but my understanding is that the district valuer is involved  in that process. I am happy to write to Mr Neil in relation to any elements of the advance purchase and voluntary purchase schemes. We made it clear in a debate on the capital transport programme—I am trying to remember which debate—that Network Rail and Transport Scotland had agreed an advance purchase scheme on 1 September. I would be happy to share that with Mr Neil, but I think that the answer to his question is that the district valuer plays the role that he mentions.

Purely for clarity—because I had not readily appreciated this—will the member confirm that he is saying that the Tory policy is not to support the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill either?

I sympathise with Phil Gallie on having to finish with words such as "it is truly acceptable to all."  In seven years of reading the Official Report , I do not think that I have ever read Mr Gallie say that. However, I commend the way in which he expressed the committee's views and the smooth manner in which he threw several passes—dodgy or otherwise—to Alasdair Morgan to deal with in his summing-up. Phil Gallie shows great ability, which I am sure his party's front benchers will recognise one day. I thank Mr Gallie and the committee for their work so far on Parliament's behalf. They considered much evidence at the preliminary stage and should rightly be commended for their efforts. Like Mr Gallie, I thank people who took much time to provide written evidence and who appeared as witnesses. I enjoyed my afternoon with the committee to consider aspects of the bill. We fully support the bill's general principles and the construction of the Airdrie to Bathgate railway project—a commitment in the partnership agreement. The project is a core aspect of the transport infrastructure plan, which involves spend of more than £1 billion per annum, 70 per cent of which is on public transport. The reasons why we support the bill and are committed to funding the Airdrie to Bathgate railway are clear. We do so for many of the reasons that Mr Gallie outlined fairly. Promotion of sustainable economic growth is the Government's central aim, and transport infrastructure and our railways have an important role in delivering that aim. The Airdrie to Bathgate railway will put in place a necessary public transport connection to the key economic centres of Glasgow and Edinburgh. Three distinct rail services run between Glasgow and Edinburgh: the express main-line Edinburgh to Glasgow service, which has a journey time of 50 minutes and four trains per hour; an hourly service via Shotts, with connections for passengers who live in Lanarkshire and Midlothian; and an intercity service from Glasgow Central station to Edinburgh, which stops at Motherwell and Carstairs and has a journey time of 59 minutes. As Mr Gallie said, the Airdrie to Bathgate railway will allow people in North Lanarkshire to take a direct service into Edinburgh, which will include a stop at Edinburgh Park, and will allow people in West Lothian to have a direct connection to Glasgow that they do not have at present. I, too, was informed by the committee's deliberations and the written evidence, in which an argument was made about the ability of our main economic centres in Glasgow and Edinburgh to access new areas with people who have skills that are needed in some industries. That was another strong argument for improved public transport services.

Obviously, I would be happy to look into that matter. I cannot envisage circumstances in which the promoter would want to avoid sensible and constructive meetings with members of the Scottish Parliament in carrying out their duties in representing communities and individuals. Such meetings are part of the process of ensuring that the railway infrastructure project is successful. It is important that the promoter deals properly with local people's views if uncertainty or concern exist. I take Mr Neil's question seriously. I met Network Rail's senior management yesterday, but will pursue the matter that he has raised and ensure that the appropriate connections are made. The Airdrie to Bathgate railway will give people in North Lanarkshire a direct service into Edinburgh, including into Edinburgh Park, and will significantly improve public transport opportunities for the large population that resides in communities along the route, which will benefit the local and regional economies and the national economy. The promoter has estimated that there will be £679 million in benefits to Scotland and that 1,500 jobs will be created in the local area. The Government recognises that the economy changes over time and that our transport infrastructure must reflect those changes. People must be able to get quickly, safely and reliably to where they want to work and where they want to learn. The bill will mean that they will be able to do so. The promoter has given evidence that the railway will offer a public transport alternative to travel on the M8 and that it will help to reduce the rise in road traffic congestion. The railway cannot by itself halt the rise in car use, but it will provide people with a genuine choice, provision of such choices being a central theme of our transport policy. The proposals show the Executive's commitment to putting in place sustainable public transport alternatives to cars. In its preliminary stage report, the bill committee rightly commented on the need to increase access to reliable public transport for people along the route. Mr Gallie mentioned the proposals for new  stations. Evidence that was provided to the committee showed that there is also a case for constructing new stations at Blackridge and Plains. Our commitment should mean that stations can be constructed at Blackridge and Plains while the main route is being built.

Mr Purvis has made an important point. I understand that he recently met the Deputy Minister for Communities to discuss that matter with respect to this and other capital transport projects. We are considering the appropriate level of home-loss payments for Scotland and will consider making proposals in due course if a change is required. I assure Mr Purvis and other members that the Minister for Communities and the Deputy Minister for Communities are actively considering the matter. It is important that we achieve clarity on it as this and other bills proceed through Parliament. There will be no additional Executive funding for any additional works. That is important. What I am saying is consistent with what I said in the autumn to the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill Committee, of which Mr Gallie is a member. The budget will remain capped at £299.7 million at 2006 prices. Such an approach is important for all our capital transport projects in which pressures exist. In its report, the bill committee made it clear that it wants the railway service to be fully integrated with other forms of transport, especially buses and cycles. That is an important point, which members—Alasdair Morgan in particular—discussed in the evidence-taking sessions. The Executive recognises the importance of joined-up public transport journeys to the railway's success and can potentially provide financial support through bus development funds or grants for demand-responsive bus services. We will work with operators, local authorities and regional transport partnerships to engage fully on that matter; indeed, meetings will take place as early as Monday to discuss positive ways forward in that respect.  The benefits of the proposed rail link represent considerable value for money. It has been estimated that it will result in £679 million in benefits to the economy as a whole. It will cost £299.7 million at today's prices, and will lead to an expected outturn cost of between £300 million and £375 million, depending on the rate of industry inflation. That means that there will be a cost-benefit ratio of 1.81. To put that another way, for every £1 in costs, there will be £1.81 in benefits. As with all major transport projects, Transport Scotland must ensure that the project is on time and on budget. The release of Government money will depend on a continuingly robust business case. I outlined to Parliament on 16 March the process that is involved. The promoter, with Transport Scotland's support, is also discussing with North Lanarkshire Council and West Lothian Council their contributions to the project. The railway will provide a reliable and sustainable public transport link to our major economic centres. It will mean that new stations will be introduced and it will improve accessibility for local people in their areas. It is an essential element of the Government's £3 billion capital investment programme in transport and rail infrastructure in Scotland, so I ask members to support the motion and to agree to the general principles of the bill.

"Ho, ho, ho" is the obvious answer to that. I thank the members who have spoken in the debate, who have been thoughtful and constructive in bringing a degree of consensus to our deliberations. We have been open about the reason for our proposals and our purpose of improving our legislative processes. We want to make our use of parliamentary time more efficient and to ensure that there is the right amount of parliamentary scrutiny. I continue to be willing to listen to any constructive arguments that will help us to improve the bill as it proceeds through its parliamentary stages. I turn to Maureen Watt's speech. We are grateful that she has mellowed—it was kind of her to say so. She made a fair point about more efficient use of parliamentarians' time, for which the bill will provide, and called for more innovative government. Members of the Executive parties would argue strongly that we have innovative government now and that it will continue, for example through the completion of the Edinburgh trams project and the building of the Edinburgh airport rail link, which the Scottish National Party would not build. There is a contrast between our attitude towards innovation in government and getting things done and that of the SNP. I take the points that Maureen Watt and others made about defining projects of national significance. That issue will be progressed now that the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill has completed its parliamentary  stages. We have already had discussions on the processes involved. I accept David McLetchie's argument that the bill is about reforming our procedures for the future. In relation to his overall theme, we laid out how we will structure our capital transport project portfolio on 16 March this year and illustrated how we will develop the projects in our programme. I grant that it is an ambitious programme, but so it should be. We are ambitious about what we can do both now and in the future, and we will not go back on that. David McLetchie was right to raise ministers' accountability and the transparency of the process. I hope that Mr Gorrie listened carefully, if not to my arguments on the matter, to those of Bristow Muldoon, Charlie Gordon and David McLetchie. It has been and continues to be the case that ministerial accountability is central to parliamentary scrutiny. In my view and in the view of other members, the bill will ensure that ministers are accountable for transport and works projects. Charlie Gordon mentioned the complexity that MSPs encounter without having sufficient resources to interrogate the massive level of detail to which such projects give rise. That is why we are so keen to ensure that the process is front-loaded effectively, from the point of view of involving communities and individuals who are affected by particular projects and the Parliament. That is the essence of the system that will be in place, provided that the Parliament agrees to pass the bill. Charlie Gordon also said that transport will be more political as a result of the bill, which chimes with David McLetchie's observations, with which I heartily agree. As the convener of the Local Government and Transport Committee, Bristow Muldoon made a number of detailed points. We acknowledge that the Scottish Executive inquiry reporters unit will have a vital role to play if the effectiveness and efficiency of our system are to be improved, and I take on board the comments that were made about ensuring that the SEIRU is adequately resourced. I confirm that the SEIRU has been fully involved in developing the bill as it affects its work and I will ensure that we pick up the points that have been made about that as the bill progresses. On front-loading, the bill will require the promoter to engage with the local community before it submits an application, to minimise the number of objections and to improve the efficiency with which the application is processed. I turn to the point that the Greens and the Procedures Committee have made. It is a fair point, but we need to get some balance into the system as regards the number of kicks at the ball the Parliament has, to use Donald Gorrie's  analogy. Ministerial accountability is important, as David McLetchie, Bristow Muldoon and Charlie Gordon said. As a minister now or in the future, I would in no way minimise the amount of scrutiny to which members subject ministers as part of our normal parliamentary processes. It is right that there should be such scrutiny. The Procedures Committee will continue to examine the matter, but it is an essential part of the process. The parliamentary authorities have yet to discuss fully and to agree how Parliament will scrutinise the national planning framework, but members will have an opportunity to scrutinise fully both individual projects and the Government's programme. It is the job of Government to put a transport programme before Parliament. The process will not take place in a vacuum and will generate debate both inside and outside our Parliament. I hope that Parliament will have many opportunities to hold ministers to account for projects, but there is no need for the bill to tie up Government and Parliament in legislative straitjackets to achieve a certain level of scrutiny. We need to set the appropriate standard, and I have no doubt that we will do so when considering the bill. I hope that my brief comments will have encouraged members to support the general principles of the bill at decision time.

We were all rather enjoying the previous item, but it is important that I open this afternoon's stage 1 debate on the Transport and Works (Scotland) Bill. I thank all those who were involved in the scrutiny of the bill. In particular, I record my appreciation of the contribution of the many individuals who volunteered their time in giving oral and written evidence. The Local Government and Transport Committee's stage 1 report is considered and balanced, and I welcome its endorsement of the bill. I am grateful to members for the constructive tone of the report. It is clear that our proposals have found favour across the political spectrum and, importantly, from stakeholders who represent a wide range of interests. I am heartened that the proposals are on the right track and I am optimistic that that measured, consensual approach will extend throughout the bill's passage. The bill seeks to provide a modern efficient process to authorise transport developments. The proposed process has the confidence of promoters, parliamentarians, the wider public and, perhaps most important, those who will be directly affected by proposed developments. That confidence is engendered by the fact that the bill will ensure that the new process operates in an open and transparent manner within a context that encourages public engagement and participation. That confidence is reinforced by enabling a public examination of proposals by a person who is appointed on the basis of their qualifications and experience. Finally, that confidence is confirmed by ensuring that all decisions are well founded, made in the public interest, informed by evidence and publicly explained. The bill contains other provisions that will provide, where possible, conformity of approach for other transport systems by introducing parliamentary scrutiny to nationally significant road and harbour developments and by improving the publicity arrangements for pilotage orders. They will also remove the operation of what some have seen as the arcane special parliamentary procedure, which will be replaced by the more straightforward approach of a ministerial decision for transport-related matters.

I certainly recognise the concerns that Nora Radcliffe has expressed. It is important to recognise—as, in fairness, members did during stage 1—that the introduction of such railways can potentially have the same impact on people in a locality and that, therefore, such people should have access to the same rights. However, I can assure Nora Radcliffe that we have no intention whatsoever of introducing an onerous burden on those who, in many cases, voluntarily give of their time to work on light railways. She may wish to pass on the commitment that I gave to the Local Government and Transport Committee that the cost of an application for heritage railways under the bill will not be greater than it is at present. I know that that has been an issue of concern. The Subordinate Legislation Committee raised a number of points. Its thoughtful comments were helpful and, as my officials have already indicated, we will address those matters through Executive amendments at stage 2. As I said, the response to our proposals from stakeholders has been overwhelmingly supportive. However, we have sought to address concerns that a few stakeholders have expressed about their status as an objector. I agree with representations that have been made by the British Ports Association. Navigation authorities have a right to be heard if road bridge proposals have been made that affect their interests, and that right should be extended to cover, for example, an order authorising a rail bridge. As I said to the Local Government and Transport Committee, I will therefore lodge an amendment at stage 2 to add navigation authorities, regional transport partnerships and Network Rail to the list of statutory objectors. RTPs have a specific transport planning interest, and their role will become increasingly important in the coming years as they implement their regional strategies. It is right and proper that Network Rail, which is  responsible for our rail infrastructure, should be treated as a statutory objector if a proposed order affects its operational interests. As members know, the purpose of the debate is not to provide definitive responses to all the points that have been made. However, I assure members that we will consider and carefully reflect on the Local Government and Transport Committee's report and the points that members make in the debate. The debate will focus on agreeing to the general principles of the bill, which are that there should be a fair and transparent process, a time-efficient and cost-efficient process and an authorisation process that operates at a level that is appropriate to the development's scope and impact. On that basis, I propose that the Parliament should be actively involved in the consideration of orders that relate to nationally significant transport developments. The three straightforward principles of fairness, efficiency and appropriateness underpin our proposals. Our challenge is to make the proposed legislation as practical and as fit for purpose as possible. It is clear that meeting that challenge is a common goal for members. Our shared purpose has been evident in the constructive attitude that has dominated the debate on the bill. I hope that members will continue to have that constructive attitude. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Transport and Works (Scotland) Bill.

We will soon publish our rail policy document, "Scotland's Railways", as part of the national transport strategy. It will examine a number of options for improving connections between Edinburgh and Glasgow.

I respect Karen Whitefield's points. Scottish Enterprise is leading a study to examine the economic impact of high-speed transport links and joint work has been done between the regional transport partnerships in the east and west to identify a possible route between Glasgow and Edinburgh, were the Scottish Enterprise study to produce a positive outcome. While bearing in mind the need to improve the journey time between the two cities, we need to look at how we can provide the kind of service that Karen Whitefield's constituents want and at the same time consider the kind of service that people in Edinburgh and Glasgow want, which is one that is faster than the current service.

There has certainly been much press speculation, including some involving Mr MacAskill's position on EARL, which of course changes according to which publication he writes in. We are treating the procurement policy for the train network as a matter of urgency and will bring formal information to Parliament in due course. We aim to improve the network not only on the Glasgow to Edinburgh line but throughout the country. It is important to be consistent, a point that Mr MacAskill misses somewhat when he discusses the proposed link to Edinburgh airport.

One of the matters that need to be considered in the capital expenditure plans for Government from 2010 to 2020 will be capacity not just at Edinburgh Waverley but at Haymarket and in the west. It will be important to take into account Sarah Boyack's point when we devise our railway strategy, and in the long-term development of rail, which is a great success story in Scotland. More people are travelling by rail as an alternative to the car. We hope to continue in that direction of travel, but I take the member's points seriously.

That is a fair question. It is certainly important that we take into account issues that relate to the current service in developing any transport investment in new provision of capacity on the Edinburgh to Glasgow line. That would happen through the Scottish transport appraisal guidance process anyway, but I assure Mr Canavan that the implications for the important commuter stop that he mentioned will be  part of the calculations when we consider those options.

I was able to discuss the Edinburgh Park issues the other week with Keith Miller from Miller Developments. We plan to develop proposals to honour a sensible commitment to Edinburgh Park and we appreciate the importance of having a rail stop there to provide travel choices to many people who work in that area of west Edinburgh. The matter is under close review with Transport Scotland and First ScotRail and I hope that we will be able to make a positive announcement in due course.

I acknowledge Bristow Muldoon's points about Livingston. One of the trade-offs in rail that we must recognise and which I know Bristow Muldoon recognises is between improved journey times and commuter stops—that is one of the calculations that we are currently making. It is part of the considerations in the "Scotland's Railways" document that we will publish as part of the national transport strategy. That essential trade-off will be one of the core decisions as we develop our plans for Scotland's railways.

The Executive is addressing road safety through a combination of engineering, enforcement and education. We are, through Transport Scotland, which is responsible for trunk roads, currently  working with local authorities, who are responsible for road safety matters in their areas, including the identification and treatment of accident cluster sites. In addition, through Road Safety Scotland, the Executive engages with police forces and a wide range of other parties to promote the road safety message throughout Scotland.

I take Gordon Jackson's point about the importance of acknowledging driver behaviour in the accident statistics. It is tragic that young drivers are disproportionately represented in road accidents—one in five new drivers is involved in a road accident within a year of passing the driving test. The current Road Safety Scotland campaign aims to raise awareness of the dangers on rural and urban roads and is targeting young drivers.

I will of course be happy to meet the member to discuss the matter. We express our condolences to Mr Lochhead's constituents at this time. He described worrying circumstances and made a fair point about the balance between education and regulation. I assure him that we will consider the matter. Driver behaviour, which Gordon Jackson mentioned, is an extremely important component of the challenge that we face, but I will be happy to consider further measures that we might take.

In 2004 and 2005, 166 fatalities out of a total of 418—that is, 40 per cent of deaths—due to accidents on non-built-up roads were reported as having occurred in darkness.

I acknowledge the points that Stewart Stevenson made. I am well aware of the circumstances and of the police analysis of the causes of the accidents that he mentioned. I will certainly look again at the pass plus scheme. The member knows that most of the resources that we channel into the area are channelled through Road Safety Scotland's programme, which is proven to have lasting benefits. However, I am happy to consider alternative or additional approaches that could demonstrably assist in the prevention of tragic accidents.

The community of Cumbernauld will benefit from that significant investment through reduced traffic noise, improved quality in local watercourses and better access between local roads and the M80.

The project will be taken forward as detailed in the previous local public inquiry. That was the recommendation that we received and on which we accepted the reporter's findings, and we have no plans to change that position.

First, I apologise to Cathie Craigie for the length of time that it has taken to respond to her earlier inquiry. I hope to be able to provide a full technical answer to her points later today. There are some issues to be addressed and I respect the perspective that she has given on that issue on behalf of the residents who have raised it. I understand that the matter was fully examined in the context of the local public inquiry, at which evidence was led about noise. I understand that the Executive's response was made by Dr Bernadette McKell, an acknowledged  expert in the area, and I hope to share the findings of Dr McKell's work with Cathie Craigie later today.

Scotland's first national transport strategy will be published before the end of this year. At the same time, an independent analysis of the responses to the consultation that was carried out as part of the development of the strategy will be published.

I am grateful to Patrick Harvie for keeping me up to date. I must ensure that the website is fully updated after question time this afternoon. I can assure him that the broad spread of the science behind climate change has been taken into consideration in the national transport strategy. A key aspect of the Stern report, which was published on Monday, is that it makes an economic analysis of the science, and in that regard it is an important piece of work. I can also assure Mr Harvie that a voluntary strategic environmental assessment was undertaken in relation to the national transport strategy, which I hope will assist in the overall consideration of the environmental pressures that we all undoubtedly face.

That is a kind offer and I will see what I can do about it. I hope that Mr Gibson will appreciate that we have worked with First ScotRail to augment the rail services to the far north, particularly on connections to Scrabster and ferry services to Orkney. I understand that the timetabling changes will be implemented in December, and I hope that  they will assist people in the area. I will certainly work in both the national transport strategy and the strategic projects review on issues such as rail connections to the far north, and I respect the interest that the member takes.

I am grateful to Dave Petrie for raising the issue, and I will look into the timetabling questions that he has asked. It is clearly a long-standing issue, and it is important that we bring forward our plans and, more to the point, the contract that will deliver the improvements as quickly as possible. I will look into the matter and write to the member.

I am beginning to think that this question allows any transport question on anywhere in Scotland to be raised, and I applaud Mr Swinney's ability in finding such an opportunity. I am aware of the arguments on dualling the A9, and I also know that Mr Swinney has made a formal submission to the consultation on it and other matters. As he and Parliament will know, we are considering the section between Perth and Pitlochry in the strategic projects review. For the rest of the road, we are continuing to work on the issue of journey times—that is one of the cornerstones of our approach—and we hope to make further progress in due course.

We will shortly review fares policy, including issues relating to fares regulation.

I will certainly take the opportunity to raise the point with First ScotRail. Indeed, given the investments that we make in both the franchise and the network, I have already discussed with it the broad relationship between fares and our clear transport policy position of encouraging people to switch from the car to forms of public transport, including Scotland's rail network. I appreciate Mr Rumbles's concern, and I would be happy to take it up with the company.

We are taking forward the planning work that must be done if a replacement crossing of the Forth is needed. Therefore, planning is under way through the strategic transport projects review. Five detailed reports have been commissioned and will be completed by next May. The reports will be submitted on 3 November, 30 November, 31 December, 30 April 2007 and 31 May 2007. That work will allow ministers to take any necessary decision next summer as part of the spending review 2007. At that point, ministers will have an analysis of the condition of the current bridge, options for a replacement crossing—which will include type, form and location—funding and procurement options and legislative requirements. Ministers' possession of the fullest possible information will allow them to make a decision that is based on a comprehensive analysis of options, risks and costs. Full details of the reports will be placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre.

I gave a full answer on what we are doing. It is now on the record that five reports will be submitted later this year and next year. The work that must be done, regardless of when the decision is taken, is being done. That is what businesses and local people expect. We are talking about a decision that will be of great significance for the Government of the day. In my view, it would be wrong to take a decision now, without doing all the necessary work. Ministers must have the full analysis when they make their decision. As I said in my initial answer, the fact that that analysis is being provided will ensure that the ministers of the day have the full information.

Governments must take decisions on the basis of full information and we are ensuring that the work is being done to allow that to happen. I would have thought that any responsible Opposition would agree with that approach and I am disappointed that the Scottish National Party does not. I finish by quoting at Tricia Marwick Mr Salmond, who said on 5 September: "Certainly the planning should be done now because you've got to plan for the eventuality. You don't build something unless you have to."

As I said in my answer to Helen Eadie's initial question, one of the pieces of work that is being done, on which a report will be produced before next May, is on the options for a replacement crossing, covering type, form and location. I assure Margaret Smith that that will include the kind of detail that she is looking for. I repeat the somewhat obvious point that no minister or Government could take a decision without the fullest possible analysis of such issues, which is what will be produced.

Let us try to keep to a rational, objective assessment of the situation. The difficulty with that argument is that it suggests that Governments should always take a decision in principle and then consider the evidence to see whether the decision should stand. We are doing it the right way round. We are ensuring that the work and planning in all these areas—which members in all parties will acknowledge must be done—is done, to ensure that we take a decision at the right time with the right information. That is what we will do.

I am not sure what more I can add to the answers that I have already given without repeating exactly what I have said. I appreciate the points about the haulage industry; indeed, we had a fair airing of those points during  the Local Government and Transport Committee's debate on these matters a week or so ago. That debate was helpful in allowing us to understand those points fully. I assure Marilyn Livingstone that we are taking these matters forward and that we are doing the work. I have detailed what the work packages will be. Further information on them will be placed in SPICe, as I said a moment or so ago. We will continue that work and will take the right decision at the right time.

Since the introduction of the air discount scheme on 18 May 2006 and up to 30 September, 25,698 residents in the Western Isles—93 per cent of the eligible total—had registered for the scheme and 3,458 residents had used it.

I am happy to address the specific points that Mr Morrison raises. I am aware that we have been able to sort out the operational issues with bookings for the Eastern Airways service to Aberdeen. I hope that that is of assistance to Alasdair Morrison's constituents. I am also happy to consider his point regarding the application of the residency rules to ferries. We are encouraged by the success of the air discount scheme, which appears to have been a successful mechanism in encouraging travel opportunities for local people, and we will reflect on Alasdair Morrison's comments. I share his concerns about SNP members who opposed the scheme and continue to send me letters saying that they are against it. I find that disappointing, given the scheme's success.

If that was a U-turn, I guess that we must welcome it. The fact is that I have received letter after letter from Mr Mather and his colleagues saying that it would be better to have a public service obligation. That is the SNP's position. While we are helping people in the islands—the numbers illustrate that—the SNP has opposed the scheme time and time again. We reviewed the entire proposal and the different mechanisms that were available to us properly, and the Government came to a decision. The SNP should have the good grace to welcome it.

It is nice to see Dave Petrie with us today. We welcome him back to the chamber. I respect his remarks on the need to advertise constantly to ensure that people are aware of the benefits of the scheme and the ease with which they can use it. In response to his point about people who do not live in the islands and do not, therefore, qualify for the scheme under the residency rules that govern it, I say to him that we are operating the scheme in a similar way to many others that operate throughout Europe. Those are the rules under which we must construct and operate the scheme, and that is the current position.

All proposed route development fund air routes are appraised against a range of operational and economic benefit criteria. The environmental component of the appraisal of new services includes two indicators of environmental impact: aircraft noise and carbon dioxide emissions.

As we have just debated, tackling carbon dioxide emissions requires a balance across the different transport sectors and across Government policy. I hope that Mr Ballance is familiar with the fact that, in considering the carbon dioxide emissions for air transport, we examine aircraft emissions and emissions from surface transport. Of course, he does not help his argument by opposing the Edinburgh airport rail link—as does the Scottish National Party—which would help considerably in that regard.

It is particularly disappointing that the Greens and SNP members, who are all screaming and shouting from a sedentary position, oppose the arrival of overseas visitors to Scotland—2.4 million in the past year, which is a 50 per cent increase since 2001 and the highest figure that has ever been recorded. The Executive welcomes that, but I see that the SNP and the Greens oppose it.

Later this autumn, we will publish our rail policy  document "Scotland's Railways" as part of the national transport strategy. It will examine a number of options for improving the route between Inverness and Aberdeen.

I assure Eleanor Scott that that is part of the "Scotland's Railways" approach to planning for the railway sector and network throughout Scotland. It is our intention to encourage and develop commuter lines to Inverness. There is strong pressure for that and there are strong arguments for it in relation to encouraging people to use public transport, as opposed to the car. The link that she mentions is important in that context. The other day I noticed a comment in The Press and Journal that it is important to share in this context. It illustrates that "the Highland capital is almost unrecognisable from a decade ago—during which time city status was achieved and new housing, offices and industrial units sprang up with alarming regularity ... Its transport links are improving". We are making some progress, as The Press and Journal recognises, and we will continue to do so.

That is a perfectly serious point and we will examine the issue. I meet FirstScotrail regularly to discuss those and other issues, as does Transport Scotland. I undertake to look into the matter, but I hope that Mr Lochhead supports the general theme of the Government's expenditure on railways, which involves tackling  and providing for enhancements in the network. That can make a considerable difference in encouraging people to use public transport as opposed to the car.

This has been a good and at times enlightening debate. Parliament can agree that the challenges posed by climate change are  immediate and demanding, and I respect the range of views that have been presented. The debate comes down to, on the one hand, those who take decisions and are rightly held accountable for them, and, on the other hand, the no-roads—and therefore no-buses and, as Mike Rumbles would have it, no-horses-and-carts—policy of the Green nationalists. The Executive is tackling emissions from all sectors, including the transport sector. We have set an ambitious target to exceed Scotland's fair share of UK carbon savings by 1 million tonnes of carbon by 2010. Of course, different sectors will have different scope for making carbon savings and for applying devolved policies. Our aim is to meet the Scottish target in the most sustainable way, by maintaining flexibility in the contribution of the different sectors. Helen Eadie was right to point to the Tory record. The Tories have some way to go before we will take them seriously on these issues. After all, it was only last year that John Redwood—who, I am told, is a leading thinker in the modern Conservatives—said that it was not clear that human activity was changing the climate. David—or Dave—Cameron wrote the 2005 Tory general election manifesto, which mentioned climate change only once. Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace have said: "This manifesto gives the impression that the environment will not be safe in Conservative hands." The Tory MEP Caroline Jackson has called David Cameron's environmental policy review "all talk and no action" and she has said that "in the general election I suspect we will roll back from some of this." With the greatest of respect to Ted Brocklebank, who has made a spirited effort to move his party forward on these issues, I suspect that his party still has some work to do. I greatly admire Fergus Ewing's brass neck. For a moment, I thought that we were not going to have the benefit of his contribution to this environmental debate, because it is not territory on which he is particularly comfortable. After all, he has spent some time trashing public transport projects all over Scotland. He has U-turned—although "handbrake-turned" might be a better expression for Mr Ewing—SNP policy on Edinburgh trams and the Edinburgh airport rail link. As we constantly remind the Greens and the SNP—who are in coalition on this issue—the airport rail link is not just for Edinburgh but, as Helen Eadie rightly said, for the whole of Scotland.

We will deliver the project. No matter how much Mr Ewing's party whinges, and no matter how much he exaggerates—as he does, day in and day out—the issues that have to be dealt with in any capital transport project, we will deliver that project. It is time for Tarmac Fergus to come clean on what other public transport projects the SNP would cancel. Mr Ewing has a problem. He says where he would save money, but Mr Salmond, his leader and boss, has already committed the SNP to a bullet train—an uncosted bullet train, members will not be surprised to hear—between Edinburgh and Glasgow. That is Mr Salmond's on-the-record commitment, but there are no costings for it. At the general election, we look forward to that kind of spending commitment being made very clear indeed. It is time for the SNP to come clean. It cannot promote rail on one hand and oppose it on the other.

I take that as a helpful contribution to the debate. I am sure that the SNP will consider the point carefully as it develops its policies. Rob Gibson made a serious point about rail procurement. We will unveil an unprecedented investment in new rolling stock, and we are adopting the latest technologies—that, to some extent, deals with Ted Brocklebank's fair point about newer and cleaner fuels in respect of carbon emissions. The only point on which Mr Gibson came unstuck was the Irish example. The Irish are promoting a fast rail link to Dublin airport, so Mr Gibson might want to go over there and change his mind—and SNP policy again—on the airport link to our capital city. I finish by considering the Green nationalists. My party is occasionally accused of being a bit sanctimonious, but the Greens do sanctimonious far better than we ever could. Let me give just one example. I am pleased that Chris Ballance has returned to the chamber, because I have here the Carrick Gazette , a paper that I read regularly. On 29 June 2006, Chris Ballance said of Maybole that "a by-pass would transform the quality of life of residents." When Mr Ballard sums up for the Greens, he will have to explain why, on one side of the south of Scotland, it is all right to support a bypass, but on the other side, at Dalkeith, that is not all right.

No. Mr Ballance said what he said and I am very grateful that he is on the record on that point. What we need from the Greens is a little clarity—which I am sure Mr Ballard is just about to provide—and a little less hypocrisy on road policy.

For the record, I indicate that the five routes were not discarded. The route that was chosen is a combination of two of the routes. Perhaps Ms Baird will confirm that that is the factual position.

Climate change is a serious challenge that faces Scotland, the United Kingdom and the world of  which we are part. Political parties in the Parliament must decide whether they live in the real world or in some green utopian ideal. Scots travel in this country and beyond. To deny Scots travel—that is the unwritten and unspoken approach that the Greens advocate—would not be to act in the real world. If we are to convince people that they need to consider their lives and the choices that they make from an environmental perspective, we must take the issues seriously and not as a university debating society would treat them. Yes, transport has an environmental impact. It contributes to carbon emissions in Scotland, England, France and every other country. The Government does not follow a no-roads policy; no Government does, not even several in Europe of which Greens are part. Travel is not bad, as the Greens argue. Can we make better travel decisions? Yes. Do we need investment in Scotland's roads? Yes. In the current financial year, the Government is spending 70 per cent of the transport budget on public transport. The Greens never give us credit for that. We will continue to invest in the road network—buses need roads—but we will also invest for road safety. I agree with Fergus Ewing about that. The investment in road improvements to reduce casualties led to a rate of road accidents in 2005 that was the lowest since records began 50 years ago. That includes a 57 per cent reduction in the number of children killed or seriously injured. The number of road fatalities is below the European Union average and the current trend is falling. Significant reductions took place in casualty numbers in 2005—the number of casualties was down 4 per cent and the number of serious casualties was down 5 per cent to the lowest figure since 1952. However, there is still much to do. The A830 Arisaig improvement eliminated a single-track lifeline road and bypassed a fragile local community; 11 per cent of the benefits of that are from road safety. The section of the A78 from Ardrossan to Saltcoats bypassed three Ayrshire towns, which removed congestion and local pollution and produced benefits of which £14 million are from road safety. The section of the A1 from Haddington to Dunbar bypassed East Linton as part of our development of east coast links with England. Of the total benefits from that, 30 per cent are from accident savings. The M77 to Kilmarnock replaced a notorious stretch of single carriageway and is predicted to generate benefits of which 28 per cent will be accident savings. An horrific fatal accident occurred at the Symington junction some days ago. We have been examining that junction, which I have  personally looked at. I discussed the accident this morning with Strathclyde police and, following their advice, we plan to introduce 50mph zones in that area and to consider any other appropriate measures for the junction. I will also review with Transport Scotland the current trunk-road programme, with a view to bringing forward work on Symington and Bogend toll. We will do work in other areas of Scotland. The Dalkeith bypass, which the Greens oppose, will take heavy traffic out of Dalkeith town centre. The Glendoick and Kinfauns junctions and the final grade separation on the A90 between Perth and Dundee will eliminate accidents that result from drivers having to cross the dual carriageway; 55 per cent of the benefits from that will be in road safety. The Government takes sustainability seriously. We focus on safety, access and the environment. Some 70 per cent of our transport investment is being spent on public transport.

That massive investment provides quality alternatives to the car. Rail passenger journeys rose to 72.9 million in 2004-05, which is the highest level of rail passenger journeys in 40 years. Mr Ballard might want to comment on that.

The recent transport statistics show stable traffic growth, which I hope the Greens welcome. It is clear that our switch in spending has helped.

The Greens are again crying, moaning, whingeing and groaning. When we do something positive, they still do that. The challenge is to investigate new fuel-production technologies—clean fuels and hydrogen, for example, must be investigated. The north-east Scotland transport partnership, for example, is currently investigating the feasibility of a hybrid hydrogen fuel cell bus, which I strongly welcome.  In our national transport strategy, which is to be launched later this year, we will spell out our full approach to a transport network that is fit for the 21 st century. However, transport is only part of the wider picture on climate change. This year, the Government launched Scotland's climate change programme, and members are already familiar with the it's our future campaign, which is a sustainable development campaign that is now being broadcast on television and radio. However, a safe, reliable and accessible transport network is pivotal in delivering sustainable development, which is exactly what the Government is delivering. I move amendment S2M-5005.3, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "supports the Scottish Executive's record investment of 70% of the transport budget in public transport; notes the significant investment in Scotland's bus services, which rely upon a modern road infrastructure, and in the rail network, where the Executive has already opened the Larkhall to Milngavie line, all with the aim of improving the environment; further supports the Executive's investment to reduce road deaths and casualties, improve safety on roads outside schools, and provide attractive, integrated and affordable public transport alternatives, and welcomes the Executive's climate change programme and sustainable development campaign."

I welcome the opportunity to discuss and debate freight issues, which this country must confront. A range of views have been expressed by members of all parties. I acknowledge Bristow Muldoon's  role as the convener of the Local Government and Transport Committee and that of Michael McMahon, the convener of the Public Petitions Committee, who worked with the RHA on the petition that called for an inquiry on freight transport. The process has been a useful parliamentary exercise, as David McLetchie and other members said. I accept his point about the potential for joint working between the two Parliaments on issues that involve reserved and devolved matters. We can debate independence any other day but today we are dealing with an inquiry report and that was a fair point to make, which I am sure many members sympathised with. We have chosen to debate our freight transport industry at a time when it is of growing importance to the development of our economy. It is a key industry, whose contribution to the economy—gross value added—is some £4.4 billion per annum. I take the point made by many members that this is not just about road freight. However, although I do not agree with all of Murdo Fraser's analysis, I accept that road freight constitutes the major component of the freight industry in Scotland. I strongly agree with members who have argued that we must do more to encourage the use of rail and sea—David Davidson and other members made that point. Donald Gorrie mentioned the channel tunnel, which is very much an issue on the Executive's radar and is subject to detailed discussions. I have strong feelings about ports and harbours, having spent a lot of time in former lives dealing with ports and their logistical exercises and work. They are an extremely important component of the freight transport industry and one of which I wish to see more. When we publish the national transport strategy later this year, we will also publish a freight action plan, which will be about action to support the industry. In partnership with the Road Haulage Association and the Freight Transport Association, this Government supports freight transport and has put significant investment into the pool of available drivers and the introduction of state-of-the-art training technologies to the industry. I strongly welcome those initiatives. In addition, I recently endorsed the sector skills agreement for the logistics industry throughout Scotland and, in doing so, made clear our continuing support for tackling the priority skills issues affecting the sector. I stress that I share the industry's concerns about foreign hauliers. As members have said, fairly, such hauliers should operate on a level playing field and should be subject to the same high standards that are expected of Scotland's haulage industry. I listened carefully to the statistics that Bristow Muldoon mentioned in that regard. Transport Scotland is working closely with the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency to  ensure that overweight heavy goods vehicles travelling on Scotland's roads are targeted more effectively. The work that is in hand will allow VOSA to identify overweight vehicles and take enforcement action where appropriate, while allowing those HGVs that comply with weight limits to travel unhindered. We very much acknowledge the points that members, and of course the industry, have made in that regard. As members have said, many key policy areas that impact on freight transport are reserved. On speed limits, for example, I recognise the strength of the arguments on both sides. Paul Martin put one side and other members put the other. Other areas, such as drivers' hours, and the working time and cabotage rules and their enforcement, are reserved but are serious issues. In addition, reserved areas are often covered by European legislation. I welcome the recent meeting between the RHA and the Secretary of State for Transport. Douglas Alexander discussed with the RHA a range of matters for which he is responsible. Some may not like this—I will not make any political observations about one side of the chamber that wants a different constitutional settlement—but it is important to recognise where those responsibilities lie and the role that the RHA and the Parliament play in seeking to ensure that the industry is properly represented in different decision-making forums, whether the Department for Transport in London; the Treasury in London, which is equally important in a number of areas; or the European Commission. In relation to the DFT's planning review of the United Kingdom's implementation of the European road transport working time directive, we are participating in work to ensure that Scotland's position is fully understood. We recognise the arguments about unfair competition. The RHA and the FTA are both part of the haulage industry task group established by HM Treasury and the DFT and are, appropriately, playing a full role in ensuring that the UK Government is aware of Scotland's concerns.

As Mr Ewing well knows, issues of taxation are matters for the Treasury. The whole reason why the RHA and the FTA are sitting on a working group with the Treasury is that it allows them to make the arguments directly to it. If we had independence and Mr Ewing was Chancellor of the Exchequer, no doubt Phil Flanders could meet him—and Mark Ballard, who would be  deputy Chancellor of the Exchequer—to discuss road taxation. Heaven help Phil Flanders in such circumstances. In the real world, the RHA and FTA are on the Treasury working group so that they can meet the individuals responsible for road taxation. I acknowledge the point about evidence on unfair competition in Scotland. It is important that we have such evidence and we are happy to work with the industry to pull that together and to provide input on the issues to the Department for Transport and the Treasury. In some reserved areas, Scottish ministers can take further action in relation to their devolved powers, such as over the safe and fuel-efficient driving scheme for HGVs. There are considerable advantages to that, not least of which is the 1,100 new drivers who have gone through the scheme since 2003-04. We want to encourage the industry to take advantage of the training system that is in place, which is part of its future, and minimise the impact of freight on the environment. An issue that has not been raised this morning is the change to the logistics industry that is being made as a result of the growth in online retailing and the expansion of the service sector. The number of vans under 3.5 tonnes on Scotland's roads is growing almost three times faster than car and lorry traffic. They now account for one eighth of all Scotland's traffic. Given that upward rise, we will take what we have learned from the training regime that is in place for lorry drivers and extend it to the van sector next year. Thus, we hope to reduce the impact of fuel costs, further protect the environment and help the competitiveness of the economy and the freight industry. I will pick up a couple of other points that have been made. I quite understand the arguments that have been made about the Forth road bridge. I hope that we can be entirely constructive and sensible about it. I say to Mr Crawford that any Government must ensure that it has the adequate information to make a decision of such magnitude. Mr Crawford can be as flippant about it as he likes, but it is potentially the most serious issue to face this or any Government of this country for a considerable time. It will be taken seriously and the decision will be taken properly, not flippantly, which is how Mr Crawford presented the argument earlier. I was disappointed by his attitude, because I thought that he was better than that. It was deeply worrying. I will be clear about what is happening on the Forth road bridge. HGV traffic across the bridge is 6 per cent of the total bridge traffic. By way of comparison, HGVs account for 18.5 per cent of Kincardine bridge traffic. Those figures come from the Scottish transport statistics of last year.  It is important to acknowledge—I would be happy to listen to Christine May and others on these points—that those statistics show that 9.4 per cent of freight tonnes originating in Fife are destined for Lothian or the Borders; 10.3 per cent for Strathclyde or Dumfries and Galloway; and 7.8 per cent for elsewhere in the UK. Assuming that destinations from Fife are similar to those from the rest of Scotland, only about one third of the traffic will go via east-coast routes; the bulk will go via the A74 and M74.

I recognise those points, the industries that Christine May describes and the haulage industry that services those industries. In dealing with the arguments, it is important that we deal with the facts of the situation and the statistics that are available to us. Some may dismiss those things, but we must make decisions based on the facts and information that are available to us. As I said, I would be happy to examine the figures closely to see whether they correlate with those that have been provided by Scottish Enterprise Fife and other organisations in Fife. It is not the case, as Bruce Crawford tried to say, that nothing has been done on the Forth road bridge. As I said to the Local Government and Transport Committee yesterday, work is under way as part of the strategic projects review. That is the right process to ensure that we can take a proper decision on the matter at the appropriate time.

We must recognise that HGV traffic accounts for 6 per cent of the total bridge traffic, as I said earlier. The weight of traffic is commuter-car related. Scott Barrie mentioned the potential for a multimodal link. I emphasise that we are considering all such options; I do not dismiss the suggestion. In fairness to Murdo Fraser, who mentioned the potential for having a tunnel, I should say that that is also being considered.  However, it is important that we consider the issue in the context of the multimodal potential. Some of the issues that have been raised might be part of the planning for the capital transport projects that will be undertaken in the period from 2012 to 2020. That will come out during the strategic projects review. I assure Parliament that we take these issues seriously and will move them forward. That is what is happening and a decision will be taken at the appropriate time. I welcome the debate and look forward to further discussions and a continuing, positive relationship with the industry as we publish our freight action plan later in the autumn.

We are considering the scope for including some service enhancements in the final service specification for the tendering of the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services. Decisions will be announced shortly when we issue the invitation to tender for the services.

I confirm that, following representations from many individuals and organisations in the islands—and, indeed, from George Lyon, who is the local MSP—we are considering lengthening the period of the two-vessel operation on the routes to Islay as one of the enhancements. We will take the matter forward when the service specification is produced and we issue the invitation to tender.

Through the access for all programme, which was announced in August, we will provide up to £12 million during the next three years for Network Rail to improve access at stations. In addition, the First ScotRail franchise includes an annual minor works programme of £250,000 per year for small-scale work to improve disabled access at stations.

I appreciate Iain Smith's point about Cupar station, which is similar to the arguments that are being made about many stations on Scotland's rail network. Transport Scotland is considering the selection criteria, including the potential number of passengers who would use the facility and the importance of transport interchanges, and I hope to receive its advice on the matter by Christmas. That will allow us to progress investment in a number of stations. We have available a funding package of some £12 million over the next three years, but given the weight of concerns on the matter, and in the interests of achieving the most from public money, I will look to augment that with different funds—for example, through the regional transport partnerships—if possible.

The simple answer is that we do not have any plans to close railway stations; indeed, we are expanding the rail network across Scotland. We are opening stations and augmenting the railway network across the country, so I would be surprised if Ms Cunningham was trying to suggest that we are closing stations. Nothing could be further from the truth. I take Ms Cunningham's point about Gleneagles station and I assure her that it will be assessed as part of the overall programme. As I said to Mr Smith a moment ago, we hope to be able to take matters forward by the end of the year.

I respect Karen Whitefield's point. It is clear that the situation that she described is unacceptable, so we need to find ways to move  things forward. As I said, we are using not just the access for all fund, but Transport Scotland's small rail projects fund, the First ScotRail franchise and major project funding to seek to move the matter forward. I certainly undertake to look into Karen Whitefield's point about Shotts station to see whether we can find a solution to the problem, which has clearly existed for some time.

I last met representatives of First ScotRail on Tuesday 26 September 2006. We discussed issues relating to rail fares and the success of the rail industry in Scotland. We also discussed what further investment in Scotland's railway might be required to build on that success to accommodate future growth.

Mr Martin makes a fair point about accessibility at stations throughout Scotland. Responsibility for that is covered by the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. I appreciate his points with regard to Springburn. We are taking forward a programme throughout Scotland—in conjunction with the Department for Transport, given the reserved nature of the disability legislation—to improve facilities and to achieve the outcome that Paul Martin rightly wishes for his constituents. We will continue to work to deliver accessible stations, and I will keep him updated on progress in respect of Springburn station.

I assure Mary Mulligan that we did discuss new rolling stock. She will be pleased to hear that we also discussed the railway line that she mentioned. We are making an important investment in the track infrastructure of Scotland to benefit not only her constituents but many other people in central Scotland. As she knows, we are considering a rolling stock programme for 2009 onwards, as was discussed in Parliament last week when we debated the Edinburgh airport rail link, and we will bring important details of that programme before Parliament in due course.

We are currently in dialogue with a number of companies that are developing business proposals to transfer freight from road to rail. Since 1999, we have made 22 awards of freight facilities grants, totalling £35 million, to projects that have moved freight from road to rail. That has enabled major companies such as Argos, Asda, BP, Diageo, Ikea and Tate & Lyle to transfer their products to rail.

An important aspect of the Audit Scotland report is its support—with which I obviously agree—for our transport policy objectives. As Michael McMahon suggests, one of those objectives is the transfer of freight from road to rail, when that is achievable. We have to consider the competitiveness of the Scottish economy and the way in which it can affect decision making in business. Decisions  must make commercial sense, and mechanisms such as the freight facilities grant can help with that. In constructing relationships with businesses, we have worked to minimise bureaucracy, to ensure that turnarounds are much quicker than they have been in the past. That is clearly evidenced by the examples that Mr McMahon mentioned in his question.

I will have to look into the details, but if the road that Mr Matheson describes is a local one it will be a matter for the local authority. I am sure that the road is important for the whole area, so the regional transport partnership in the area may wish to consider the case carefully. We have provided a substantial capital allocation for regional transport partnerships, which could provide a mechanism to help. That would be the best way forward, but I am happy to consider the details of the road that Mr Matheson mentions.

Commercial discussions are continuing with a number of companies. I am sure that Mr Fraser would not expect me to disclose the stage that they have reached. I hope that in future we can reach agreement with a number of operators on investment in the transfer of freight to rail, so that supermarket chains such as the one to which Michael McMahon referred will again use rail. It is certainly our intention to pursue such agreement. We also intend to ensure that investment in the Elgin to Mossend upgrade, on which work is continuing, will assist the movement  of freight from the central belt to the north-east and the Highlands.

In the first instance, it is for Strathclyde partnership for transport to consider fastlink in the context of developing the regional transport strategy. There has been no submission to the Scottish Executive for funding so far. Any request for such funding would receive full and careful consideration.

I would be happy to discuss the issue with SPT and consider the innovative fastlink model for moving people quickly, efficiently and affordably around the areas in the west of Scotland that Wendy Alexander mentions. Strong proposals and practical plans exist for that type of modal transport. We are examining fastlink closely and I undertake to examine it further with SPT.

The transport framework that SPT will conclude and publish later next year will be important in providing the context that Mr McNulty rightly seeks. It is important that we have an overall vision of how transport services are to develop both north and south of the Clyde in the way that members seek. I look for that to come through in the SPT report next year, which we will study carefully.

All I can remember about 1973 is that it was the year in which Scotland qualified for the football world cup in West Germany. I am from the Charlie Gordon school of politics. I am not in the same party as him, but I am from the school of politics that says that we are here to make decisions and not endlessly to review, analyse and call for more studies. I accept his point and understand the frustration that many members have expressed at the length of time for which the project has been on the books. It has been analysed, considered and talked about. I will address the process that has to be gone through for any capital transport project—Paul Martin asked a fair question about that. I acknowledge Bill Butler's leadership on the issue in Parliament, both through his convenership of the cross-party group on Glasgow crossrail and through his raising the issue in the chamber on numerous occasions, although in truth the issue got a fair hearing in the preliminary stage debate on the Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill before the summer recess, and it has been raised in other ways. It is important to stress that the arguments that are made by Mr Butler and his colleagues throughout Parliament help immensely in consideration of the issue. I appreciate Sandra White's support for Bill Butler's motion. Last week, the SNP was opposed  to major rail investment in Scotland, so it is important that it is supporting it today. I think that Bill Aitken and Patrick Harvie, in a different way, accept that our investment in the west and in Glasgow is not just a rail package but is also—as Wendy Alexander and others said—about the major investment that we are making in the M74 and other roads. As Mr Butler said, the Strathclyde partnership for transport's proposals would not introduce a direct link from Glasgow Central to Queen Street: instead, the proposal is to provide a link from stations south of the city, via a new station at Glasgow Cross, to Queen Street low-level station. As we set out in the partnership agreement, the Executive has supported with a grant of £0.5 million the feasibility work on Glasgow crossrail that is being undertaken by SPT. Work to date has reassured us that the project is technically feasible. It is estimated that it will cost between £115 million and £187 million at outturn prices. As SPT said recently in its statement of the case for crossrail, there are issues that need to be resolved in confirming the demand for crossrail services, and in respect of the interface between crossrail and major rail infrastructure works, which is important. At the risk of incurring Parliament's wrath, I note that that work is being undertaken by SPT and is due to be completed by March 2007. That will lay the foundation for the business case for crossrail. I intend later this autumn to set out our vision for Scotland's railways, as part of our national transport strategy. That will provide—I hope in a glossy document—the framework within which we will develop projects such as crossrail through the strategic transport projects review. To answer directly one question that was asked, the framework will prioritise transport projects for future spending. That is the process that members seek. Glasgow already has an extensive transport network that provides excellent local, regional and international accessibility. By 2014, an additional £1 billion will have been spent on enhancements to the transport infrastructure, including the completion of the airport rail link. Transport Scotland has been working with Glasgow City Council and Strathclyde partnership for transport on the preparation of Scotland's bid to host the 2014 Commonwealth games, and will continue to do so to ensure that the bid proposals are realistic and deliverable. I take seriously the points that members have made this evening about the importance of the crossrail project in that context. Two thirds of all First ScotRail journeys—about 50 million journeys each year—are within the Strathclyde region, which makes it the most  heavily used commuter rail network outside London. The new Larkhall to Milngavie line provides a north to south-east cross-Glasgow service and the number of passengers on the line in its first year of operation has been one third higher than the projections. Trains have been refurbished across the region to provide better passenger facilities. Closed-circuit television coverage and car parking have been extended at a number of stations, and we have plans to improve in the near future customer information systems at Queen Street. The further work on crossrail will update previous studies of demand and will assess the positive impacts of making easier some links to onward services for some passengers, and the negative impacts of making longer journeys into the centre of Glasgow for others. It will also set out how crossrail would operate in the context of an expanded rail network—including the Airdrie to Bathgate line and the Glasgow airport rail link—and how reliability of services around Glasgow can be maintained as services expand. I accept that, despite all the investment that we are making, there remain a number of concerns about rail connections in the city, including concerns about there being two separate major terminating stations in Glasgow—at Glasgow Central and Queen Street—with no direct connection between them. There are also concerns about restricted capacity and congestion at both stations, and about the lack of direct links from the south and west of Glasgow to the north and east, which Mr Gallie raised. There are also concerns about the speed and frequency of connections between Glasgow and Edinburgh. Our vision for Scotland's railways will set out ways in which we can address such issues. I envisage a package of enhancements to improve links into and across Glasgow, which will build on the substantial current investment. Glasgow crossrail can be part of that vision for Scotland's transport future.  Meeting closed at 17:54.

I thank Maureen Macmillan for the thoughtful way in which she introduced this evening's debate. I also thank Richard Lochhead, David Petrie and Eleanor Scott for their speeches, much of which I agreed with. I have one or two thoughts on them that I would like to share. I drove along the A96 many times in my former employment, so I appreciate the points that Maureen Macmillan and Richard Lochhead made about the change along the entire length of the road. I was usually travelling from Aberdeen to Inverness but, on occasion, I had to drive all the way from Scrabster to Aberdeen. I appreciate the points that were made about the change in the road in recent times, which is possibly the important issue in the debate. Eleanor Scott might argue that that relates to general traffic growth, and there is no doubt that there has been traffic growth in the area. I will come on to that. We had a discussion with Moray Council about whether that is a strategic or a local issue, but I acknowledge the points that Maureen Macmillan and Richard Lochhead made. In response to David Petrie's remarks, I advise members that—as I understand the figures—far from falling, the population of the Highlands and Islands is rising at this time. If he was making a specific point about Moray, however, I take that on board. I say gently to our colleagues on the Green benches that I could not agree more with the point that Eleanor Scott made about interchanges. I work as hard as I can on what we can do to improve interchanges in villages, towns and cities. However, I do not think that, having voted against an interchange half an hour earlier, as the Greens did this afternoon, they can argue for better interchanges in Elgin. We need to be consistent in how we approach policy. I accept Maureen Macmillan's point about it taking 45 years to build the existing relief road in Elgin. That was a fair observation. This august institution has been here for only seven years or  so; therefore, we have a number of years to get things right. I take the point that she made seriously. I learned much from my visit to Elgin in August. I had not seen The Northern Scot , but I had seen the cuttings. To Mr Lochhead, I say that the picture that I was in was one of the better ones. I acknowledge how direct but fair Pauline Taylor was in expressing the views of the campaigners. I found it interesting that a powerful advocate for her area is also the editor of the local paper. It would certainly be interesting if the same was true on my own patch. I took the campaign group's arguments seriously and I accept what members have said about the consistency of the campaign group's message. There has been strong local support for the project—members have mentioned the strong leadership of the late Margaret Ewing, who was the local MSP. There has also been a steady stream of correspondence from members of all parties, and plenty of parliamentary questions as well. I attach considerable importance to those representations on how we should best resolve Elgin's traffic problems in conjunction with the good people of Elgin and Moray. A benefit of being able to attend the meeting at Moray Council was that we were able consider short-term actions to improve the town now. We agreed on three such actions; I will go through them quickly. First, I wanted to ensure that there were good lines of communication between Moray Council and Transport Scotland. That is now happening; a liaison officer in Transport Scotland has specific responsibility for Elgin and Moray. I am sure that members will welcome the opportunity to speak with him. Secondly, Moray Council has said that further work is required to analyse the traffic problems. I agree, both from the perspective that Maureen Macmillan and Richard Lochhead gave me this afternoon, and from the perspective that Eleanor Scott has given me. There are now regular meetings between Transport Scotland and Moray Council officers to consider such an analysis. Thirdly, Moray Council asked for improved traffic counts on the A96 and at other specified locations in the Elgin area, so that we can analyse the data and understand traffic movements better. That is now happening. Those were the three things that I was asked to do and I am pleased that they are all moving forward. Transport Scotland is developing relationships with local councils through the regional transport partnerships. It is now meeting the Highlands and Islands transport partnership and the north-east Scotland transport partnership on the trunk roads directorates so that work is fully explained and  relationships are developed. That is important, and such a relationship is evident in our Aberdeen to Inverness corridor study steering group, on which Moray Council is represented and plays a full and active part. This is a good time to be debating the issue, because we are in the final stages of completing the national transport strategy, which will provide a rational, objective and structured policy framework to guide future national and strategic investment programmes. When we present the strategy to Parliament, I do not think that anything in it will cause Richard Lochhead or Maureen Macmillan any worries: on the contrary, they will be able to see the helpfulness of the arguments within the strategy. Closely linked to the strategy will be the strategic transport projects review, which will identify and prioritise our national investment programme for the future beyond 2012. I appreciate that that is not quick enough, but I have to be straight with colleagues about where our programme is now—by definition, that programme is full in relation to spending—and about what we can do in the future. We will make progress by taking a corridor-by-corridor approach. In this case, that is the Aberdeen to Inverness corridor—or the Inverness to Aberdeen corridor, depending on how one sees it. The review will take into account the points that Maureen Macmillan and Richard Lochhead have raised about Elgin; but it will also take into account the fair point that Eleanor Scott made about the comparison between journey times on road and rail. The review will assess such things properly, robustly and correctly; that is the right way to ensure that the Government of the day will make the right decisions.  We will ensure that HITRANS and NESTRANS assist us with identifying options in the Aberdeen to Inverness multimodal corridor study. I assure members that I am ready to take decisive steps to ensure that we provide a fair share of future investment to the Highlands and the north-east. We will do that responsibly, based on a rigorous and objective assessment of what is required and how it can be delivered over time with the resources and budget that will be available to us. Rome was not built in a day, but nor should it take 45 years. The solutions to Elgin's traffic problems must be addressed. We are putting the right mechanisms in place to ensure that we identify rational and appropriate measures to tackle the problems and, in that context, to identify our priorities for future investment. I will keep Parliament updated on our progress towards that objective.  Meeting closed at 17:39.

After Brian Adam's summing up, the one point on which I am sure we can all agree is that the debate is about which parties have a vision for Scotland. Which parties believe that the rail link is a strategic investment for the country and that a direct rail investment for the entire country is the right project at the right time? The Labour and Liberal Democrat parties and Margo MacDonald articulated fairly the arguments in favour of the project. The arguments that we have heard from the Opposition parties against the project do not pass muster. In many ways, Helen Eadie reflected my views and the core of the argument about why the project is the right one. She said that that it needed to be the hub at the centre of the spokes.  That was an eloquent expression to describe why the Edinburgh airport rail link is so important not just for Edinburgh—despite the SNP turning its back on our capital—but for the north-east and, indeed, for the whole country. That is why, when we vote on the general principles of the bill, we should vote in favour of the project. Let me pick up a couple of important points on particular aspects of the proposal. Members were right to ask about the rolling stock, and I hope that everyone will welcome the introduction of new rolling stock to the Scottish network. There will be a new fleet of modern, high-specification trains that can deliver our future timetable aspirations and provide the opportunity for enhanced services to other routes in the network. That should be a good thing for Scotland. It is astonishing that some oppose that and make fun of it, as Mr Ewing did. I respect members who raised serious issues about the runway tunnel option, but I hope that they recognise that the evidence that was given to Mr Barrie's committee showed that that option would ensure that the highest number of trains could serve the airport—eight to 10 per hour in each direction—and that a higher percentage of passengers would access the airport by train if we used that option rather than any other. Crucially, the option would offer interchange opportunities that would produce quicker journeys between Fife and Glasgow, easier commuting to business centres in west Edinburgh and an increase in rail connections throughout Scotland.

I am happy to give way, but those are important matters that Mr McLetchie will want to consider.

As we discussed at question time this morning, the STAG assessment includes not just the cost benefit ratio but the other factors that I have described, which it is important to recognise. I was surprised by David McLetchie's speech. He is after all a conviction politician, and I expected utter clarity from him and his party about whether they support the general principle of providing the airport rail link—they cannot have it both ways. It would be astonishing if David  Cameron came up to Scotland during the election campaign and apologised for a lack of clarity from the Tories, but perhaps we will hear that. I was particularly astonished that the Conservatives were not clear about their position. After the statement on the capital programme on 16 March, Murdo Fraser said: "we are falling behind with our infrastructure"— [ Official Report , 16 March 2006; c 24055.]  He went on to say how important this project is. I simply do not understand why the Conservatives do not support the bill's general principles. Members made fair points about timetabling not just for EARL but throughout Scotland. The opening of the airport rail link provides a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to review Scotland's rail timetable and to ensure that it meets needs throughout Scotland for the next 10 years. The rail link is a positive potential development in achieving the outcome that we all want to see. I listened carefully to Christine Grahame's arguments, but I say gently to her that she did not pick up the one argument that someone in Galashiels would surely put to her. If she supports the Borders railway line and wants people to use the new Waverley line between Galashiels and Edinburgh Waverley, why does she want to prevent people from catching a train to the airport after that?

The debate is about the link to Edinburgh airport—it is about the general principles. I would have thought that that was pretty obvious, even to the SNP. We heard a fascinating speech from the Green nationalist behind me and saw his cosiness with Mr Ewing. Mr Ewing must welcome Mark Ballard being such a good close personal friend. The political pact that is being formed must be of great importance to Mr Ewing. The logic of Mark Ballard's argument was bizarre. We want to invest in the tram, which the SNP opposes, and in the heavy rail link, which the SNP and the Greens oppose, because the link will be not just for Edinburgh, as Mark Ballard argued that it should be, but for the whole of Scotland. That is the overriding argument that we want to make. I will finish with some bad news for Mr Ewing from the leadership election manifesto of his leader—the one down in London. Mr Ewing trotted out many figures in his speech and said that we  need to be very careful with money, which is a new policy for the Scottish National Party. In his leadership election manifesto, Mr Salmond called for £4 billion to £6 billion of investment in rail, including "a train link between all three central belt airports". I am not sure how Mr Salmond's position sits with Mr Ewing's speech. I fear that Mr Ewing may not be the SNP's transport spokesman for long. We may get Mr MacAskill, which would be a good thing for all of us. I support the motion.

Come on then—the member said that he would give way.

I am grateful to Mr Ewing for giving way. If he has talked to Ron McAulay and Transport Scotland, which he says he has, he will know that we are procuring new rolling stock throughout the rail network. That is part of the 2009 exercise. He should know that and I am sure that he will be prepared to share his knowledge with the chamber.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in support of the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill this afternoon. I thank Scott Barrie, the committee and all who were and continue to be involved in the process on the Parliament's behalf and to its benefit. It is good to have a lively debate on a project that is extremely important for all of Scotland, not just our capital or the area around it. The bill is about our vision for a Scotland in which the nation's airports have good public transport links and Glasgow and Edinburgh have rail connections from their airport terminals into the rail network. With the EARL project, Edinburgh, a great European city, will have a rail service like those of Oslo, Helsinki, Copenhagen and Stockholm. Ireland—a country that we all watch—is following our lead in planning a rail link for Dublin. I am disappointed that the Opposition does not follow our drive and vision for Scotland. The Edinburgh airport rail link will connect the airport with 62 stations throughout Scotland, from Fife to the Highlands. Highlands and Islands Enterprise considers the link to be so vital that it has planned its rail strategy around the fact that Inverness businesses will have direct access to a major airport. Moreover, business at Edinburgh airport is predicted to grow over the next 25 years from 8 million passengers in 2004 to up to 23 million by 2030, so viable and sustainable public transport alternatives are a must. I find it extraordinary that the Opposition parties do not recognise that reality and are opposing our public transport proposals. The Edinburgh airport rail link will provide a sustainable alternative. The committee has found that the 78 per cent of people who used a car or taxi in 2003 will reduce to 56 per cent in 2026, by which time 22 per cent of travellers will use the rail  link, according to the conservative modelling that has already been done.

The Scottish National Party tries to say that it is not against the bill, but it is, and that intervention proves it. Yes, I have read the master plan—that is the point of Stewart Stevenson's question—and, yes, we could delay and delay, which is the SNP's and the Conservatives' position. That is an option for the Opposition, but not for the Government. The rail link will remove 1.7 million car trips from the roads, reduce traffic congestion around the airport and the west of Edinburgh and tackle the environmental and negative economic impact of congestion, but the Opposition is against investing in public transport links to Scotland's airports. The runway tunnel is the only rail option for the airport that represents value for money and meets our transport objectives of promoting economic growth and social inclusion and creating sustainable transport alternatives. The Opposition can oppose them, but those are the Government's objectives. Let me tackle the issues that the committee has raised. On rolling stock, Transport Scotland will introduce a new fleet of modern trains to the Scottish network. I would have thought that that was something to applaud in our vision for rail, but again the Conservatives find it a negative factor. The trains will deliver new and improved services from 2009 as Scotland's major rail investments are delivered. The rolling stock programme will also take into account the issues raised by the committee on the internal cabin layout of the new trains that will serve the airport. They will have luggage space and be easy to access. I accept that tunnelling is a vital part of the project, but let me give two vital facts in dealing with the nonsense spoken by the Scottish National Party. First, the gradient of the tunnel will be no steeper than at Glasgow Queen Street station, despite what the SNP said this morning.

No. That is the answer. Mr Ewing said this morning that the gradient will be steeper, but he is factually wrong. I am putting on the  record what the position is, and if he does not like it, he can take it up with someone else. Secondly, the BAA tunnelled successfully under a live taxiway at Heathrow in building terminal 5 and under the runway in producing the Piccadilly line extension. Such projects happen. They are complex in engineering and design terms, but they can be done—and so will the Edinburgh airport rail link. The decision on fares will be made by Government and delivered through the ScotRail franchise. Before the devolution of rail powers last year, fares policy sat with the Strategic Rail Authority. Its work was often based on data from the rail network across Britain. We want to ensure that decisions about future fares are made on the basis of the most relevant and robust Scottish data. We will look at fares policy across Scotland, meeting rail passenger needs. Mr Barrie did not quite have time to deal with costs and funding. The Edinburgh airport rail link has a positive economic case and a developing and positive business case. The benefit cost ratio is 2.16 and the benefits are estimated at £1.35 billion over the 60-year programme. Those are facts that the Opposition dismisses in lazy soundbites. As with all major projects, Transport Scotland must ensure that the project is on time and on budget. The release of Government money is dependent on a robust business case, now and in the future. As I laid out in a statement on 16 March, the Edinburgh airport rail link will cost £497 million in 2004 prices and between £550 million and £650 million in outturn prices, depending on the rate of industry inflation. I reiterate the point. As with other major capital transport projects, the airport rail link must remain within its budget. It will not be another Holyrood, and I despise the SNP scaremongering to that effect. The form of contract will be completely different from the one used for Holyrood. We are the major funder of the project. Transport Scotland is in discussions with BAA about its contributions to both the Edinburgh airport rail link and the Glasgow airport rail link. Those commercial discussions will conclude shortly, and we will inform Parliament of their outcome. On 16 March, the SNP front-bench members did not oppose the project. They called it an important investment. Indeed, Kenny MacAskill has said that the proposed rail link—[ Interruption. ] He was transport spokesman at the time, so Mr Crawford might want to pay attention. Kenny MacAskill said: "the proposed rail link to Edinburgh airport is of fundamental importance and must be delivered ... It opens up endless opportunities for improved rail services that are  long overdue. That's why the project must proceed and, moreover, why the most radical and visionary option must be pursued." And the SNP is against it today. The Government will have nothing to do with the hypocrisy, U-turns and spin of the SNP. Today is the day to support the project, and I encourage members to do so.

I suggest that David McLetchie speak to BAA about buses because its position is clear: it will not allow buses to flow through the airport to his proposed station. Will he accept that what we are seeking to achieve is a transport interchange and that a bus journey to a train station some hundreds of yards away is a very different thing from what happens in other capital cities, where one can go straight into a train station under the airport?

Transport Scotland uses the Scottish transport appraisal guidance process to determine the best solution to evidence-based transport problems. The STAG process is a multimodal framework approach that covers key criteria for the assessment of proposals, which include economic issues as well as matters of accessibility and social inclusion. The current strategic transport projects review is being undertaken in line with STAG.

I am sure that the member will agree that road safety must be the priority of the agency to which the Parliament has given responsibility for those roads. I am happy to consider the impacts of signage where speed limits change—the member makes a fair observation about that—but it is important that, in constructing policy, we keep road safety to the fore.

A wide range of improvements are being progressed for the A9 north of Perth including: grade separation at Ballinluig and Bankfoot; a dual-carriageway extension at Crubenmore; provision of a three-lane section at Kincraig; junction improvements at Kindallachan and Inveralmond; an alignment improvement at Helmsdale; and overtaking opportunities at Moy, Slochd and Carrbridge. A number of safety-related studies are also under way.

I am happy to write to Mr Swinney in the next few days to give him the dates on which we expect work on the junctions at Bankfoot and Ballinluig to start. I understand the points that have been made about the entire route, which is why the strategic projects review will provide an objective analysis of it. That is in addition to the current study of the route between Perth and Pitlochry. We will ensure that that work is done timeously so that appropriate decisions can be taken as quickly as possible on that important route between the capital of the Highlands and Perth.

Transport Scotland carries out various forms of monitoring, ranging from monitoring of the number of cards that have been issued, their category of eligibility and the accuracy of the records that are held.

I would be happy to look into the cases that Karen Whitefield has mentioned and to ensure that Transport Scotland contacts her so  that they are properly considered. It would certainly be unacceptable for elderly people with concessionary passes to be bumped to the end of the queue in the circumstances that Karen Whitefield has described. Of course, she will be aware of the difference between elderly passengers who have the card and other fare-paying passengers who have pre-booked seats, but I will certainly take up the matter and ensure that Transport Scotland looks into matters that are causing considerable and understandable concern.

I would be happy to take up the case that Roseanna Cunningham has mentioned, which I hope she has brought to the attention of Transport Scotland. After question time, I will check whether she has done so. We have said time and time again that Transport Scotland is available to sort out problems. If she has raised the matter with it and the issue has not been solved, that is not good enough. I will check whether she has raised the matter with that body at all.

Scottish National Party members are an excitable lot today. I hope that they support the scheme, although it is clear that there are questions about the SNP's support for any policy that would help the elderly. I would be happy to consider the serious issues that Mr Stone has raised, which I can see are of no importance to the SNP whatever. We are discussing with the bus companies significant  matters to do with bus design and disabled access, particularly in relation to coaches that go on longer journeys. We will continue that work and see that the bus operators provide the types of bus that are needed to provide a better service for the constituents whom Mr Stone represents.

The procurement procedure has commenced for the new junction at Ballinluig and tenders will be invited later this month. Design is being pressed forward on the remaining projects. Additional dual carriageway is being provided at Ballinluig and at Crubenmore. Dualling elsewhere will be considered as part of the wider strategic transport projects review. All road improvements that are undertaken on the A9, whether they consist of junction upgrades, dualling or the provision of unambiguous overtaking opportunities on three-lane sections of road, are expected to provide safer travel. The A9 route improvement strategy study indicated that the case for dualling between Perth and Ballinluig needs to be addressed. A feasibility study of the difficult length between the Pass of Birnam and Ballinluig will be submitted to Transport Scotland at the end of this year, which will allow the wider evaluation to be addressed by the strategic transport projects review.

As I said in my original answer, there is no doubt that the road improvements that are being carried out, whether they consist of dualling or the provision of unambiguous—I stress that word—overtaking opportunities through the  use of three-lane sections of road, provide a safer road network. That is why we are progressing our work on the A9. We will continue to assess the arguments that are made in respect of that road in the strategic transport projects review.

I can assure Mr Fraser and other members that the road safety record is a factor when it comes to investment decisions about the A9, just as it is with decisions about any of the roads on our trunk road network. The accident prevention work that we do across the network ensures that roads' safety records are considered regularly. One of the most important aspects of the strategic transport projects review is the comparative journey times that are created by public transport on the one hand and the road network on the other. We will continue that work to ensure that an objective assessment is made against the criteria that we will use.

Maureen Macmillan makes a fair point about the northern stretch of the A9. It takes significantly longer to travel by train between Inverness and Thurso than it does to go by bus or private car. That argument is being considered as part of the corridor study in the strategic transport projects review. I can certainly give the member a breakdown of past and present investments on the A9 north of Inverness, on which we hope to make further progress.

A bypass for Maybole will be assessed against the contribution that it would make towards delivering the objectives that arise from the national transport strategy when it is considered as part of the strategic transport projects review.

It is always nice to be the star of a leaflet. That does not happen to me often—in fact, it has never happened. I take Mr Ingram's kind observations in that light.  I was grateful for the meeting with the campaigning group that Cathy Jamieson, as the constituency member, arranged. The meeting was a useful opportunity to learn more about the project. I take the points that have been made about the importance of the bypass. The straight and fairest answer that I can give today is that the strategic projects review will consider the bypass. That consideration will conclude by the summer of 2008 when the ministers of the day will have to make decisions, as ministers must do with respect to other bypass campaigns and road projects throughout Scotland.

The M80 will improve journey times, reliability and road safety along the corridor. It will also benefit residents of Cumbernauld as a result of better access between local roads and the M80, reduced disruption from traffic diverting into the town to avoid incidents on the trunk road and reduced traffic noise.

I understand the points that have been made in relation to the traffic projections and the environmental and pollution problems. The public local inquiry, which was held in October 2005, considered those matters in some detail and I have no doubt that submissions and representations were made on those matters at that time. The public local inquiry's findings were made public earlier in the summer. We supported those findings and the project will now proceed.

I am happy to write to Cathie Craigie on the park-and-ride facility that she mentions. I do not have the specific details of that contract with me today. I take her point about the noise impact. We would be happy to look into that, and I will share with her the technical advice that I receive on the matter.

It has been a useful debate that reflects the quite understandable concern about bus services that exists across the chamber and throughout Scotland. I acknowledge Pauline McNeill's leadership of the debate and the fact that members of all parties, except the one that colleagues have mentioned this evening, have taken an interest in the issue. I want to deal with the three central points in Pauline McNeill's motion: the arguments around greater accountability; the arguments around the need for a review of quality bus partnerships; and the need for better forms of regulation that she and other members articulated this evening. I acknowledge at the outset that bus services are an essential component of Scotland's public transport system. Buses are flexible, cost-effective, high-occupancy vehicles that provide sustainable mass transport. They assist us in our climate change objectives to reduce congestion and promote both economic growth and social inclusion by providing links that enable people to get to and from employment and to access shops, leisure facilities and public services. Paul Martin has argued before that we should pay more attention to planning our health care services and  schools estate in relation to transport infrastructure and services, and I assure members who share that concern that that work is on-going both in the national transport strategy and in discussions with my colleagues with responsibility for health and education. Buses are the principal, most frequently used and most widely available form of public transport, and I would like to pick up some of the points that have been made this evening, starting with Paul Martin's point about the competition authorities. As Mr Martin knows, the Competition Commission has considered the competitive nature of the bus market across Scotland on a number of occasions since 1985. Hitherto it has concluded that there is no monopoly, but members who examine closely the situation in their area will recognise that there are probably around eight companies, out of some 300 operators, that share the majority of the bus market across Scotland, so there must be some competition issues. That is one of the matters that I have sought to tease out in the consultation on the national transport strategy and in the specific questions that I have asked of members about the bus industry in their areas. The perception is that there is too much competition in the west of Scotland, driving down the quality of service and standards, and that has certainly come through in the representations, which I read carefully last night. I will address some of the other points made in the debate. I understand Rob Gibson's points about the far north. I take his point about journey times, because that is the issue that we are addressing in the context of the consultation. The bus route development grant has, and will have, an essential part to play in that, but we also need better management and better communication among public bodies and commercial companies, and we must demand responsive transport in both rural and urban Scotland. A number of members mentioned the concessionary travel scheme. If there are constituency or regional concerns about the scheme, it is important to ensure that Transport Scotland is aware of the issues and to take up the matter quickly and directly. We will do our level best to sort that out. Mary Mulligan raised an essential point about buses versus trains. It is a serious point, because in the context of the number of passengers involved and given the contrast between the amount of money that we put into the ScotRail franchise and Network Rail in Scotland and the amount invested in public bus services across the country, there is at least a debate to be had about the Scottish Executive's relative spending in those areas. I will reflect on that in the national transport strategy and in policy.  I thought that Patrick Harvie was a touch harsh on Glasgow taxi drivers, but he can take that up with them, I guess. However, he did make a fair point about passenger information, and other members also reflected on that. On the structure of the bus industry in Scotland and what we can do to address the legitimate regulatory issues that members have raised, it is important to recognise—as some members did—that passenger numbers have grown in recent years. Local bus services carried 465 million people in 2004-05, which was an increase of 2 per cent over the previous year. Passenger numbers have grown in the past six consecutive years. However, there are serious issues to address. The bus action plan that I am having prepared as part of the development of the national transport strategy will focus on specific bus issues. It will build strongly not only on tonight's debate but on the representations that members made in the consultation on the national transport strategy. I take seriously the points that members have drawn out on all three of the central themes that Pauline McNeill introduced at the start of the debate. In developing the action plan, informal discussions have been held with a range of key stakeholders. We will ensure that the points that arose are addressed when we produce the national transport strategy towards the end of the year. There is a real need to continue to drive up transport service standards if we are to achieve an aim that several members picked up on this evening, which is modal shift from cars to public transport. I also take the point that several members made that for many the car is not an option as their household does not have a car, so the issue does not apply to many people in both urban and rural Scotland. In that sense, bus services are an essential public investment. We must tackle that properly. As members have pointed out, the current bus regime is market led with light regulation by local and central Government. The underlying principle that was established all those years ago—that private bus companies are best suited to seek out and develop market opportunities while driving down costs—must be considered carefully. It is the right time to consider the effectiveness of that approach. Significant concerns remain about the provision of urban and rural services and the basic quality and reliability of transport planning, bus infrastructure and services, particularly in the west of Scotland, as has been highlighted. Concerns have also been expressed about safety, congestion, overcrowding and late running. As part of the regulatory regime, we must examine  our enforcement standards and consider what we can do to improve them. Therefore, we will review the policy, financial and regulatory framework within the bus action plan to examine the appropriateness of current legislation and the implementation of the regulatory regime by all the authorities concerned. Scottish ministers take seriously and will act upon Pauline McNeill's central three points of accountability, quality bus partnerships and the forms of regulation when we present the action plan later in the year.  Meeting closed at 18:13.

This devolved Government provides substantial resources, directly and indirectly, to support bus services in Scotland. The bus service operator grant is paid directly to bus operators to help to reduce fares. In effect, the grant reimburses operators for about 80 per cent of the excise duty that is paid on the diesel fuel consumed. The total that is paid out is about £55 million per year. In addition, the Executive makes resources available to transport authorities through a number of schemes that support the bus industry. Those include grant-aided expenditure for socially necessary services, the bus route development grant, the public transport fund and the rural transport fund.

I certainly respect the Evening Times campaign that Paul Martin brings to the attention of the Parliament today, which has the aim of ensuring that services meet the needs of people in the Glasgow area. As Mr Martin will know, we are currently consulting on the development of the national transport strategy, and specifically on the best mechanisms for the appropriate regulation of the bus industry, so that we achieve the outcomes that I am sure members broadly share in respect of the public money that is used for bus services. Mr Martin makes an important point with regard to local services. There are many good community transport and bus projects across the country, including in Glasgow. One of the challenges of policy development is to spread the principles of good practice more widely.

Mr Sheridan can make all the ideological arguments that he likes, but the important point is to ensure that the use of public money is targeted through a number of mechanisms to achieve different solutions for different parts of Scotland, where clear needs are identified and where different models of regulation are appropriate in meeting those needs. In that context, it is extremely important to ensure that we use the national transport strategy to consider the models that are available to us and that we examine carefully our experience of those elements of the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 that relate to the bus industry. That is what we have said we will do, and that is what we will do.

The Executive provides substantial resources through the local government finance settlement to enable transport authorities to support socially necessary bus services. The Executive monitors what authorities spend on supported services as part of its overall monitoring of bus issues. It is of course for local authorities to decide their own priorities and to provide the support that is needed in their areas.

We have a number of options through the mechanisms that I outlined in reply to Paul Martin and through our continuing work with local authorities—and indeed through the mechanisms that are available for all local authorities to use in providing such services. I  judge that it is for local authorities to make the most appropriate decisions, given their understanding of the services that are needed locally. I suspect that that is the way in which we would wish policy to develop.

Following the announcement of the preferred alignment last month, the project design team is now working towards publication of draft orders by the end of the year.

As I understand it, and as Mr Adam will be aware, Aberdeen City Council recently agreed to contribute 9.5 per cent towards the cost of the bypass element, to be spread over the 30 years of the capital project. The council is seeking further clarification of some details; we have yet to receive that request, but we will of course respond to it in due course. Those are important issues to get right, and we will take as much time as we need to, working with both Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council to ensure that we get them right.

As Mr Rumbles knows, we have announced the alignment of the road and the issue is now moving through the processes that I described in answer to Brian Adam some moments ago. We have no plans to revisit the alignment. As Mr Rumbles will also know, the alignment that has been chosen provides 20 per cent higher user benefits and will reduce congestion on the A90 south of Aberdeen and in Stonehaven. Those are solid arguments for the chosen route, on which we hope to continue to make progress through the process that I have outlined.

Yes—I am glad that we are coming to the summer recess.  As Mr Davidson knows all too well, the routes are not separate but are part of the entire AWPR. I do not accept in any way the premise of his question, as I have met a number of residents who will be affected by the process. Mr Davidson also knows that the consultation on the route has been extensive and lengthy and that the options were consulted on in their entirety. Indeed, the routes chosen include a number of elements that came from the public consultation. The consultation process is important, but it is also important to recognise that the likely local public inquiry on the route will rightly give many people an opportunity robustly to interrogate the process that has been undertaken.

As with every part of our capital transport programme, we endeavour to ensure that, as I told Parliament in my statement on the entire programme on 16 March, we set out not only the timescales for all our capital projects but the budget that attaches to those projects. The Aberdeen western peripheral route is no different from any other project.

We are taking a wide range of measures. The rural transport fund provides grants to local authorities to help them to introduce new and improved public transport services in rural areas. It also supports community transport projects in rural areas where no public transport services are available or where such services are very limited. In addition, the Scotland-wide free bus scheme for older and disabled people, which was introduced on 1 April 2006, provides benefits to residents in rural areas. Also, residents of peripheral and remote communities in the Highlands and Islands have had access to discounted air fares under the Executive's air discount scheme since 18 May.

The principle that Karen Whitefield has articulated is important in the context of transport policy generally and will certainly be raised during the consultation on the national transport strategy. Indeed, I am sure that she will want to comment on the strategy. I will be happy to consider the particular issue that she has highlighted and raise it with the promoter, which is Network Rail.

As STAG is an objective-led, multimodal transport appraisal framework, it does not need to be altered specifically to assess long-distance rail routes. Part of the STAG process involves the national policy context that applies to the particular transport issue being considered. That includes an assessment of sustainability. STAG was updated in November 2005 to incorporate strategic environmental assessment requirements. The national transport strategy consultation, which closes on 13 July, was the first Government publication to be accompanied by a strategic environmental assessment.

Mr Gibson should take some comfort from the fact that, properly, the strategic projects review on which we are embarking as part of the national transport strategy will allow for a corridor-by-corridor assessment throughout the country. That assessment will certainly include the areas in which he is interested. As part of the review, the relationship between road and rail will be carefully considered in the context of STAG, which allows that to happen.

The Haudagain roundabout traffic study, which was completed in August 2005, is now subject to the Scottish transport appraisal guidance process. The work is closely linked to the regeneration of Middlefield and local consultation will take place later in the summer. We will continue to work closely with the north-east Scotland transport partnership and Aberdeen City Council to complete this work.

I accept Richard Baker's point that this particular roundabout is causing congestion in Aberdeen. I understand that it runs at about 25 per cent over capacity at peak times. That clearly creates difficulties for the movement of traffic around the city. Working with NESTRANS and Aberdeen City Council, I will ensure that we make speedy  progress on the study and on the next stage of the STAG process—which I am sure that Mr Baker would expect us to undertake in relation to the expenditure of public money.

As I said in response to Richard Baker, we will consider the matter closely with Aberdeen City Council and NESTRANS, which is chaired by Councillor Alison McInnes from Aberdeenshire Council. We will ensure that, once we have completed the STAG process, those issues are addressed properly. I assure Mr Davidson and Parliament that the matters are under active consideration.

Since I announced a number of initiatives on the A82 following the completion of the A82 route action plan review, progress has been made on the more immediate schemes. Consultants have been commissioned to take forward the design of a new western bypass for Crianlarich. We are also in the process of appointing consultants for the pulpit rock improvement on Loch Lomondside. Orders have been issued to Scotland TranServ to review the sites identified by the route action plan relating to accident-prevention sites, the lay-by and picnic areas and local carriageway restrictions. A detailed report on the issues that implementation raises for each site should be submitted to Transport Scotland at the end of July.

I agree on the latter point. We endeavour to invest in cycleways, which is why this week we announced additional funding for Sustrans, the cycling promotion body, in relation to Loch Lomondside and other areas of Scotland. In relation to the process of the schemes themselves, we will certainly develop them as quickly as we can, given the road orders and other measures that have to be taken into account, as with all projects of this scale.

On the whole, the debate has been informative: there have been one or two flashes of rhetorical nonsense, but it has been useful for all that. I am grateful to Fergus Ewing for lodging the motion and have much sympathy with many of the arguments that have been made about the road and rail links. There has been strong emphasis on the road links rather than the rail links. With the exception of Rob Gibson and Eleanor Scott, most members' major focus was on the road links, although they may have mentioned rail. To some extent, that reflects the reality of constituents' views on the matter. We have to be clear about where and how road and rail interact. That is why the strategic projects review—about which we have talked in the Parliament on a number of occasions—will assess the differences and linkages between public transport and the road network on each individual route, corridor by corridor.

I need to make a bit of progress first. I welcome Fergus Ewing's plea to take the politics out of transport. I agree with him that that would be good to achieve but, when I read his press releases and cuttings, it seems to me that we have a way to go first. If he is saying that a strategic projects review on the back of a national transport strategy that, as John Swinney rightly pointed out, is open for consultation at the moment is the way to construct the best assessment of transport priorities throughout Scotland and for the links within the Highlands, I agree with him. However, any Government of any political persuasion must be clear that that process leads to clear choices between different priorities over a period of time. I noticed that, in The Press and Journal on 17 June, Mr Ewing said that the upgrade may take 10 or 20 years. I agree. It is laudable that he now accepts that we must be clear about the timescale over which the design, procurement, tendering and then delivery of projects need to be managed. It is good news that he takes that view.

I am grateful that Mr Ewing is adopting my approach to the matter, which is to have a national transport strategy. If the Scottish National Party is doing that as well, I applaud that. We are objectively considering the important priorities for transport links throughout Scotland on the basis of a robust analysis. That work is not only for the Government, but for the regional transport partnerships, such as the one in the Highlands that is chaired by Charlie King, or the one in north-east Scotland that is chaired by Alison McInnes. The regional transport partnerships will be important in sorting out priorities and dealing with transport needs. That is how we will have to proceed with the spending of transport moneys. I applaud all members who wish to be part of that process and to present objective arguments. I ask John Swinney and others to believe me when I say that the Government has plenty of other priorities. Mr Swinney's party, my party and other parties will have their own priorities. The transport portfolio could lose moneys to other priorities. I say to Mr Swinney and others that making the most objective case for transport spending will have to be done irrespective of who is Minister for Transport on any said future day in this Parliament. Members have made a number of fair points. However, despite what some have said, the Executive has invested a considerable amount in the areas that we are discussing and across the rest of Scotland. We have invested £22 million in the A82; £45 million in the A9; and £36 million in the A96. Mr Swinney mentioned the Ballinluig junction. I share his pleasure that that work is going ahead and I share his frustration over the length of time it has taken. I ask members to believe me—I do not spend my working day trying to block things. I spend an awful lot of my working day trying to develop things and to make them happen. I do that to the best of my ability. The A82 improvements that we announced recently—for Pulpit Rock and the bypass at Crianlarich—are important. I was grateful for the welcome that those measures received from local people and businesses alike. Work is going on in relation to the A9, the A82 and the A96—and not only in the context of the strategic projects review. Members will be familiar with the design work that I have commissioned on dualling between Inverness and Inverness airport. Such projects are important stages in the process and I hope that that will be acknowledged.

I do not want to be drawn into a different debate. Mr Stevenson raises a serious point. The financing of roads and other transport projects is a serious issue, but it is not an issue for this evening. I will simply observe that, whether Mr Stevenson's model or the PPP model is used, we are talking about 30 years' expenditure. Assessments are made on a 30-year basis. I think that that is the right way forward. Mr Lochhead spoke about Fochabers. I share his frustration about the time the project has taken and I will be happy—well, happy is the wrong word—to chase on what is happening. Mr Lochhead knows the process and that it is not easy and must be dealt with appropriately. It is not for ministers to tell the judicial system how to go about its business.  We are making significant progress on rail services. I take members' points about improvements, but would stress that the work on the rail utilisation study is about reducing the time required for journeys between Inverness and the south. I acknowledge that some of the challenges that Mr Ewing and other colleagues have described are borne of success. I agree with Eleanor Scott when she says that Inverness is growing and booming. That growth is very positive for the Highlands. Employment in Inverness has increased by 17 per cent since this Parliament came into being and the rate of population increase there is one of the highest in Scotland. Now and again, Mr Ewing does not accept such good points about the Highlands and Islands, but I am keen to make them. However, I accept that a transport infrastructure must be part of the future for the Highlands and Islands. That is what we are committed to delivering.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

Oh, come on.

No, I was saying that there is a bus link between the two stations, which is free.

I am sure that Mr Davidson will accept that there is a difference between 2004 prices and the outturn costs that we expect at the time of completion, and that he will want to recognise that in his comments.

I thank Margaret Jamieson and her colleagues for their work on behalf of Parliament in considering the bill. The point that she made about the assessor is important not only for the Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill Committee, but for those colleagues who are involved in scrutinising the two other bills for which that process will be used. We will look to her advice and that of her colleagues as to how effective that process is. As she observed, the committee considered a large amount of evidence, both written and oral, during the preliminary stage of the bill. I would like to thank those who took the time to provide written evidence and those who appeared before the committee as witnesses. The Executive strongly supports the general principles of the bill. The construction of a rail link direct to Glasgow airport is a key commitment in the partnership agreement. We therefore do not agree with Mr Monteith's position. I accept that his amendment was not chosen for debate; nevertheless, he gives vent to his views at some length in The Herald today. Mr Monteith might care to observe that, if we took the view that he takes on patronage, we would be unlikely to commit to any new rail investment. I draw the Parliament's attention to the Larkhall to Milngavie route, which is operating at some 35 per cent above the expected passenger number projections. That is a good outcome, not only for that line, but for the Scottish rail network as a whole. Scotland's position in the world and its attractiveness as a place to do business and as a tourist destination depend on our global connections. Through the air route development fund, we have worked successfully in partnership with Scotland's airports to develop and achieve more year-round air links. Glasgow in particular has seen the phenomenal growth of the Dubai link with Emirates airline. That flight has also provided connections onwards to Australasia, India and China. We need to build on that success, and a key factor in ensuring the continued growth of  those routes is to have the necessary supporting transport infrastructure. Rail links to airports are an important part of that support infrastructure; as cities and countries compete for business and for tourists, they are essential. Many cities that I have visited, in Europe and in other parts of the world, recognise that effective and affordable public transport links, especially heavy rail, are an essential part of being a competitive location, as I am sure members will agree. Glasgow—as is Scotland—is competing for international business both as a location and as a destination. To compete, we must improve. To improve, we must invest—and invest we will.

One of the interesting aspects of that matter is that BAA, the body that owns both Glasgow and Gatwick, has, as I understand it, been extremely critical of that decision. It wants to retain the Gatwick express because of how important it is to the airport. Although the express and the dedicated service may have been changed, there are trains running through Gatwick from Brighton and other locations, so it would not be fair to say—and I accept that Mr Monteith has not said this—that there are no train connections between Gatwick and the centre of London. The important point is that the airport operator, which is also the operator of Glasgow airport, was keen to see that express service retained. We can all draw our own observations from that. The Glasgow airport rail link has the potential to bring direct economic benefits to Glasgow, to Renfrewshire and to the Scottish economy. Margaret Jamieson mentioned a number of those benefits in her speech, and I would like to highlight three in particular. First, 675 jobs over three to four years, and support for up to 135,000ft 2 of office accommodation in Paisley town centre could flow from that strategic investment. Secondly, a further 650 jobs could be brought to Glasgow and Renfrewshire over the next 10 years. Thirdly, there is the potential for 52,500 additional United Kingdom and overseas visitors to Scotland, who would contribute upwards of £10 million in additional expenditure every year. There are clear economic gains.

Yes. That is a fair point. I take the point in relation not only to this rail link but to the ScotRail franchise throughout the country. Affordability is key and it is one of the issues that we are taking forward as part of the rail review, which Margaret Jamieson mentioned. I encourage members who have points that they would like to raise on the matter to make them in the context of the national transport strategy.

I will come on to deal with the Glasgow crossrail scheme shortly. On Mr Butler's point, it is fair to recognise that the on-going assessment of the project is exactly that: on-going. Work is still to be done as part of the full assessment of the project. It was explained to me some weeks ago at the cross-party group on Glasgow crossrail, which Bill Butler convenes, that some aspects of the crossrail scheme are important in the context of both Glasgow transport and—as he made clear that evening—the network. I fully acknowledge the point.

I agree with Mr Scott's points, although he might allow me to check the details carefully with those who can provide me with the figures. I certainly recognise the spirit of his comments. The Glasgow airport rail link will directly create jobs and stimulate economic development in relatively deprived areas in the west of Scotland. Those benefits can be directly quantified and forecast; other benefits and jobs to which we cannot yet point could be created. The rail link will certainly have a positive economic impact on Scotland. The committee's report highlights connections to the Scottish rail network as a whole as being central to its considerations. The committee states that it is concerned that the forecast patronage figures are low and that the airport rail link does not offer optimum connectivity—or connections, as I would rather say—for passengers. The committee has heard from several witnesses that a Glasgow crossrail scheme could—as Mr Butler has just suggested—provide for improved and  increased connections. I agree with the committee on the importance of wider connections. Ensuring that the rail link and the airports are linked into the wider transport network is a fundamental part of the scheme's successful delivery. As I said to the committee when we discussed the matter in Paisley several weeks ago, nothing in the Glasgow airport rail link proposals would inhibit a Glasgow crossrail project being taken forward in the future. On Margaret Jamieson's wider point, we will consider this as part of the rail utilisation study being undertaken by Network Rail—in other words, how we get the best out of the rail network across the country. She was right to draw attention to the work on rail that is being taken forward in support of the strategic projects review. That work will continue. The committee has asked me to provide it with further information at the next stage of the bill process on the crossrail proposals and other issues about connections. I give the assurance this afternoon that I will do so. The Glasgow airport rail link has a positive economic case and a developing and positive business case. As with all major projects, Transport Scotland will scrutinise the business case to ensure that the project remains on track and continues to represent value for money. The release of our funds is dependent on the continuing development of a robust business case. The Glasgow airport rail link will cost £160 million at 2004 prices, which translates to an expected outturn cost of between £170 million and £210 million, depending on the rate of inflation. The Executive will be the major funder of the project. Transport Scotland is in discussions with BAA on the contributions that it will make to the Glasgow and Edinburgh airport rail links. The discussions are on-going and, for reasons that are, I hope, obvious, I cannot say exactly at what stage they are. Parliament is aware of the potential takeover of BAA. That has, inevitably, slowed the process of negotiation. However, our commitment to both airport rail links is clear and we are working hard to maximise contributions and secure the best outcome for public funds. The quantified benefits of the rail link are important, but perhaps we should ask what we would lose if we were not to invest in the strategically important proposal. Would a multinational company choose not to locate in Scotland? Would an airline choose not to fly to and from Glasgow? Would we lose the passengers who would prefer to take the train rather than the car? We cannot answer with certainty, because many factors would have an impact on those choices but, as transport becomes an increasingly important element in the choices that companies and passengers make, it  increasingly affects economic growth in Glasgow and Scotland. We are committed to building the rail link, and the Parliament has the opportunity to take the next step. Therefore, I ask members to support Margaret Jamieson's motion to agree to the general principles of the Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill.

Yes. More than 400 new and improved rural public transport services have been introduced under the scheme. Those are mainly bus services, although some ferry services have also been supported. Related facilities such as bus shelters have also been provided in a number of areas.

As someone who lives in a part of rural and island Scotland, I know that it is not just about bus services. I always work hard with local authorities and other organisations that have a role to play in the provision of bus services, which we ensure through several funding formulas. Mr Ballance will appreciate that the funds to which he refers are not the only investment that we make in rural transport in peripheral areas and across local authority boundaries. Particular forms of finance are provided in those ways. He will know that, in Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders, there are 27 community transport projects that are assisted by such schemes. We would be happy to consider, through the national transport strategy, other aspects of the development of the policy. However, at this time, I am focused on ensuring  that we achieve the most useful forms of transport investment to make transport provision as accessible as it can be.

I agree that the provision of such services is important. The bus route development grant has a mechanism to allow local authorities to access additional funding to provide services that the commercial sector does not currently provide. I would be happy to consider any examples that Mr Morgan has of areas of Scotland where there are gaps in provision. I take his point that, for young people and an active workforce, we need the best possible range of public transport services. Indeed, that is why we have the bus route development grant.

The Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 gave transport authorities additional powers to improve bus services in Scotland. After a prolonged period of decline, bus passenger numbers have increased in each of the past six years. The total increase is in the order of 10 per cent. However, more needs to be done and, as part of the consultation on the development of the national transport strategy, I have asked my officials to carry out an overview of bus policy.

Kenneth Macintosh makes a number of important points. Discussions on the provision of primary care services and their accessibility for local people are taking place with my colleague the Minister for Health and Community Care. Kenneth Macintosh also made a point about particular services, which was rather like the point that Alasdair Morgan made earlier. We are using and encouraging the use of the bus route development grant scheme, which brings some £22 million into bus services. Local authorities are eligible to make applications to that scheme for particular areas that lack the kinds of service that Kenneth Macintosh described. His point about the importance of regional transport partnerships is good. We hope that, in the local and regional strategies that they will produce later this year, they will emphasise the importance of building bus services that meet local need.

I have some sympathy with Brian Monteith—although, as he has now left the chamber, my sympathy is reduced a little bit—but my colleague Margaret Curran tells me that the matters to which he referred are under active consideration across all parties. I hope that we can reach an accommodation that will help those who wish to do so to speak against or for bills that deal with such projects. As members have said, we want to build the entire line. The Executive absolutely agrees with that. We are committed to building the entire line. We are committed to the Borders railway project.

I am happy to associate myself with Euan Robson's remarks concerning all those who have played a role in the project. He and a number of other members have made a significant point about the wider environmental benefits that will come from providing good public transport options and enabling people to leave their cars at stations, so that they can use the new rail line when it is constructed. I will comment on a couple of points that were made in the debate. I assure David Davidson that I have no doubt the transport and works bill, when it comes before the Parliament, will make provision for adequate scrutiny of the issues that he has raised in relation to voluntary purchase. We have concluded that that is the best mechanism for advancing the matter. I agree with a number of members that the Borders and Midlothian need to be connected not just to Edinburgh but to the entire Scottish rail network. A key component of the business case is to ensure that the system works and is successful and that there is interaction between the line and the rest of the network. Derek Brownlee made the fair point that the growth in housing is happening now. I accept that, based only on my much more limited observations. I take Christine May's point about the robustness of the financial case and the need to ensure that we work constantly on that, using the mechanisms that are appropriate for all our capital transport projects. I agree with a variety of members who made the point this afternoon that this is a national project that works and has seamless connections with the rail network. It is important for us to get on with the work and to deliver the project now. I will be happy to share a congratulatory glass of wine with members—including, of course, Christine Grahame—after the debate.

We are indebted to the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee—to Tricia Marwick, its convener, and to Christine May, Gordon Jackson, Margaret Smith and Ted Brocklebank—for going through  what I think Ted Brocklebank said was a 4ft-high pile of evidence, procedural information and proceedings. I pay tribute to all the committee's members for their work, to those people who supported them in carrying it out and to the promoter, advisers and everyone else who was associated with the delivery of this part of the project. It is only the first stage in ensuring that we, the Parliament, deliver the Borders railway project. Our commitment to the project is £115 million at 2002 prices, and the railway will be delivered by the end of 2011. The Parliament is aware of the importance that I attach to all transport projects being delivered on time, on budget and in a way that represents value for money. The rail link to the Borders is no different in that respect. In March 2005, we set out four criteria to be attached to the release of Government funding for the project. The first was approval of the bill by the committee and, in due course, by the Parliament. Secondly, the assumptions underlying the business case must hold, which includes the achievement of patronage levels, the containment of costs, the active management of risks and the achievement of the housing growth projections that are achievable and are based on identified market demand. Thirdly, a clear, comprehensive risk management strategy must be delivered. Fourthly, the railway must be integrated with local bus services to maximise its impact in the Borders and Midlothian. Those criteria have not changed. We must be satisfied on all counts, and the development of the business case and the assumptions underlying the scheme are critical. If the business case is not robust, we will not release our funds—it is that simple. An appropriate review mechanism has been put in place for all the major projects, including the Borders railway. A quarterly review of projects has been established; each project is subject to a Scottish Executive gateway review, which examines projects at critical stages in their lifecycle to provide independent assurance that they can progress successfully to their next stage; and the business case for each project is re-examined each time there is a need for a commitment to significant expenditure. Parliament can be confident that public investment will be safeguarded by close monitoring of the project to ensure that value for money is maintained. I take the committee's point about voluntary purchase, but I am sure that it appreciates that we had to consider the wider implications on our capital rail investment programme. Many people are content to live close to railways and major infrastructure is constructed successfully without voluntary purchase schemes. However, I agree in principle that voluntary purchase should be  available, because it offers a fair way of addressing exceptional situations in which properties are affected by the construction or operation of railways. Following our investigations into the issues involved, we have found that funding voluntary purchase schemes for railway infrastructure requires legislative change. In our proposed public transport and works bill, which we will introduce to Parliament shortly, we intend to make provision that will enable Transport Scotland to fund voluntary purchase schemes for major rail infrastructure projects, should that be required. We must keep the aims of the bill in our sights.

I am happy to get back to the committee on any points to do with retrospection. It is certainly the intention to ensure that any live situation in relation to the scheme is dealt with actively. The future prosperity and growth of the Midlothian and Borders economies are closely tied with those of Edinburgh. We can choose to strengthen those links through this bill. The railway will provide for greater opportunities and access by increasing the travel choices available. It will offer a sustainable and genuine alternative to car travel for both Midlothian and Borders commuters. It will bring faster journeys to and from the capital, by bypassing the difficulty of travelling the A7 and the congestion and parking problems in Edinburgh. The bill will make a real difference to the people of Edinburgh, Midlothian and the Borders. It is now time to get going with building one of our key transport commitments. I ask the Parliament to support the motion.

I am happy to take this opportunity to say that there will be a voluntary purchase scheme. We have to sort out the details, but I will deal with that in my speech.

I would like to finish this point and to answer Tricia Marwick's central question. There are factors outwith the scope of individual projects that can delay them and affect the whole of the rail industry. For example, the start of the construction of the Larkhall to Milngavie line came within six weeks of the 10-year period expiring. That happened because of a number of factors  that were outwith the direct responsibility of the scheme's promoters, including the restructuring of the rail industry and revised safety standards following the Hatfield train derailment. The second fundamental reason was that a new regime introduced by the rail regulator meant that more time was needed to resolve some issues related to the scheme. The issue is not so much a delay in the context of a particular project but the need to deal with wider rail issues that might have implications for such a project.

I accept that, as Karen Gillon says, aspects of overall rail policy have changed. We want to take a reasonable step to avoid the potential for the scheme to be at risk over its lifetime because of circumstances that arise that have a direct impact on the project and that could result in time for compulsory purchase and development expiring. We recognise the arguments put forward by the committee; our amendment is a reasonable and practical compromise. Scottish ministers will only extend the time available if it is the right thing to do for a particular project.

No. I will conclude on this point. The period of extension can be much less than five years. There is a precedent for this solution, as it has already been used in the Edinburgh tram bills. The possibility of an extension of up to five years means that amendment 3 is required to increase the time to develop the land to 10 years to ensure that the bill remains technically correct. The Executive's amendments 2 and 3 balance the needs of those affected by the railway with the recognition that large-scale construction projects can be subject to delay. In the rail industry in particular, that can be due to factors that are external to the project.

It is unfortunate that Christine Grahame, Ted Brocklebank and Chris Ballance did not listen to the argument, which is that my proposals are about the external factors that can influence any rail scheme in any part of Scotland. This is not just about the Waverley project; it is about the external factors that can influence any such project, whether that is a Hatfield-style situation or a change in a regulatory aspect that affects the whole rail industry. I ask the members to whom I referred to bear that in mind. I seek to achieve consistency in how we move forward all of our capital rail projects and ensure that the measures that I seek are in place. My only other point is that I seem to remember that Christine Grahame moved an amendment at consideration stage to get rid of the promoter, so it is a bit much to get a lecture from her about delay.

I thought that Christine Grahame made a bit of a cheap shot by attacking someone who is sitting in the public gallery and therefore cannot answer back. She was also factually wrong on that point. Ian Jenkins is a good friend of mine. Christine Grahame, you're no Ian Jenkins. The intention behind Tricia Marwick's group 2 amendments is to tidy the bill as amended at committee stage and can be considered as technical amendments. As they will make the bill work, we very much support them. We do not support the amendments in the name of Bristow Muldoon, about which I have two comments. After its earlier consideration of the bill, the committee wanted to ensure that a station be instated at Stow on social inclusion grounds. The committee concluded that the whole railway was  justified not solely by the potential economic benefits but for reasons of social inclusion, which is a key Scottish Executive policy objective. I appreciate Bristow Muldoon's point and I remain concerned about the business case implications of a station at Stow. Those implications will therefore be properly and thoroughly tested by Transport Scotland so that a railway that works and presents value for money will be delivered. I have stated consistently that funding for any additional station on the railway would have to be found from the allocated budget or separately by the promoter. That remains the case and, as I said earlier, the Executive's contribution will be capped at £115 million at 2002 prices. On that basis, I ask Bristow Muldoon to withdraw amendment 19.

Some of Tricia Marwick's arguments are inherently reasonable, and I shall try to provide her with the explanation for which she asks. The committee amended the bill at consideration stage to reduce the time limit for the power to compulsorily acquire land required for the scheme. The time limit for the exercise of compulsory purchase powers was reduced from seven years to five years after the date of royal assent, as she indicated. The committee also made a consequential amendment to limit the authority to develop land that is given by the bill to development begun within eight years of royal assent. The committee was of the view that five years should be sufficient time to finalise the required land take and to make the necessary arrangements for acquisition, with eight years being sufficient time to begin development. I absolutely agree in principle, but experience shows us that, in practice, those time limits could be too inflexible, because we must take into account the wider implications for the rail industry. Our priority is to deliver all of our major rail projects on time and within budget, and the Waverley project is no different. Amendment 2 has been lodged to ensure that, for good governance reasons, the time in which to acquire land can be extended by up to five years, although an extension could be much less than that. Amendment 3, in consequence, provides that the authority to develop land that is given by the bill is for 10 years.

I suspect that Bristow Muldoon and I share a passion not only for railways, but for golf. At times this afternoon, I would rather have been debating golf than railways. However, we are where we are. I understand Mr Muldoon's intentions for amendment 5 and his commitment to the railway infrastructure throughout Scotland and the Waverley line in particular. He and I want the same outcome—that we build and operate a rail line between Edinburgh and Tweedbank—but the Executive does not support amendment 5 and I hope that I can provide sufficient reassurance to avoid division. The partnership agreement commitment is to support the building of the whole of the Borders railway. We have committed £115 million in 2002 prices—that is, an anticipated cost outturn of £155 million—to the project as a whole, not in part. The budget for the Borders rail project has been set and our contribution will remain capped, but colleagues want to know about the contributions from other project sponsors. They amount to £19 million at 2002 prices. Scottish Borders Council, Midlothian Council and the City of Edinburgh Council are contributing £11.3 million, while developer contributions from Scottish Enterprise Borders, Shawfair Developments Ltd and the Currie Road developments amount to £7.6 million. We will work with the project sponsors to manage the project effectively and procure the entire project in a way that ensures value for money and secures maximum benefit and a successful project. I agree with the committee's conclusion that the whole railway is justified, not solely on economic benefit grounds but on the grounds of social inclusion—which is a key Scottish Executive policy objective—and improving accessibility to the Borders. The Parliament has asked, fairly, that the business case be robust. I reiterate an often-made point: for Government funds to be released, the business case must continue to be robust, be  positive and represent value for money. Transport Scotland will continue to test that business case and the assumptions that underpin it. As part of its broader, Scotland-wide rail responsibilities, Transport Scotland will also ensure that the assumptions about performance and the timetabling of services take account of the need to integrate successfully with the overall rail network. It is a matter of how we manage the process and the delivery of the whole railway on time, within budget and for the benefit of the Borders, Midlothian and Edinburgh. We will work with the promoter to manage the project effectively and to procure it in a way that ensures value for money and secures benefits that will deliver a railway that works. Turning specifically to amendment 5, I wish once again to state the importance of the project passing the four key tests that the Government agreed in supporting the Waverley line. The most important of those tests is that the assumptions underlying the business case must hold, including those on the achievement of patronage levels, the containment of costs, the active management of risks and the housing growth projections that are achievable and based on identified market demand. We must be satisfied on all those counts. The development of the business case and the assumptions underlying the scheme are critical. If the business case is not robust, we will not release funds. Given those checks and balances and the consistent financial scrutiny that is in place, I ask Bristow Muldoon to withdraw amendment 5.

That is an operational matter for CalMac. However, I understand that the company's new charging system for coaches involves no charge for individual coach passengers.

I understand that the main coach operators were consulted prior to the implementation of the measure by Caledonian MacBrayne. The new coach pricing arrangements will standardise revenue from car deck space. The process simplifies the booking procedure for coach operators and, indeed, for Caledonian MacBrayne. Therefore, it should be easier for coach operators to plan their routes and tours and provide savings over the longer term.

We hope to identify tender lists and to issue invitations to tender for both the tendering exercises shortly. In parallel, good progress is being made with the restructuring of Caledonian MacBrayne to enable the tendering to proceed.

Mr Morrison makes a persuasive argument, and I would be delighted to meet him and his colleagues to take those matters forward. As he knows, the consultation on the specification has concluded. Many comments were submitted, including some relating to the particular issue that Mr Morrison is highlighting now. We will make progress on the matter when we produce the final specification. A meeting of the kind that Mr Morrison proposes would be useful in that regard.

I am not quite clear about what Mr Mather is arguing for. If he is arguing for a comparative breakdown in the costs and subsidies applying to each individual route, he must also, by definition, be moving towards the territory of arguing for the unbundling of the west coast services. I had thought that that was not the Scottish National Party's position. We all know the dangers of such an approach. Mr Mather will need to be cautious. Indeed, he might wish to explain his position to people on the west coast, who have a strong understanding of why the Government listened to the persuasive argument in favour of the complete bundle and argued that case to Europe, ensuring that that is what now applies.

No, and no. I will not take one step back from ensuring a very positive tendering exercise. If commercial organisations or businesses decide that they do not wish to be part of the exercise as it moves forward, that is a matter for them. My officials met representatives of Western Ferries recently to consider the issue; lessons can of course be learned on both sides, not just on the side of Government. Furthermore, Audit Scotland has reported on the matter. The processes are being, and will continue to be, properly scrutinised. The Parliament also holds ministers to account for that. To suggest, as Mr Davidson does, that no one has faith in the process might reflect the position of the Conservatives, but it is not the position of anyone else.

The Scottish Executive will not underwrite any funding gap associated with the proposed Edinburgh tram network. I can confirm that, as I stated to Parliament on 16 March, we have agreed to contribute £375 million plus inflation. I expect that to be a contribution of £450 million to £500 million towards the capital cost of the tramline from Ocean Terminal to Edinburgh airport. Our commitment to funding is dependent on the production of a robust final business case by the City of Edinburgh Council.

I hope that Margo MacDonald accepts that I have sought to be entirely consistent in my desire to ensure that all our capital transport projects hit their budgets and timescales and that we deliver what we agreed with the promoters. Parliament has scrutinised that in its consideration of private bills. I understand the important arguments that have been made about Granton by Margo MacDonald and others in Parliament and elsewhere. However, we must achieve the project that the Parliament has committed to achieving. There is nothing to prevent future consideration of further stages of a tram network in the city.

At national level, this devolved Government provides substantial resources to support bus services. In particular, we will pay some £55 million this year directly to bus operators in Scotland through the bus service operator grant. We also resource local government to support bus services. This year, Glasgow's allocation through the local government settlement to support local bus services is over £3 million. The bus regime frees up bus operators to use their commercial judgment in planning bus services and, for Glasgow, it imposes a duty on Strathclyde Partnership for Transport to ensure that bus services meet local needs.

I understand Paul Martin's concerns with regard to the withdrawal of services, particularly at times that might loosely be described as off-peak but which are pretty important to people in various parts of the area that he represents. The bus route development grant scheme is investing in Glasgow and other areas of Scotland. A grant of £133,000 has been awarded to SPT for night services from Glasgow city centre to a number of areas. However, I understand Mr Martin's concerns and the importance of examining the regulatory regime to see what improvements we could make under the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001, which introduced the quality contracts and quality partnerships that are available in local areas.

On 19 April, I announced a number of initiatives on the A82 following the completion of the A82 route action plan review. The plan proposes £90 million of improvement works from Tarbet to Fort William over the next 10 years, and Transport Scotland is taking forward the most pressing works.

I would be happy to ensure that Transport Scotland undertakes to meet Jackie Baillie to discuss that roundabout and to ensure that remedial work is considered closely to solve the problems that she has identified. I assure her that the A82 overall is an important part of the strategic projects review, which will flow from the national transport strategy. There is now an opportunity, through that consultation, to make the appropriate arguments for longer-term measures that would be beneficial to the route that she describes.

The recent publication of "Changing Our Ways: Scotland's Climate Change Programme" demonstrates the commitment of the Scottish ministers to tackling emissions and climate change and to developing further carbon savings. Evidence suggests that road traffic levels are still rising. We are considering the 2021 target, its underpinning environmental and economic aims and the best way to achieve them as part of the consultation on the development of the national transport strategy, which was launched on 20 April 2006.

I am not responsible for John Prescott. That is probably a good thing for us both. A consultation is taking place on the national transport strategy, so it is unfair and incorrect of Mr Harvie to say that any target has been abandoned. The purpose of the national transport strategy consultation is to assess those matters. I am sure that Mr Harvie will want to contribute to the consultation. The issue is serious and I recognise the seriousness of the points that he raises. I am sure that he also recognises the work that we are doing on the target to have biofuels constitute 5 per cent of the fuels on sale on garage forecourts by 2010. If we can achieve that target—I hope that we can not only achieve it but do considerably better—it would be equivalent to saving a million tonnes of carbon emissions produced by road transport. We cannot ignore the realities of our transport system and the contribution that transport makes to emissions. That is why we must place those matters in the context of the overall climate change programme.

I am happy to investigate specific issues that members have in relation to the methodology that we have adopted on traffic counting, the evidence that is necessary to inform investment in our roads infrastructure and the comparators that we use when we consider public transport improvements.

I am sure that Mr Johnstone accepts that we are improving the road network. It is because of this devolved Government and this coalition Government's work that we are investing solidly in local road improvements—in collaboration with local government—and in the trunk road network. I am sure that Mr Johnstone would also want to be fair and reflect that transport has an environmental consequence. We need to consider carefully the consequences, not necessarily for Mr Johnstone or me, but for future generations. That is an important factor. The national transport strategy, which is being taken forward in a national consultation, must be put in the context of the climate change programme that I mentioned.

I thank Richard Baker for bringing the matter forward. I will be happy to bring to the attention of my colleague Margaret Curran his keenness to serve on private bill committees, which she will note with great interest. I am sure that serving on a private bill committee would also help him with his sleep deprivation problems. I was grateful for David Davidson's appeal to the Scottish National Party to show a degree of financial responsibility and I am sure that all members were interested to hear that Maureen Watt wants Government to spend more money on public relations—I presume in the pages of the Daily Record . We are committed to delivering a more accessible transport network in Scotland and we are willing to consider proposals to enhance  infrastructure services throughout the country. As Richard Baker fairly acknowledged, we must balance the needs of different areas and communities and assess the extent to which transport proposals represent value for money in the allocation of available funds. It is important that decisions on proposals such as the Aberdeen crossrail are made in the light of the rail strategy that is being developed, the strategic projects review, which has started—I assure Nanette Milne that the crossrail proposal is part of the review—and the national transport strategy, which will be concluded later this year. I am grateful to members for giving me the opportunity to comment on the Aberdeen western peripheral route, which was inevitably going to be mentioned in the debate. I am particularly grateful to the Greens for placing so firmly on the record their utter opposition to the scheme, despite the fact that it is the number 1 priority of NESTRANS, the local authorities concerned and many local people, including a great part of the business community. The Greens' strong opposition to the scheme is firmly on the record. I suspect that it is inevitable that there will be a local public inquiry into proposals for an Aberdeen bypass, which will correctly scrutinise the decision-making process and the robustness of the business case. It will be important that members and organisations that support the scheme make the case at the inquiry. Conspiracy theorists—it is disappointing to note that they include a number of members of Parliament—and political opponents can look forward to that opportunity to put up or shut up. I have nothing but the utmost sympathy for individuals who might lose their homes as a result of the route that has been identified. Nineteen homes, along 47km of the AWPR, will be removed, which is a considerably better outcome for a road that must go somewhere, as many people in the north-east have observed. I quote from—

Let me finish the point. I thought that I had dealt with the Greens rather firmly. An editorial in the Aberdeen Evening Express on 15 May said: "The city bypass, combined with the dualling of the A90 north will create what this area needs—a modern, efficient road system. One that will see traffic flowing freely from north to south. Everyone will benefit from that." The editorial also acknowledged the importance of the road in the context of the entire transport system of the north-east. Richard Baker and other members made that point.  Some people—a vocal, articulate minority—oppose the Aberdeen bypass.

I will do that once I have dealt with the issue that members raised—one of them was the member who raised the point of order. I know that she does not want to hear this, but she will just have to sit there and take it. Road Sense is a campaign body that should admit that its real purpose is to oppose the road. Where was it when the First Minister, Jack McConnell, and the then minister with responsibility for transport, Lewis Macdonald, announced early in 2003 that we would build the road? That was the time to make its case, but it was not there. I will deal with some of the issues that have been raised about the crossrail project, which, as I and several members have said, is part of the proposals for the overall transport system in the north-east. Those proposals have been developed over several years and a number of processes have been gone through. NESTRANS took over development of the project and promotes the scheme as part of its modern transport system, which includes the western peripheral route. NESTRANS has developed both schemes as part of an integrated package of measures to improve the economy, accessibility and environment of the region. Two Scottish transport appraisal guidance reports have now been produced and have built an approach that splits the proposals into the short, medium and long term. In June 2005, just one month after receiving the STAG 1 report, we awarded £400,000 to NESTRANS for the development of detailed feasibility work, which is being done properly. NESTRANS recently submitted the first of three reports as part of that detailed work. To deal in part with Nanette Milne's point about the strategic projects review, I can say that the estimates from that, which we received in recent weeks, are that the capital cost to Government for delivery of the medium-term proposal is in the order of £40 million to £90 million, with additional operating costs to the franchise operator of about £3.2 million. For the long term, the capital costs are estimated to be £140 million to £215 million, with additional annual operating costs of £6.5 million to £8 million. That serves to show the need for a proper and full assessment of the business case. The arguments  on that have been put by members this evening. Those arguments will be revisited as part of the STAG process but, for Government investment purposes, it is important that, as with all capital transport projects, a positive business case is made. On a wider point, we are committed to the Mossend to Elgin rail freight enhancement scheme, which Nora Radcliffe and others mentioned and which will be wholly funded from our transport funds. The project is already under way—a construction contract has been awarded to Jarvis Rail and is progressing to schedule—and will transfer 12.3 million vehicle kilometres per year from road to rail. That is a substantial improvement for north-east businesses and for the environment. The project goes hand in hand with a number of station investment proposals, and improvements that are being made throughout the network. Mike Rumbles and David Davidson mentioned Aberdeenshire Council's proposals for Laurencekirk station and there are several other investments.  I assure members that Transport Scotland and my officials are working on the crossrail project, in conjunction with the regional transport partnership, NESTRANS, to ensure a thorough assessment of the associated benefits, costs and risks for consideration as part of the strategic projects review. They will continue to do that and we will ensure that we deliver a range of important projects for the north-east.  Meeting closed at 18:14.

Gosh. Please do.

We are preparing detailed proposals for the examination and we intend to inform Parliament about the matter next week.

I assume that, in her final question, Tricia Marwick was referring to the Forth road bridge. I cannot give her that assurance, nor will I. We have to ask some fundamental questions about congestion on and around the Forth bridge and I hope that Tricia Marwick and her colleagues will do so too. One of the questions that we need to ask is how it is good for the Scottish economy if the tolls are removed and congestion increases. I am sure that that is one of the issues on which she and many others will want to comment.

Yes, I do. I was very encouraged by the speech that the new Secretary of State for Transport made in London this week. It made an important contribution to this central debate on how we value and charge for space across the trunk road network in the UK. I believe that the matter should be taken forward on a UK-wide basis. However, I must add two important caveats. First, there must be clear and demonstrable improvements in public transport services and people must be able to use those services. Secondly, if we take forward such a policy, the user of the road—whether that is the freight industry or Mr Davidson or me using our motor cars—must see a consequential reduction in other forms of taxation. Those are issues that the Department for Transport is considering at the moment.

Where existing local concessionary schemes offer additional transport modes such as rail, those remain the responsibility of the local authority. The Executive has agreed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities a fair split of resources, to ensure that those local authorities continue to be resourced for concessionary travel on modes other than bus. There are currently no plans to introduce national concessionary rail travel.

As I said, the national scheme that we have introduced relates to bus and is seen as a tremendous improvement throughout Scotland. I appreciate that specific issues may arise for the council in Cathy Peattie's constituency, but I am sure that she is pursuing those with considerable vigour in that part of the world.

The Executive is taking forward several transport improvements in the northern corridor of North Lanarkshire, including the upgrading of the A80 trunk road between Stepps and Haggs.

We liaise with Strathclyde Partnership for Transport, which is the new partnership in the west, on a range of transport issues, including those that have been raised in Parliament this afternoon. The Minister for Health and Community Care and I are taking forward a series of discussions on health facilities, including on the importance of ensuring that access to primary care facilities by public transport is available. The issue is particularly relevant when we are launching a consultation on the future of the national transport strategy.

Consideration of NHS Lanarkshire's proposals will be a matter for my colleague, the Minister for Health and Community Care. I would be happy to bring this exchange to his attention. I am very aware of the transport implications of the potential changes for many people in the areas that we are discussing. The issues are important to many local people. I can only repeat that I will be happy to discuss with the Minister for Health and Community Care the transport component of the equation.

I acknowledge Mary Mulligan's continued work in pursuing and pushing that rail project, as is quite appropriate. I assure her that we are working hard with the promoters of the  scheme, Network Rail, to ensure that the project meets the timescales that we badly want it to meet. We will continue to do that. I assure her that I will keep her up to date with progress.

The Scottish Executive is working with local authorities to develop an electronic application process for the entitlement card, which will allow cards to be produced within three working days of receipt of data.

I will be happy to look into the problems to which Scott Barrie refers. This morning, I contacted Transport Scotland about the range of issues that have been raised. I know that four MSPs have been in touch directly with Transport Scotland about issues relating to the availability of cards. I understand that we are currently able to turn around applications within 10 working days of receipt, that 750,000 cards were issued on time and that 841,007 cards have been issued to date. I am happy to take up any specific issues that Scott Barrie would like to raise, to see whether we can sort them out as quickly as possible.

Aviation makes a significant contribution to growing Scotland's economy. The route development fund in particular promotes a greater range of direct connections. Projections suggest that, in order to maximise the benefits, a second runway may become necessary between 2020 and 2030.

I certainly accept the premise of Mr Pringle's argument that we need to consider the wider arguments and issues relating to aviation in Scotland, as we will do through the consultation on the national transport strategy. On every working day, there are 140 or more direct flights between Scotland and London's airports. We must consider whether there would be greater environmental benefit and improvements in  journey times through promoting and encouraging, along with the United Kingdom Government, a fast rail link to the south. That issue is under active consideration. As Mr Pringle no doubt knows, Rod Eddington, the former boss of British Airways, was commissioned by the UK Government to consider that issue and others.

I am not aware that there is a problem in travel between Glasgow's airports. If Ms Fabiani alludes to Glasgow airport and Glasgow Prestwick airport, there are rail links. While we can always look at improvements with the west of Scotland transport partnership and the First ScotRail franchise, there is significant co-ordination between those services at this time. On travel between Glasgow airport and Edinburgh airport, one of the important issues around the Glasgow crossrail project is the ability to connect Glasgow airport to the rail network in a way that would allow passengers and travellers generally to travel right across Scotland, potentially without having to change trains. That seems to me to be a significant advantage of that project.

The proposals for that will be reported on as soon as possible.

I certainly accept that all those factors need to be taken into account, and they need to be factual. It is important that factual evidence supporting the concerns to which Scott Barrie refers is considered. I give him the assurance that it will be considered in the context of the study that we will undertake.

I would be very happy to deal with the stupidity of the Scottish National Party, which of course has two different policy positions depending on which day it is. The SNP had one policy position before Christmas, according to which it was in favour of tolls; after Christmas, the SNP adopted a policy position that said that it was against tolls. Which is it?

As we announced on 1 March, we are taking forward the work that needs to be done in relation to the potential need for a second crossing. That includes an assessment of the technical requirements and the continuing assessment of the current condition of the Forth road bridge. I assure Mr Davidson that we will bring those matters back to the Parliament so that members can be kept up to date with an extremely important strategic issue for Scotland.

In line with our partnership commitment, we continue to support the development of the feasibility work for the Aberdeen crossrail scheme. My officials recently met the north-east Scotland transport partnership, which is responsible for delivery of the study, to discuss progress and the next steps. All the parties involved are committed to ensuring that the feasibility work is completed by the end of 2006.

I have no doubt that NESTRANS and local members such as Richard Baker will want to make such a submission to the national transport strategy. Richard Baker will know that the strategic projects review provides the opportunity to consider carefully that kind of project against many others for which there will be competing demands.

We will continue to core fund Cycling Scotland to promote cycling as a healthy, sustainable and environmentally friendly mode of transport. We will maintain cycling, walking and safer streets funding to local authorities. Earlier this month, we published guidance on regional transport strategies. The guiding principles include the provision and promotion of sustainable transport choices and the facilitation of access to jobs.

I am grateful to Mr Pringle for his helpful question. He is right—we attach considerable importance to investments in cycling. I am pleased to say that between 2005 and 2006, local authority funding has risen from £8.65 million  to £9.9 million. In addition, our funding for Cycling Scotland is around £400,000 in the current financial year. Sustrans funding for the national cycle network, to which Mr Pringle has paid particular attention and on which he has written me many letters, has risen from £1.5 million in 2002-03 to £2 million in the current financial year. I was surprised by the piece that he mentions, particularly as I received a letter from the chief executive of Sustrans that entirely refuted the arguments.

We are committed to improving public transport in Glasgow in line with the bid for the Commonwealth games. The national transport strategy and the strategic projects review will consider projects that improve public transport in Glasgow, including the rail network.

I am grateful to Paul Martin for raising this issue, and I am grateful to his  colleague, Bill Butler, for chairing last night's meeting of the cross-party group on Glasgow crossrail. I attended the meeting and was interested to hear the proposals and how they are developing. The case is compelling, and there are strong strategic and local arguments. As Mr Martin knows, the project will have to proceed through an appropriate process involving the strategic projects review. However, I give him the undertaking that I will continue to look closely at the project and see what we can do to bring it to fruition.

I accept that the project stands on its own merits. It is not just a local project for Glasgow: it has potentially significant advantages for our strategic rail network, not least because of the potential for the new Glasgow airport rail link—on which I know Mr Harvie is particularly keen—to connect to the rest of the Scottish rail network. That appears to be one reason why it is an important project to consider further.

No, I cannot tell Sandra White that we will commit to a project—whatever it might be—in the strategic projects review. That would defeat the purpose of having the review. We will take it through its normal course, which I am sure Sandra White agrees is the right approach for any Government to take. The proposals that are being made and the development of the ideas behind the project are important, and we need to make further progress on them.

Construction for the Waverley station infrastructure works project was on site in January and will be complete, on time and within budget, in  December 2007. The City of Edinburgh Council is conducting a feasibility study to examine the wider options for development at Haymarket station. That study is due to be complete in spring 2007. In the meantime, Transport Scotland, First ScotRail and Network Rail are establishing which additional facilities should be delivered at Haymarket during 2006 and are considering the alleviation of platform overcrowding, the improvement of waiting facilities and the provision of improved surfaces for visually impaired passengers.

I accept the drive that Sarah Boyack brings to the issue. I am happy to assure her that I will discuss with Malcolm Reid, the chief executive of Transport Scotland, how best to take forward the transport improvements at Waverley station, and I assure her that I will look constantly and consistently at how we can best achieve that. I share her frustration about Haymarket railway station. We have an opportunity to provide a shining example of a good transport interchange in Edinburgh between trams, heavy rail and the bus services that connect at Haymarket. Haymarket appears to be an important transport interchange not only for Edinburgh but, strategically, for Scotland, because there is potential for many people to use it. I will do what I can to push the matter that Sarah Boyack raises.

When the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line opens, freight services that  currently take space from passenger services will be removed from the Forth rail bridge, which will bring improvements. I would be happy to share the details with Parliament. I will look into Alasdair Morgan's point on signalling. I cannot answer his question here and now, but I will be happy to write to him.

I last met members and officers of FETA on 2 November 2005. Officials from my department hold regular discussions with the authority.

Christine May raises an important and serious question about how we can ensure that we deliver important regional and strategic networks and links. As she knows, the bridges review—dare I mention it—concluded that FETA was the most appropriate body to maintain the existing Forth road bridge. However, ministers have an open mind about the longer term, when we will have to consider whether we need a second crossing. If one is needed, we will have to consider the most appropriate body to manage it.

The A8000 project is under way, as is obvious to anyone who passes the area—and I am sure that Tricia Marwick is one of them. We will continue our discussions with the FETA board on the funding arrangements. I am glad that Tricia Marwick pointed out that my colleagues are consistent, unlike her own.

I begin by restating the three policy findings of the bridges review. I do not mind if MSPs disagree with them, but rigorous assessment is important and members must substantiate, in terms of more than just equity, why they think that the findings are wrong. The first finding was that, where construction of a bridge has not been paid for, that remains a compelling reason to maintain tolls unless there are significant reasons for doing otherwise. The second finding was that, where construction costs have been met, maintenance of the bridge alone is not a compelling reason to keep tolls. The third finding was that it is justifiable and necessary to use tolls to address demand even where that was not the original purpose of the tolling regime. If members have difficulties with those three policy objectives, which we set out not just in phase 2 but in phase 1 as well, they should come forward with them during the forthcoming exercise. However, they should do so on the basis of a rigorous assessment of the argument and not just to score political points.

I appreciate the points that members from all parties made about congestion. It is clear that most members disagree with the contention that we need to use demand management mechanisms to address congestion. A number of members said that we should not use demand management mechanisms—that is, tolling—on the Forth road bridge. If those members do not believe me about the modelling—it is clear that they do not—they should go and look at the evidence. If they have better evidence, they should produce it. However, they should not believe that, if we remove tolls from the Forth road bridge, everything will be better and there will be less congestion.  The point has to be addressed with evidence and with rigour. I accept that it is a live issue but, regardless of their political perspective, members have an obligation as parliamentarians to produce evidence rather than just rhetoric. I encourage members to do that.

I want to deal with the points that were made in the debate. Ms Robison should make an argument that is based on fact rather than on rhetoric. Murdo Fraser made three points from a particularly inconsistent position. The Tories appreciate and want tolling. That is their position. The difference between us and the Tories is that they want to use the private sector to implement tolling. That is shown in the Tories' record on the Skye bridge and bridges in England. There, tolls were set not by Government but by the private sector. I am interested to hear that the Tories oppose an economic assessment. Murdo Fraser often stands up in the Parliament and says that we are not doing enough economic analysis of the Scottish economy.

Murdo Fraser says that we are wasting taxpayers' money, but what is the main argument of the Confederation of British Industry and other business organisations? They argue that we should tackle congestion and examine the pinchpoints in our strategic transport network. I think that investing in doing so represents a good investment in the country's future, but Murdo Fraser is against that. I hope that members will continue to point that out when we discuss the matter. I cannot understand the SNP's position on the issue. Until Christmas, the SNP supported tolls. Andrew Arbuckle and a number of my Labour colleagues were right about that.

SNP members—particularly Bruce Crawford—were in favour of tolls. I will finish with three quotations from SNP material:  "the SNP have made their position clear from the beginning - a pound's enough." "The SNP is campaigning for a freeze in the level of tolls on the Forth road bridge at £1." "The SNP says loud and clear £1 is enough." I will not take any lessons about consistency from the SNP. Its position is utterly inconsistent.

The SNP and the Tories have had two separate opportunities during the bridges review to call for the abolition of tolls over the Forth and the Tay. They did not take them.

That is a fact.  On 1 March, I announced the outcome of the tolled bridges review, which was a commitment in our partnership agreement. On 2 July 2004, this Government wrote to all MSPs to seek their views and four responded. In phase 2, we published a consultation paper on 15 April 2005. That time three MSPs responded: Trish Godman, Des McNulty and Jackie Baillie.

It is noticeable that among the consultation respondees—

Can I be heard, since I was ticked off earlier?

It is noticeable that among the consultation respondees, key players such as the Forth Estuary Transport Authority, the Tay Road Bridge Joint Board, Dundee City Council and Angus Council did not call for an end to tolls on any of the bridges. In addition to the consultation, we analysed existing and potential traffic movements. We modelled average daily traffic levels, morning peaks, afternoon peaks and inter-peak traffic. The model takes into account future developments that have been identified, such as extensive new housing developments in Fife and planned transport projects such as the A8000 upgrade.

No. As I stated on 1 March and reiterate now, the principles established in the review provide the framework for our decisions. Each bridge has its own unique circumstances. Bridges have different traffic patterns, different financial issues and different levels of congestion. Therefore, a one-size-fits-all policy does not work.

No. If a bridge has not yet been paid for, that is justification for retaining tolls, unless there are significant other factors. The Erskine and Forth bridges have been paid for, but the Tay bridge has not. The Tay Road Bridge Joint Board has outstanding debts of £13.3 million, which include original capital costs. Therefore, the bridges  review concluded that tolls should remain on the Tay. In Dundee City Council's response to the consultation, it noted that the purpose of tolling is to "ensure there is adequate funding to maintain the bridge and repay capital borrowing". Indeed, bridge tolls—

No. I will finish my points. Bridge tolls play an important role in addressing congestion. It is necessary to use tolls to control traffic. The removal of tolls on the Erskine bridge will result in less congestion in and around Glasgow city centre. The Forth road bridge already suffers severe congestion problems at peak times. That congestion problem has been analysed not only by ourselves but by South East Scotland Transport Partnership and FETA. Traffic analysis shows that removing the tolls in 2011 would result in an increase of average daily traffic of 28 per cent, which is some 19,000 vehicles. Not only would that worsen the position on the bridge, it would exacerbate traffic levels on the wider road network. Tolls at the Tay play a role in managing traffic, although the situation is not, of course, as severe as that on the Forth.

Can I just finish these points? Traffic modelling indicates that removing the tolls would increase traffic on the bridge and thus into Dundee. The analysis looked at morning peak, evening peak and off-peak travel, in both directions. The analysis, which is online and available to any member, forecasts that by 2011, without tolls, there would be an extra 10,000 cars and lorries every day. I acknowledge that there is currently queuing at the toll plaza in the early evening peaks, but Dundee also has congestion in the morning peaks.

I am going to deal with that now. Dundee City Council did not call for the ending of tolls on the Tay in its submission and neither did the Tay Road Bridge Joint Board. In fact, the board said that it  "recognised the need to reduce future traffic growth, particularly increased traffic flows at peak periods". In the long term, this Government supports national road pricing across the United Kingdom, which would address congestion and other important issues, including environmental perspectives. In such a future, bridge tolls would not be required, but we are not there yet. I recognise that a tolling regime has an economic impact.

Can I just finish this point?

It is appropriate to interrogate fully and comprehensively the economic impact. We claim to base policy on evidence and we must justify a change in policy on the basis of fact. We will take forward a full economic analysis of the impact that tolls and congestion have on local people, businesses and the wider Scottish economy. The Confederation of British Industry and other business organisations constantly point out the considerable cost of congestion to business and Scottish jobs. Therefore, I welcome the opportunity to look closely at the economic impact of pinchpoints on the strategic parts of our road network, on the one hand, and on the local road network, on the other hand. That will help us to define the extent of the problem. That is the right way forward, as our amendment says. I move amendment S2M-4197.3, to leave out from "agrees" to end and insert: "notes the responses, analysis and conclusions set out in the recent consultation and review of Scotland's tolled bridges, including the Tay Road Bridge Joint Board's response; notes that the bridges review met all of the Board's requests, and recommends an examination of the economic, social and environmental impact and cost of retaining or removing tolls from the Tay and Forth bridges, on Fife and Dundee, the proposals for which will be reported on as soon as possible."

Have you noticed the difference?

Have you noticed the difference?

And you don't?

No.

In that case, I will make three brief points. First, I say to members across the chamber who expressed a view on the economic and business case that, before any investment is made, strict and objective criteria are applied through the business gateway and the quarterly reviews to any investment decisions that we make on capital transport projects. That is absolutely the case for this project, as for any other. I assure Mr McLetchie that patronage is one of the components of the business case. As I said earlier this afternoon, the outline business case must be approved before the summer recess, including those aspects that he mentioned. I am pleased that the Conservatives support the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill this afternoon.

No. Helen Eadie made sensible arguments about Margaret Smith's points on the Western general and I can only repeat the assurances that the promoter and the bill committee gave in relation to that undertaking. I cannot support the contention that we should enshrine bus services in statute, although I understand the seriousness of Margaret Smith's point. I hope that the Parliament will not accept her amendment this afternoon. I finish by responding to Mr MacAskill, who made two speeches about Edinburgh politics rather than about what is an important transport investment for Scotland. We appreciate that he admitted to his flip-flop on the matter, but it always seems to be the wrong time for the SNP. That party would never make the investment decisions that we need in Scotland, nor indeed, in this case, in Edinburgh. Mr MacAskill made a couple of disingenuous remarks about both Waverley and the integrated nature of transport in Scotland. Frankly, he was a disappointment once again. The tram scheme is a good project for Edinburgh and Scotland and I hope that the Parliament votes for it this afternoon.

That is absolute rubbish. What about the £150 million for phase 1?

I wonder whether Mr MacAskill can tell me the exact transport and railway advantages of phase 2.

Last week, the Parliament agreed to pass the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill. Today, we will decide whether to complete the Edinburgh tram network proposals that are before Parliament by agreeing to pass the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill, which is the second part of a necessary investment in modern public transport in Scotland's capital.  The Parliament is indebted to the Edinburgh Tram (Line One) Bill Committee—to Jackie Baillie, for her spirited and cheerful convening, and to her colleagues, who have worked diligently and with much attention to detail on the issues that they have been confronted with. We also recognise the promoter, the advisers, the clerking team and all who have been associated with the project. The Executive supports the tram scheme. We have confirmed our commitment to funding it by £375 million plus inflation. The challenge for the promoter and construction manager is to deliver efficiencies against that budget. The City of Edinburgh Council's decision in January to phase the construction of the tram network recognised the reality of the funding situation. The Scottish Executive funding, together with the £45 million that has been put forward by the council, will provide the necessary funds for the construction of the first phase from Leith to the airport. I particularly want to say to Margaret Smith and to the Parliament that construction of the remaining phases of the network has not been ruled out. They could be completed if the underlying assumptions prove to be robust and future funding becomes available.

I will be happy to give way when I have finished the point. When I gave evidence to the committee in February, I said that there are many calls on the transport budget and that I could not make a commitment that future Executive funding will be made available. That remains the case, and I suggest that the Parliament would expect no less.

As I made absolutely clear in my statement on major public transport projects, we will fund what is now in front of us—that is, the tram network between Leith and the airport—but that is dependent on the business case. That is our position. Parliament is aware of the importance that I attach to transport projects being delivered on time and on budget and to their representing value for money. I am sure that Mr Davidson appreciates that. The work that the promoter has undertaken on phase 1 of the tram network gives me  confidence that the economic benefits continue to represent value for money. However, continuous testing of the business case is critical. Before the summer recess, the promoter must complete a full update of the outline business case and present the results to Transport Scotland. Transport Scotland has in place review mechanisms for all the major public transport projects, including the Edinburgh tram project. Parliament can be confident that the public investment will be safeguarded by close monitoring of the project to ensure that value for money is maintained. Why should we support the motion and the bill? Without the bill, there will be no tram network. On Margaret Smith's amendment to the motion, I readily understand her concern that the tram does not directly serve the Western general hospital, but we must recognise that the tram is only one part of the City of Edinburgh Council's plans to improve public transport in the city. As Jackie Baillie said, the committee heard in evidence at consideration stage that a new interchange between buses and trams at Crewe Toll will allow feeder buses to serve the Crewe Road South entrance to the Western general hospital. The feeder buses will operate at least as frequently as the tram. Given the City of Edinburgh Council's commitment to continue the existing bus services, there will be greatly improved public transport access to the Western general. The creation of Transport Edinburgh Ltd, together with the Scottish Executive's investment in the tram network, will give Edinburgh the perfect opportunity to deliver for the city as a whole an improved integrated public transport network that serves the places to which people need and want to travel. I assure Margaret Smith and the Parliament that I will seek clear evidence from the City of Edinburgh Council, Transport Initiatives Edinburgh and Transport Edinburgh that those improvements will be delivered. Without that evidence, I will not give the go-ahead for the release of the Executive's investment. I trust that the assurances that Margaret Smith has heard from the City of Edinburgh Council, from the bill committee and from me make it clear that the Western general hospital will be fully taken into account and that the tram represents a significant improvement in public transport access to the hospital. I therefore ask Margaret Smith to withdraw her amendment. There is significant development in the north of Edinburgh. As the promoter stated in evidence to the committee, a community the size of Bathgate is being built in and around Leith docks. The first phase of the tram network will serve two thirds of the proposed waterfront development. The experience of Nottingham and other cities gives us  confidence that the tram scheme will encourage a shift from cars and help to reduce congestion. The tram is necessary to encourage and support economic development in the north of the city. The scheme will improve the local infrastructure, but it will also help to safeguard the continued economic growth of the city and the region and the growth of the Scottish economy. Last week, the Parliament showed its support for Edinburgh trams. I strongly urge the Parliament to support the motion and the bill today.

Members will already be aware that if they take an intervention from Jackie Baillie on the subject of noise this afternoon, they do so at their peril. I will make two points on this complex issue. First, I am with Sarah Boyack on the theme of her remarks. That in no way belittles the amendments that Margaret Smith, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and Donald Gorrie have lodged. However, the committee that the Parliament set up to consider these matters has done so in considerable detail, as Donald Gorrie accepted. Parliament will wish to recognise and take cognisance of the fact that the committee took independent advice on the issues. Secondly, I note that the cost of the amendments has not been made clear. As the Parliament would expect, we have been concerned that it might be prohibitive and have implications for the scheme. Therefore, we do not support amendments 12, 13, 15, 15A and 16. However, we are content to support amendments 10 and 11. We agree with the promoter and the committee that what amendments 10 and 11 seek to do is already implicit in the bill as a result of the enforceability of the noise and vibration policy. Amendments 10 and 11 reinforce that position. I take the points that members have made about noise, but they relate to various areas in the transport portfolio.

I shall announce further details of the air discount scheme later this month. We expect to have European Commission approval shortly.

Mr Morrison makes a persuasive point about the position of students. We hope to make progress on that matter in the coming weeks when we are able to announce the details of how the scheme will operate in practice. I share his concern about those who are against a mechanism that will, for the first time, reduce the cost of flying from his constituency to the Scottish mainland. That is a long-held political and policy objective that we are about to deliver.

I can assure Mr Wallace that when we are able to announce the details once we have secured European Commission approval, we will certainly be able to provide details of the timeline of the scheme. For bookings that have already been made, it will be difficult to provide retrospective assistance. However, I will look into the matter.

The scheme will bring a number of advantages, including greater capacity on the routes, better scheduling and lower air fares. They will undoubtedly be strong advantages for the people who live in those areas and the economies of which they are part. I note from the press that Mr Mather is against our proposal. I also note that he is in favour of public service obligations, which would allow no competition whatsoever. Given that competition takes place on routes such as the Stornoway to Edinburgh route, the Scottish National Party seems to be against competition.

Today we will decide whether to develop the first instalment of a modern light rail system and meet the challenges that are posed by the growth in transport demands of Edinburgh and Scotland. The tram scheme will be the rival of our continental neighbours and the first such tram scheme in Scotland for well over a generation. The word "historic" is overused in politics, but perhaps it deserves a slight airing today. Parliament is indebted to Bill Aitken as committee convener, and to the other committee members whom Mr Aitken has just named, for the amount of work that they have done in connection with the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill. Consideration of the bill has been a complex undertaking that has required rigorous evaluation. In particular, the devastating ability to deal with 102 amendments in an hour, which the committee demonstrated at consideration stage, is worthy of high praise from our young Parliament. I thank the promoter, the advisers, the clerking team and everyone who has been associated with the project; they have all allowed us to reach the stage that we are at this afternoon.  Why is a tram necessary? Edinburgh has a thriving economy. Its city region accounts for some 20 per cent of Scottish gross domestic product and through the commercial developments of Edinburgh Park, the Gyle and Edinburgh airport, west Edinburgh is playing a significant role in growing new economic opportunities.

I hate to disappoint Mr Monteith, but the debate can fulfil both those functions and I am sure that it will. Mr Aitken did exactly what the Parliament would expect him to do, which was to explain the legislative process that he and his colleagues have been through. I am sure that members who represent Edinburgh and members who represent areas outwith the city will wish to make points about the project, and I hope that Mr Monteith will not mind if I proceed to do that. The new Royal Bank of Scotland headquarters is home to 3,250 jobs. Edinburgh Park employs 6,000 people and that number could rise by a further 12,000 over the next few years. Such continuing success puts increasing demand on travel. As Mr Aitken said, the committee heard evidence that committed developments in west Edinburgh are likely to add another 12,000 vehicles to the road network during peak hours by 2015. If that happens, most key roads in the area will be operating over their capacity. The fact is that the pace of development is outstripping what the existing transport infrastructure can support. Ultimately, that could subdue economic growth because potential investors might opt for other, more accessible locations and existing businesses might consider locating outside Scotland. In its evidence to the committee, the promoter highlighted the benefits that trams will bring to help ease the transport difficulties that Edinburgh currently faces and those that it is predicted it will face. Those benefits include not only the provision of local infrastructure improvements, but the safeguarding of continued economic growth in the region and, indeed, in the Scottish economy as a whole.

No, I want to make a bit of progress. To maximise those benefits, we must encourage a shift away from the use of cars and ensure that trams and buses are integrated in an effective public transport system. The trams will provide a high-quality, high-capacity, frequent, reliable and fast public transport system. Tram travel will become an attractive alternative to the car. That has been the case in Nottingham, where 8.5 million journeys were made in the first year of operation of that city's tram system. That level of patronage was well above predictions. Furthermore, 25 to 30 per cent of tram passengers had previously travelled by car. In Nottingham, as in Edinburgh, the local bus company is owned by the local authority and the bus and tram operators were combined to ensure that the two systems would be complementary. That will also be the case in Edinburgh, where Transport Edinburgh Ltd will manage the operation of both the tram network and Lothian Buses. From discussions that I have had—including a memorable one on a flight between Sumburgh and Edinburgh airport—and from my mailbox, I know that there is considerable support for the proposals to link the city centre and its growing financial and commercial districts with the airport, which is undergoing considerable development to match the growth of the city and the south-east of Scotland. I am aware that some concerns about the proposals remain. It is right for members to be concerned that the scheme should be delivered on time and on budget—I am sure that the points that are made during the debate will reflect that—and to be preoccupied with aspects of the project's financial viability and the tram's ability to generate and sustain sufficient passenger numbers. It is right, too, that we should identify concerns, especially those that remain to be addressed, if the tram network in Edinburgh is to become a reality and to be successful. Last week's introduction of the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill means that we have two complementary projects that will help to develop Scotland's capacity to compete and grow. The projects serve different markets: whereas the EARL project will provide a direct airport link on Scotland's heavy rail network, tramline 2 will provide more frequent and convenient stops and the ability to connect into the wider public transport network in Edinburgh, in a fast and convenient way.

My point is that the heavy rail link to and from the airport will be a link not only for Edinburgh, but for destinations and locations around Scotland. Given the wider range of destinations that Edinburgh airport now serves, the rail link will encourage people who wish to travel to the airport and improve access for them. The work that the respective promoters of the two projects are doing is entirely complementary. I am sure that Margo MacDonald is as familiar as I am—if not more familiar—with the work that is being taken forward.

I could be drawn into commenting on what Mr Cameron said about aviation in his contribution to the debate on the budget statement, but that would be wholly inappropriate. Indeed, it would be an abuse of the situation, therefore I will duck the opportunity. What I will say—I am sure that Mr McLetchie would expect me to do so—is that the business case, in relation to both the tram and the heavy rail investment to Edinburgh airport, must be robust. I will say a little more about that in a moment. The business cases for the two projects must ensure that the financial and patronage figures on which they are built are adequate—indeed, more than adequate—to meet the value-for-money criteria under which public sector and, in these two instances, Scottish Executive financial assistance is made. In my statement to the Parliament last week, I confirmed that our commitment to the Edinburgh trams is £375 million, plus inflation. I expect our contribution to be some £450 million to £500 million towards the capital cost of the tramline from Ocean Terminal to Edinburgh airport. The challenge for the promoter and the construction manager is to deliver efficiencies against that budget. The work that the promoter has undertaken gives me confidence that the economic benefits of the tram network will continue to present value for money. The current evidence indicates a healthy benefit to cost ratio.  Before the summer recess, the promoter will have completed a full update of the outline business case for the tram project and presented the results to Transport Scotland. Continuous testing of the business case is critical. As Mr McLetchie would expect us to do, we will continue to review the business case rigorously at each remaining stage of project development. I believe that the principles behind tramline 2 are not only acceptable to the Parliament; they are widely supported by local businesses, local people and local communities. Edinburgh's economy requires support and investment if it is to maintain its current growth levels and help Scotland to fulfil its wider economic ambitions. The Scottish people look to their Parliament for real achievements, real delivery and real progress. There is no stronger or more solid example of that than the delivery of improvements to the local and national economy, which the passing of the Edinburgh Tram (Line Two) Bill will help to bring about. The advantages that the bill will bring about are considerable, and I believe that the case has been made to approve it. We look forward to starting work on the scheme in the autumn. I extend an invitation to all members of the Parliament to join me in riding on an Edinburgh tram in early 2011. I hope that support for the scheme in the Parliament this afternoon will be overwhelming. I strongly urge members to support the motion and support the bill.

We are currently developing detailed proposals to implement the partnership agreement commitment to introduce a national scheme of concessionary travel for young people. I will make an announcement once the proposals are finalised.

Kate Maclean makes a fair point about the publicity and information that would be necessary to make young people aware of the entitlement that they would have under the young persons travel scheme. We are considering a number of methods for doing that. It is also  important to use some of the voluntary organisations that have a particular attachment to young people in that work, but we would be open to any suggestions that colleagues might wish to make on the matter.

One of the benefits that will accrue to public transport from the national concessionary scheme for young people is that it will encourage the kind of shift to which the member refers. There is clear statistical evidence that, tragically, many young people are involved in accidents on our roads in their first year of driving after having passed their tests. The statistics are worse for that age group than for any other in the population. Jamie Stone makes a legitimate point about encouraging young people to use public transport where it is available—although availability is an issue throughout Scotland—rather than using the car.

Yes. Detailed traffic-modelling data gathered as part of phase 2 of the tolled bridges review have been published through the Scottish Executive and transport model for Scotland websites.

The Scottish Executive has carried out a lengthy and detailed review of tolled bridges. That review has concluded and there was a statement followed by a fairly lively debate in  Parliament a week or so ago. The construction costs of the Tay road bridge have not yet been recovered. That was the primary reason for the decision not to remove tolls.

I do not accept Mr Swinney's argument that a one-size-fits-all policy would be right for the bridges. The review on tolled bridges has been published and he can read the clear reasons behind the decisions that were reached. Different circumstances pertain in different parts of Scotland. I am sure that he is well aware of the statistic that 65 per cent of traffic on the Tay road bridge is local, which suggests that a local determination of the issues is important.

When I took office as Minister for Transport and Telecommunications, I took responsibility for the greatest sustained investment in Scotland's transport system in decades. Transport spending has increased substantially since devolution. In 1999, transport spending was £345 million. Since then, as a result of our commitment to and focus on investment and the transfer of new rail powers to Scottish ministers, the transport budget has risen to £1,649 million in 2006-07 and £1,694 million in 2007-08. The programme of public transport investment has arisen from the major commitments on infrastructure investment in our partnership agreement. It is a major opportunity for Scotland to improve our infrastructure, improve our economy and improve the travel choices for passengers and freight. We need to be bold to make the projects happen, but we must have realistic and credible delivery plans to turn the plans into reality. I stated in Parliament last year that I wanted our capital transport plan for new rail and road investment to deliver on time and against budget. I am here today to update Parliament on progress. Before I turn to the programme of major public transport projects, I will say a little about progress on the significant investments that we are making in improving strategic roads. Our major roads programme is aimed at reducing congestion on the network, tackling pinch points and completing the strategic motorway and road links. The investment supports the Government's principal objective of growing Scotland's economy. We will build the Aberdeen western peripheral road. Detailed engineering and environmental work is now progressing, with the aim of narrowing down the line of the road corridor next month. I  understand the obvious worries of local people and can say today that the Stonehaven link will not be an upgrade of the existing Netherley road. Where the corridor reaches Milltimber, we are working hard to reduce the impact of the route. I can confirm that the route will not affect any properties in Peterculter village and that where the route passes Milltimber village no options are being considered to the east of the route that was previously consulted on. We will bring forward draft road orders at the end of the year. The contract for the new Kincardine bridge was let earlier this month. Construction work is expected to be under way by the summer and we will complete the bridge in 2008. Proposals for upgrading the A8 between Baillieston and Newhouse will be published in the next few weeks. I expect the major roads programme to hit budgets and be delivered on time. For our major public transport projects, I am establishing—for the first time—a rigorous baseline against which I expect projects to be delivered. I will today present a programme that is realistic, affordable and deliverable. It is all about delivery. We need to be clear about what stands in the way of delivery and must overcome those obstacles. That is the challenge that I have laid down to Transport Scotland, the promoters of the major projects and the rail industry as a whole. It is a challenge that I expect them to meet. In presenting the programme today, I tackle one of the perennial problems that face the construction industry as a whole and the rail industry in particular: establishing the expected price of a scheme. By stating today the expected outturn cost of schemes, I will allow all those involved to focus clearly on delivering to budget. Furthermore, our transport and works bill aims to improve the process for the future. This is an ambitious programme. We must ensure that overall it remains affordable and provides value for money as we move through its delivery. We are committed to applying best practice in procurement, to setting challenging milestones and to making best use of the gateway review process. The focus is not only on individual projects. I have asked officials to consider the affordability of the programme as a whole and how it would be affected if in future there were any changes to the timing or the costs of the individual elements of the programme. Rail devolution gives us a new option for funding rail projects. It offers an alternative form of public-private partnership, working in strategic partnership with Network Rail. Such an approach makes the best use of Network Rail's expertise in delivering rail infrastructure enhancements. However, as with any public-private partnership  project, we need to be convinced that that method of procurement offers best value for money. I will outline where we are on the individual projects, state what we believe to be a realistic target and highlight any changes from information given to Parliament previously. The Larkhall to Milngavie rail project has relieved a pinch point on the northern Glasgow rail network and opened up economic opportunities for the people of Larkhall. We have delivered the first new branch line in 25 years by reopening the Larkhall branch. The new line was delivered by a partnership between Strathclyde Passenger Transport and Network Rail. It took a long time to get the project moving, but once we did so the project came in on time and on budget. In the 70 days for which the Larkhall line has been open, 68,749 people have used it, which is 34 per cent above projected passenger numbers. The fact that a new rail line has been opened and passenger numbers have increased shows that the investment is already paying dividends. At a time when other parts of the United Kingdom have struggled to deliver enhancements, we have shown that we in Scotland are capable of breaking the mould and getting things done. We must build on that. I want the completion of projects on time and on budget to be the norm, not the exception. Our investment in the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line will connect Alloa to the rail network; improve the efficiency of the transport of coal to Longannet power station, which generates 20 per cent of Scotland's electricity; and free up space on the Forth rail bridge for additional passenger services between Fife and Edinburgh. Work began on site last October and continues on schedule. Clackmannanshire Council and TIE have set themselves challenging targets for completing the railway by summer 2007 at a cost within the range of £65 million to £70 million. The range is due to mine workings and land valuation. Those targets are achievable, but they will require the project team to work together extremely effectively. I welcome the team's appetite for the challenge. The Waverley station project is a flagship that is within Scotland's capital but is for Scotland. The station is already at full capacity during peak times, yet passenger growth is forecast to continue. I strongly welcome that growth, but capacity needs to be addressed. Our investment will add new platforms and allow more trains per hour. The trains will be on time, because punctuality will be one of the key advantages of the investment. The project improves Waverley station for passengers, including the elderly and the disabled. The project was on site in January  and will be completed by December 2007, on time and within a budget of £150 million. The Waverley station project, funded from additional resources secured in the rail review, is proof that we can work effectively with Network Rail in Scotland. Edinburgh's trams are a strategic investment in tackling congestion in Scotland's capital. The interchange at Haymarket station will be particularly important for commuters and for visitors from outside Edinburgh. I have confirmed our commitment to contribute £375 million plus inflation. I expect that to add up to a contribution of between £450 million and £500 million towards the capital cost of the tramline from Ocean Terminal to Edinburgh airport. The challenge for the promoter and construction manager is to deliver efficiencies against that budget. The gas, electricity, water and telecoms diversions needed for the project are expected to start this autumn, with project completion in early 2011. The City of Edinburgh Council's original target of the end of 2009 has had to be moved back as it underestimated the length of the private bill process. Transport Scotland is working closely with Network Rail to deliver the Airdrie to Bathgate line as a real alternative to car travel on the A8 and M8 corridor. The investment will provide a public transport choice, particularly for people in North Lanarkshire and West Lothian. I am pleased to announce that we reached agreement with Network Rail earlier this week to allow work to begin on doubling the track east of Bathgate at the turn of the year. I am pleased to be bringing the project forward to the earliest possible date so that we deliver benefits to passengers as soon as we can. The project will be delivered within a budget for completion of £300 million to £375 million in outturn prices. Overall, the project is on target for delivery in 2010. That target reflects the significant scale of the project and the parliamentary timetable. Scotland's airports need to be part of the country's rail network, so the investment in airport rail links will be good for visitors, good for business and good for Scots. They will also be good news for the airports themselves as they will improve their competitive position and provide accessible links to many destinations throughout Scotland. We attach great importance to BAA's co-operation with and contribution to that work and we are taking steps to secure that co-operation and contribution. We hope that a deal on Glasgow airport will be concluded shortly. Further discussions on Edinburgh airport will continue. The Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill was introduced in January and the Edinburgh airport rail link bill is due to be introduced by the promoter, TIE, today and published tomorrow. The Glasgow airport rail link is on target to cost £170  million to £210 million and the cost for the Edinburgh airport rail link will be £550 million to £650 million in outturn prices. We do not expect any real-terms cost increases on the projects. We expect Glasgow's airport rail link to be delivered by the end of 2010 and Edinburgh's by the end of 2011, but the promoters are working to deliver them up to a year earlier. I welcome and support that drive, but we need to be realistic. We expect preparatory work that does not require parliamentary approval to start early in 2007. The Waverley railway partnership's objective, and ours, is to reconnect the Borders to the rail network. We will contribute £115 million in 2002 prices and we expect the uplift for indexation on that contribution to bring the figure up to £155 million. Work on the scheme is also expected to start early in 2007 and the rail link is expected to be delivered by the end of 2011, but the Waverley railway partnership is working to deliver it more than a year earlier. We must set out realistic, deliverable and affordable plans to enhance Scotland's railway. We expect the whole of the rail industry—Network Rail, First ScotRail, local authorities, SPT, the new regional transport partnerships, Transport Scotland, consultants and contractors—to work together to deliver enhancements. New engagement is needed to achieve that and this is the industry's chance to show that it has changed. For too long, rail transport has been thought of as the poor cousin. That is no longer the case. Rail transport can be a driver of economic growth in Scotland; it can move people and freight across the country safely, efficiently and affordably. I have outlined the Government's current committed major transport infrastructure programme up to 2012. The programme can be funded from within our overall budget. All the projects that I have mentioned can be delivered by 2011. That was our commitment in the infrastructure investment plan. Seventy per cent of our investment over the 10-year capital plan will be spent on public transport. So far, one railway line has been completed and two are under construction. We are already delivering. We look further to the future through the national transport strategy and the strategic projects review. We will consider Scotland's transport investment needs for 2012 to 2022 and beyond. There is no slowing down in our determination to look to Scotland's future. Scotland's rail investment programme is the envy of the rest of Britain. I want Scotland to be the place where people come to see how rail projects are delivered. I look to all concerned to step up and deliver.

I welcome Mr Ewing's support for the statement. I am sure that it was only an oversight on his part that he did not reflect on the fact that, when I came into post, I said to the Local Government and Transport Committee, which is convened by Bristow Muldoon, that I would bring to the Parliament a full, updated report on the position of the capital investment programme as it affects transport. That is what I am doing and I am surprised that Mr Ewing does not seem to think that parliamentary scrutiny of the Government's capital investment programme is appropriate, because he argued in the committee that it was appropriate. Dear me, he has not leaked his questions in advance to the press, which is unlike the normal state of affairs. The £150 million that we are investing in Waverley station now is in our capital programme. It is what we said that we would do and we are now doing it. That investment will provide significant enhancements to the rail network throughout Scotland. In particular, it will help the performance of the Fife service and help  commuters and other passengers to enter Edinburgh daily. It is an important investment for the future. The second part of Mr Ewing's question was about what would be done in future. To determine that, we will shortly consult on a national transport strategy and have already begun work on the strategic projects review. I envisage that, in that assessment and in continuing discussions with the rail industry and others, we will consider future investments, the importance of freight and how to tackle capacity issues as they arise. It is also important that we assess the rail network as a whole now, so that we find out where the pinch points are and what investment is needed to tackle those pinch points. That work will be taken forward and we will also inform the Parliament as appropriate.

Last night, I read with interest the weighty tome that is the Enterprise and Culture Committee's report and I agreed with much of it. It is a substantial piece of work and a useful contribution to the debate on economic growth within and outwith Scotland. I welcome the report's recommendations on transport, as they have some useful pointers for us all. There is a programme of major transport projects that were noted in the partnership agreement and we are taking those forward to delivery. When they are fully delivered, they will make an enormous impact on the whole of Scotland and particularly on our economic sustainability. The projects have been assessed, and will continue to be assessed, against those criteria. Today's statement provides an update on the projects, because that is what Parliament asked of me.  Laying out the delivery timetable has been important. The business community has raised justifiable concerns with me about our ability to say when projects will come on stream, how they will tackle pinch points in the road and rail networks, and how they will help the movement of freight on road and rail. We have therefore laid out the timetable as clearly as we could, using rigorous guidelines and rigorous assessments of budgets, and describing the direction of travel and the milestones we have reached. I make the same point to Mr Fraser that I made to Mr Ewing: the strategic projects review will include an economic assessment of projects. It will look to the future and will continue to consider the pinch points in Scotland's transport corridors and how we can make the best and most strategic investments to assist the growth of the economy.

I will answer the question on the Edinburgh airport rail link first. Discussions continue on the points that Mr Muldoon raises. I hope that all parties—in what is, by any standards, an extremely complex project—will come together with their particular sets of skills and expertise. The construction of the T5 terminal at Heathrow is also complex, as it involves tunnelling and various other construction issues. More than 40 companies have been brought together in a strategic approach to project management that has been essential to delivering the project on time and—as far as I know—on budget on an extremely difficult site. That is no mean achievement; I want to bring similar skills to bear in what will be an important and strategic investment in Scotland's future. I do not have the answer today to Mr Muldoon's question on the timescale for the Airdrie to Bathgate line, but I will be happy to write to him with an answer. I certainly hope that we can make progress as quickly as possible.

I will be happy to look into both those issues. In addition to making improvements to connections and capacity—including increased platform lengths and the provision of trains of a size suitable for peak times—it is essential that we improve the ease of access to stations and alternative facilities if we are to ensure that more passengers can use rail and therefore move away from using their cars. With Network Rail and First ScotRail, we plan to provide an enhanced park-and-ride programme. I will also be happy to consider the points that Mr Arbuckle made about park-and-ride facilities on the motorway network.

The biggest sense of disappointment comes from Mr Harvie's question, which is always the same. He never gives the Administration any credit for investing 70 per cent of our transport moneys, over a 10-year plan, in public transport. Not once have the Greens ever given any credit to the Government for what it is doing. I am disappointed that a party that claims to care about the environment—although the claim is pretty hollow at times—never gives any credit to a Government that both cares and delivers.  Mr Harvie just was not listening. I made it clear that the programme that I spoke about today was the programme that was in our partnership agreement, that was in our 10-year capital investment plan and that was in the infrastructure plan that will take us up to 2012. We are delivering on the programme and we were asked to report to Parliament on where we were on budgets and timescales. That is what we are doing today. If Mr Harvie wants to ask about Glasgow crossrail and Aberdeen crossrail in the context of the strategic projects review, that will be fine—but that is where those projects will be considered. We have always said that that is how those projects will be taken forward.

I do not agree with Mr Sheridan's final point on the M74, but I certainly agree with his point about integrated transport planning for primary health care facilities and new hospitals. The Minister for Health and Community Care and I have already had some discussions and the national transport strategy will ensure that the planning of health services is considered from a transport point of view. Mr Sheridan makes an entirely fair point about that. Different Government portfolios will plan how transport solutions for local people can tie in with major investments in our health service, such as the one that Mr Sheridan describes.

All I can say is that we will seriously scrutinise budgets, whether they be in the east or the west of Scotland. I am sure that Mr McNulty, as the convener of the Finance Committee, would expect me to say that. On budget scrutiny and the process that we now apply to the project management of major capital transport projects, quarterly reviews of project progress against cost and time targets have been established, which identify actions that are needed to ensure projects' success. All of the projects have been reviewed over the past couple of months and, as Mr McNulty would expect, they must continue to represent value for money. The business case for each project is re-examined each time to ensure that there is a need to commit significant expenditure. In addition to quarterly reviews, projects are subject to the Scottish Executive's gateway reviews, which examine projects at critical stages in their life cycle to provide assurance that they can progress successfully to their next stage. We have put in place a number of processes and, quite appropriately, shared details of them with the Finance Committee. They are designed to ensure that projects meet our targets for them.

I will deal first with the points that Mr Crawford made at the start of his question about the two transport projects that he mentioned. On the cost of building the new Kincardine bridge, the figure of £70 million was estimated four years ago, which represented the expected tender price at that time, excluding VAT. The successful tender bid was £93.5 million, plus VAT. Some of the press comment was somewhat excitable. One of the major reasons for the additional costs was the effect of the large increase in the price of untaxed petrochemical product—that is, blacktop. We should bear in mind the fact that 6.4km of road are involved in that project. That gives some context to the issue. On the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway, we have been able to get the project team and the processes that I described a moment ago to Mr McNulty to focus closely on some of the cost issues. Work is now at a stage at which we can have confidence in the forecasts. The prospect is positive with regard to the remaining risks. We look forward to progress continuing to be made. Mr Crawford made a number of serious points with regard to the Forth road bridge. As is patently obvious, I cannot tell the FETA board what to do. However, I know that the board has started initial work on dehumidification. It has let two contracts for early work and it is working on the tender documents for the cabling element. I will write to Mr Crawford with further details in relation to the contracts. I am focused on the need to ensure that we keep to the timescale that has been announced.

Mary Mulligan has raised a number of practical issues to do with the project, which is of strategic importance not only to her constituency but to the whole of Scotland. I recognise those points and would be happy to discuss them with her. I appreciate the points that she made in the latter part of her question about the challenges—if I may put it euphemistically—that people are facing. We must do better in that regard and find ways to deliver better services. I would be happy to talk about that with those who are responsible. I hear Mary Mulligan's concerns about slippage in the timetable. It is why we have put in place the processes that I have outlined to Parliament today. The partners who are involved in the project must focus more on meeting the timescales, in terms of the bill and the agreements that have to be reached on the project. The initial investigation and the review process that I described earlier concluded that some benefits could be delivered early if work to double-track east of Bathgate were separated from work that relies on the bill being passed. As I have said, we have reached agreement with Network Rail on that point. The promoter's work plan needs to include milestones for the submission of the bill, and the design needs to be reviewed from an operator's perspective. We look to all of that work coming together as quickly as possible. I will write to Mary Mulligan with further details on those important points.

I understand Nanette Milne's point about the concerns of local people: many members of all parties have made that fair point. I hope that we will narrow down the route by April, and thereby alleviate as many of the concerns as possible. It is inevitable that when a major road of this nature is constructed in residential and business areas some people will encounter disruption. That will be the case regardless of the route that is chosen. Most rational people would accept that observation in the context of the road that we are discussing. However, we will do what we can to achieve the spirit of what Nanette Milne said. It is our intention to meet the timescale that I outlined on 1 December.

I suspect that those questions would be more appropriately raised in the consultation on the national transport strategy, which will take place soon. It would be entirely legitimate to raise those matters in the consultation. However, we seek to ensure that we are designing and committing to the delivery of an approach to transport that meets the criteria that Elaine Smith mentions. I take her point about buses, but my statement was on our programme of capital investment in rail. We are working with First ScotRail and Network Rail on enhancements to station design to improve people's safety and security, which is why the roll-out of closed-circuit television and other such measures are important. We will continue to work on those enhancements.

I confirm that we hope to narrow down the options for the route during April. I take the member's point about public consultation. As I said in my statement, draft road orders will be published by the end of the year and there will be public consultation on them. It is fair to assume that there will be some objections during the consultation. We cannot predict what will happen, but I suspect that that will lead to a local public inquiry, probably in autumn 2007. Some of Mr Rumbles's constituents might wish to avail themselves of those opportunities to express their views.

Those innovations are the responsibility of First ScotRail and Network Rail. One of the main advantages of the devolution of rail powers—the additional powers that Scottish ministers now have and their accountability to Parliament—is in this area. Practical enhancements can be made by Network Rail as the owner of stations and by First ScotRail as the operator. That will bring improvements to facilities for people who use the rail system. As passenger numbers increase, it is eminently sensible to ensure that we have a range of appropriate facilities that meet the needs of the group that Sylvia Jackson mentioned.

I have to be blunt: there have been many discussions about stage 2, but I do not yet have on my desk an agreed programme from the various partners and the local authority that are responsible for the project. Mr MacAskill criticises me for not agreeing to something that I have yet to see and that has not even been agreed by the partners who are responsible for promoting it. When they agree to a programme I will be interested to see it, but I am focused on delivering what we said we would deliver, which is a £150 million package of enhancements at Waverley station. I repeat the point that I made to other members: the national transport strategy and the strategic projects review represent an important opportunity to look to the future and consider what further enhancements are appropriate.

Those projects are important, but they do not come within the capital transport programme. I am happy to write to Cathie Craigie about the details. I share her frustration that the improvements at Croy station are not yet in place. I agree that money was earmarked for the project and that it should be spent on the enhancements that she and I want to see. We have made it absolutely clear that the money is in place and that we expect the work to proceed. I will write to Cathie Craigie on her other two points because I do not have the details with me today.

I met officials of the concessionary scheme today, so I can assure Christine Grahame that as long as the application for her card has been received, she should receive the card by the end of next week. I will personally look into where her card is and ensure that it is taken care of. I thank Mr Stevenson for lodging the motion and for the spirit in which he presented his arguments, which were, as usual, fair and to the point. I join him in acknowledging the role of the Banffshire Partnership and Buchan Dial-a-Community Bus scheme. It is probably one of most innovative local schemes of its type and one of the best in Scotland. I ask colleagues to reflect on the thought that, from Edinburgh, we do not know the best way to operate such schemes. I would always argue that local bus or ferry operators or transport users have a better idea than would people working at the centre of what sort of scheme suits Mr Stevenson's constituents or mine, and how to put it together and ensure that it has a sustainable future. Richard Baker was right to mention the Scottish transport awards. It is fair to reflect that Aberdeenshire Council, and its infrastructure and services convener in particular, received the rural transport award for its A2B scheme, which now operates in Alford, Strathdon, Peterhead and Fraserburgh—and which the council is looking to extend right across the shire, as we now call it. That is no mean achievement for the council and the officials who are no doubt doing the bread-and-butter work to make it to happen. These successful projects are funded by the rural community transport initiative, which a number of colleagues have mentioned. The initiative is of particular help in more remote areas of Scotland, particularly those where there are no scheduled bus services or where services are  limited. I understand the point that members have made about the nature of providing rural transport. I live on an island where there is no such thing as a bus service and I am acutely aware that we have to consider how to think through policy solutions. I genuinely suspect that such solutions must come from the ground, from those areas themselves, rather than from above. Some £15 million has been awarded to projects throughout rural Scotland since the scheme was introduced. The projects have played a significant role in reducing the social exclusion that people in those areas face. The partnership agreement recognised the importance of demand-responsive transport, which a number of members have mentioned, and committed us to supporting enhanced rural demand-responsive transport pilots. During the past three years, we have funded a series of pilots in rural settings. There have been challenges to our ability to meet the need for flexible services. We currently have £3 million funding 13 rural pilots, in partnership with Aberdeenshire Council—which Mr Stevenson highlighted—with Angus Council, with Argyll and Bute Council, with Fife Council and with Highland Council, and there are pilots in urban areas, which Mr Ewing mentioned. We have commissioned independent research into how those pilots have worked. I will consider that research and how we can expand demand-responsive transport provision and improve accessibility throughout Scotland.

I understand Mr Robson's point about schemes such as Berwickshire Wheels. We need to encourage such schemes and think about how we can expand them. We must look to the methods and mechanisms that have worked in particular parts of Scotland, such as Mr Robson's constituency, to determine the best way in which to do so. There has been some discussion of the national concessionary scheme. Every member proclaims that it is the best thing to do and then sets out lots of things about it that should be better, increased, added to or changed. A couple of weeks ago, in the Local Government and Transport Committee, Mr Ewing and I used a colourful phrase that I have forgotten for the moment—it was something about  Rome being built in a day. However, a scheme is in place. I accept that it would be good to do more, but I think that the scheme is an important achievement. By 1 April, when the scheme is up and running, more than 1 million older and disabled people—including Ms Grahame—will travel free on buses throughout Scotland, even during the morning rush hour. There has not been a steal; there has been a commercial negotiation. I can say to Mr Ewing that, from my previous life, long before I entered politics, I know that, in such a negotiation, both sides do not always get what they want. A commercial negotiation involves coming to a deal that achieves the objective that both parties share. That is what we had to do, as I outlined at some length in the Local Government and Transport Committee meeting a couple of weeks ago. The motion highlights the inclusion in the scheme of conventional services, which Mr Stevenson talked about. That means that local registered bus services and scheduled coach services throughout Scotland are included in the scheme, including those demand-responsive transport services that are registered local services. While introducing the new Scotland-wide free bus scheme, we have been sensitive to the need to reach a financial agreement with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that ensures that we meet our aim of protecting concessionary travel on other modes of transport, including ferries and rail, and accessible transport schemes such as taxicard, dial-a-ride and shopmobility. As I have said to the Local Government and Transport Committee, we reached a settlement with COSLA—and, therefore, with local government across Scotland—that will protect the grant-aided expenditure that is outwith the normal national concessionary schemes. In that regard, I would like to thank in particular Alison Magee, the convener of Highland Council, who led for COSLA on that issue. It is important to recognise what was achieved in that settlement.

I recognise the point that Mr Stevenson is making and, in a moment, I will deal with what we can do in the future. However, no minister or taxpayer can ignore the financial  consequences of the national concessionary travel scheme. In the next financial year, this Government is putting £159 million into the scheme. I do not think that anyone should underestimate the financial commitment that we are making. Shiona Baird mentioned the Buchan community dial-a-bus in relation to patients and others who wish to access health services. There is an agreement with Grampian Health Board and the Scottish Ambulance Service to deliver patient transport. It is not correct to say that they are not funded to do so. The Buchan scheme needs only to provide patient transport service information to ensure that it is funded appropriately. On the point that Mr Ewing made about community transport, it is not right to say that community transport is dependent on local authority funding alone. Rural community transport initiative funding of up to 75 per cent of project costs applies, so there is considerable help in that regard. The first two years of operation of the scheme will be critical in building up the evidence base for future reflections on the scheme. I will certainly consider the points that have been made this evening and those that have been made by the Local Government and Transport Committee in recent weeks when I reflect on how we can improve and scope the future shape of the national concessionary scheme.

I am just finishing. This evening's contributions will be extremely helpful in that regard.  Meeting closed at 17:45.

I can confirm that.

The final service specification for the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services will encourage bidders to propose improvements to, and enhancements of, those services.

I apologise to Mr Mather, who will ask exactly the same question later. All that I can say at this stage is that, with officials in the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department, I am examining the options, following the exercise that was undertaken under the European and domestic procurement rules that we must follow, with which Mr McGrigor is familiar. It was not a case of the Executive or anyone else failing; it was a case of no compliant bid coming forward. I hope that Mr McGrigor is aware of that—I am sure that he is. I absolutely appreciate the point about the economic importance of the route, and we will continue to consider all the options. I hope to make a further announcement on the matter as soon as I possibly can.

As Mr Wallace knows, we had hoped to be able to announce the preferred bidder by the end of February. Following some further work and further economic and financial analysis, we are able to confirm today that Caledonian MacBrayne is the preferred bidder for the northern isles tender. A process will now be undertaken to establish the precise contract details. That will take some time, but I hope that, by the early summer, we will be in a position to confirm the contract and the operation that is to be undertaken in the northern isles. Mr Wallace makes a fair point about the continuation of the service being as seamless as possible. It is indeed our intention to work hard to achieve that. I will write to him on the matters relating to staff, but as far as bookings for passengers and freight businesses are concerned, we want to ensure that the service continues as it has done and that there is no disruption to booking arrangements.

In addition to our funding of local authorities and other bodies for specific projects to increase car parking facilities, we have secured additional car park enhancements through the ScotRail franchise. We are in discussions with First ScotRail and Network Rail to unlock additional investment and to provide a programme of car parking enhancement.

I would be happy to consider the specific argument that Sylvia Jackson makes with regard to development in the Stirling area. It seems eminently sensible to ensure that, as the planning process continues, we build in the need for improvements in the availability of public transport. As the detail comes forward, I will be happy to consider the matter in conjunction with colleagues who have responsibility for planning. I take Sylvia Jackson's point about pressure on car parking spaces at certain stations. To some extent, such problems are victims of the service's success, but we obviously need to try, where possible, to enhance car parking facilities to encourage more people to use the First ScotRail system. I am aware that the Bridge of Allan station car park has recently been expanded to more than double its previous size. I hope that a considerable amount of such investment happens in the future, not just in Sylvia Jackson's constituency but throughout the country.

I cannot give a precise answer to Mr Fraser's question today, but I am happy to write to him on that point. I can say only that all of us who believe in the future of rail in Scotland and in providing other forms of transport as alternatives to the car must take considerable encouragement from the fact that there are so  many strong campaigns throughout Scotland to reopen stations such as the one that Mr Fraser mentioned.

I wondered how Mr Morgan would get that in, but as usual he was able to mention it. In recent times, some of us have become very familiar with Inverkeithing station. Indeed, I came through that station on the train last night. In all seriousness, Mr Morgan has made an entirely appropriate point about the pressure on the bridge. I will be happy to sit down with Fife Council, First ScotRail and Network Rail to look again at the particular pressures on that station and on other stations on the Fife circle. Given the evidence of increased growth in passenger numbers, we need to respond as positively as we can by considering car parking improvements where it is possible for those improvements to be made.

With the support of Scottish Executive funding, the north-east Scotland transport partnership is leading the development of the Aberdeen crossrail proposal and is responsible for delivering the completed feasibility work by the end of 2006. Elsewhere in the north-east, the Scottish Executive and Transport Scotland are working closely with scheme promoters and rail industry partners on implementation of the Mossend to Elgin freight gauge enhancement scheme, the range of improvements to be delivered by the £40 million station improvement plan under the First ScotRail franchise agreement and the development of proposals to reopen Laurencekirk railway station.

Nora Radcliffe makes a good point about the importance of freight and the benefits of the enhancement scheme, which will enable the track to be used in the way that she described. My understanding is that the project will be delivered by the summer of 2007 at a cost of about £4 million. If any additional information is available, I will be happy to write to Nora Radcliffe.

We are examining the feedback that has been received and considering whether there is a feasible and practical way forward within the terms of the current tendering process. We are also in close touch with our colleagues in Northern Ireland. As I have said, I recognise and well understand the strong feeling locally that we should look seriously at any possibility that has been brought to our attention, to ensure that all the options under the tendering process have been considered. We will make further information about our position available as soon as we can.

The short answer is yes. As I said, any option that we can consider within the procurement rules that we must follow will be examined. I assure Mr Mather that any particular company will be taken into account in that exercise, subject to those caveats. I take the point about the disbenefits of not having—or the economic advantages of having—the link. We take that into account seriously when considering what can be done to promote the economic viability of the Kintyre peninsula. Mr Mather advanced an argument by making a comparison but, as he well knows, comparisons  can sometimes be misleading. The subsidy that was sought to attract bidders for the route to Ballycastle has been the figure for a considerable time. A decision to look again at that number would be difficult.

Transport Scotland is considering the technical and operational feasibility study into Glasgow crossrail and hopes to respond to Strathclyde Passenger Transport with comments during spring. Projects of such magnitude require detailed examination before final decisions can be made.

I am happy to take up Mr Butler's invitation to attend a cross-party group meeting and to hear the detail that I am sure he would impart. The advantage of the consultation on the national transport strategy, on which we are about to embark, and of the corridor-by-corridor assessment under the strategic projects review is that they will allow detailed consideration of the arguments that Mr Butler and others advance for crossrail. However, ultimately, funding for a project—no matter what its magnitude—is subject to the usual disciplines of government.

I begin by dealing with the points that have just been raised. I regret that information was placed in the public domain and am as angry as anyone that Parliament has been shown such a discourtesy. I deprecate those leaks, if that is indeed what has happened. It is not in the Government's interests for information to be released to one media outlet, rather than to Parliament and therefore the entire media, on a statement on issues that are so important to so many members across all the political parties in the chamber. Last Thursday, I asked for an investigation and it is now under way. That is necessary for obvious reasons, but also because such actions undermine the sensible process of government. I want the situation dealt with, and I want it dealt with quickly. Today, I announce the findings of the tolled bridges review and how we will move forward on the Forth road bridge. In our partnership agreement, we committed to reviewing all the tolled bridges in Scotland. The first phase focused on toll levels and current experience. It found that there would be no adverse environmental impacts from removing the tolls on the Skye bridge, and those tolls were lifted on 21 December 2004. The second phase focused on principles and management structures. The principles established in the review provide the framework for our decisions. Each bridge has its own unique circumstances, such as different traffic patterns and levels of congestion. We are therefore saying no to a one-size-fits-all approach. Tolled bridges should not be managed in isolation; they must be integrated with all transport options. There is a strong case for the retention of tolls where they were set up to pay for the provision of a bridge and outstanding costs remain. Bridge tolls play an important role in addressing congestion. Although in the long term it may be preferable to replace tolls with a national approach to road user charging, in the meantime it is necessary to use them. However, two criteria must be met before tolls are increased. First, where public transport services are already at capacity, visible and necessary improvements must be in place before tolls are increased, in order to provide genuine alternatives for travellers. Secondly, where a tolling regime is required, bridge maintenance is the first priority for  expenditure, and any extra revenue must be invested in local transport improvements. The Government's key objective for the Forth bridge is to maintain the crossing. Although the construction of the bridge has been paid for, a strong case exists for continued tolling to manage growing demand and meet the high cost of providing a facility of such a scale. The bridge runs at capacity at peak times; the peaks are widening; and approximately 70 per cent of vehicles that cross the bridge contain only their driver. That is unsustainable. Such congestion is bad for motorists, the environment, public transport users and our economy. Removing the tolls would only exacerbate the situation, and the Government is not prepared to countenance taking such action. I recognise the difficulties that commuters face between Fife and the Lothians. Some have public transport options, whereas others do not. Although there are good public transport links to Edinburgh city centre, only 11 per cent of morning trips from Fife end there. There are greater challenges in providing effective alternatives for the 33 per cent of destinations that are west of the bridgehead or the 25 per cent of destinations in west Edinburgh. Much is already planned to assist travellers. The Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine rail project and the redevelopment of Waverley station will give extra capacity between Edinburgh and Fife, providing at least an extra 800 train seats per hour in 2008. The bus route development grant has provided funding for services between Inverkeithing railway station, via Ferrytoll, to Edinburgh. Funding has been provided for bus station enhancements in Fife and, this summer, for the Markinch integrated rail and bus interchange. The A8000 upgrade, which the Executive supports, will be completed by early 2008. Before any toll increase is introduced on the Forth bridge, travellers need to see the completion of visible improvements such as those. We have, therefore, rejected the Forth Estuary Transport Authority's application. We want to concentrate on taking a strategic approach to improving all public transport in the region. That work will be led by the Government and Transport Scotland, working alongside FETA, local authorities and the regional transport partnerships. The issue of most concern is cable corrosion on the Forth bridge. We have considered the findings of the independent technical audit of FETA's analysis. Although there are no immediate safety concerns about the bridge, there are two potential long-term problems. If the corrosion cannot be slowed or halted, the bridge may have to be closed to heavy goods vehicles at some point between 2013 and 2018 and to cars at some point between 2019 and 2024. The experts cannot be more categorical about the dates because it is not  an exact science. That is the risk as they judge it now. FETA is instructing further work: the fitting of acoustic monitoring on the bridge cable; a feasibility study into dehumidification to slow or halt the corrosion, although if that system is fitted the results may not be known for several years; and a study into strengthening or replacing the cable that is due for completion around the summer 2007. The most optimistic timeframe for replacing the crossing is around 2014—if the work starts now. It is prudent, therefore, to start the planning now. However, such planning may prove unnecessary if methods are found to safeguard the existing bridge with more certainty. Starting preparatory work does not commit us to constructing a new crossing. Given the evidence, however, it is essential to start preparations in case the bridge needs to be replaced. That will ensure that if a new crossing is needed, time will not be lost waiting for the results of relevant studies. Transport Scotland will take the work forward as part of the strategic projects review. The role of any replacement crossing will be properly considered in light of the national transport strategy. Due process must be followed. I am, therefore, unable to say what the design of a replacement crossing would be, how much it would cost or how it would be funded. Those issues will be examined as the work proceeds, and environmental considerations will be a critical part of that analysis. The bridges review was also about the Firth of Tay and the Clyde. The Tay bridge joint board owns and operates the Tay bridge, and 65 per cent of trips on the bridge are made by local traffic. The capital costs of the bridge have not yet been repaid, and its tolls play a role in demand management. There are congestion problems at peak times, and the Dundee City Council area is to be an air quality management area. Bridge traffic contributes to those problems, which would be worse without tolls. The board needs to upgrade the bridge's tolling facilities and is considering moving the toll plaza to the south side, to help to ease Dundee's air quality problems. Importantly, it must consider its role in the Dundee central waterfront development. The development will create a sense of dramatic arrival for travellers entering the city, and the bridge must play a key part in that regeneration. However, the board has no powers beyond maintaining and operating the bridge. We have, therefore, decided that tolls should remain and that the board should be given more flexibility to deal with transport issues in its vicinity.  I turn to the Erskine bridge. The construction costs of the bridge have been met, although there are on-going maintenance requirements. Removing the tolls would ease congestion, particularly through the Clyde tunnel and on the Clydeside expressway. Glasgow City Council has declared an air quality management area covering the city centre. The predicted reductions in traffic as a result of removing the tolls would have a beneficial impact on air quality. I am pleased to announce that, in the light of those benefits, tolls will come to end on the Erskine bridge on 31 March. However, it is essential that we prevent the new space on the road from filling up with new traffic. I will be looking to Glasgow City Council and the regional transport partnerships to commit to and to implement measures that lock in the benefits of toll removal. Although I understand that ending the tolls will be widely supported, I am aware of the difficulties that that may cause to toll collection staff. Support will be provided by the Renfrewshire local response team, as part of the Executive's partnership action for continuing employment framework, if required. We must be decisive and must act now. We will plan a replacement crossing, if one is needed, to maintain the links between Fife and the Lothians. We reject FETA's £4 tolls. We will abolish the Erskine bridge tolls, because that is right for the environment and the local economy. We will help the Tay bridge joint board to deliver for Dundee's regeneration. We are taking a principled and consistent approach to Scotland's bridges. It is a fair approach and it is the right approach. I commend it to Parliament.

I will deal with the points in reverse order. First, on the replacement bridge and the studies that FETA is taking forward, it is important to recognise the timescale that I laid out in my statement for when those studies will happen and when they will provide the information that is needed. The suggestion that, in November, we should have immediately commissioned, configured and announced sizeable amounts of public money for work on the case for a new bridge—as Mr Ewing has just suggested—without carrying out an independent audit of the analysis and work already done shows a breathtaking lack of understanding of anything about Government and a breathtaking contempt for taxpayers' money. It was the right decision to employ the Flint  and Neill Partnership to provide an independent audit of the initial findings to make the analysis complete. That independent work has meant that we could announce, as we have done today, that we will begin the process for having a second crossing—if it is needed—following the completion of the studies. I got a bit lost during Mr Ewing's first question, as he could not decide which part of the country he was in. Perhaps he should stick to making points of order, because he is sounder on those than he is on making logical arguments. I noticed that there was no mention of the environment or congestion in Mr Ewing's comments. That shows the position of the Scottish National Party today.

The Conservatives do not appear to understand the point that I explained clearly in my statement about how different arrangements, different amounts of congestion and different levels of car and HGV use on different bridges have to be dealt with by making an impartial and consistent assessment across the bridges network. That is what the tolled bridges review did. Neither the Tories nor the SNP contributed—as they were invited to—to any part of the review. When it comes to consistency, the one thing that the Tories and the SNP are consistent about is that they put forward no views at any time on the issues. [ Interruption. ] No—the SNP did not contribute to the review. The one answer that I can give to Mr Davidson is that we will continue discussions on the A8000.  We expect FETA to continue to play a role in that project and we will sort out the discussions on the funding of the road.

I will certainly look into the issues that Mr Barrie raises with regard to the capacity of any future crossing, if we need it. We will of course do that as part of the on-going work on the strategic projects review, which has already begun. It will be important to consider those issues. I take his point about the destination of the traffic that crosses the bridge, which was one of the issues that I addressed in my statement. We need to consider that, which is why our work on transport and the on-going assessment of different types of public transport provision are important. The two issues that Mr Barrie and many other members from Fife have raised consistently with me over the past couple of months—he also raised them in his members' business debate—are FETA's £4 proposal and the need to start work on a new crossing, if that is necessary. We have rejected the FETA proposal, but we have started work on the new crossing. Some of us have to be responsible and take credit at the same time.

I can certainly give Mr Smith the assurance that any proposals to move the toll plaza to the south of the Tay bridge would have to meet planning requirements, which would include an environmental assessment, and deal with air quality and congestion issues or build-ups of traffic that relate to the plaza. Those would be carefully considered as part of the assessment. I hear his views on the Tay bridge, which no doubt others share. All that I can say is that we have had a lengthy process that involved the tolled bridges review, and, as I stated in Parliament this afternoon, the position is that the review has concluded. It is tempting for me to comment on statements made by others in recent weeks, but I will perhaps not do that today.

There is an opportunity to consider all those issues in the regional transport partnership work that is on-going in areas with which Mr McNulty is familiar and in the strategic projects review, which will be based on a corridor-by-corridor assessment. I am sure that if there are arguments of strategic importance, they can be placed in the context of the strategic projects review. If the arguments are predominantly more regional and local, I am sure that it would be appropriate to take the projects concerned forward through the regional transport partnership work.

Variable tolls have a part to play in the future.

However, as I said in my statement, there are two important qualifications. First, improvements in public transport are required so that people have alternatives. The Tories may not think that that is a good idea, but most of the rest of us think that it is. Secondly, moneys raised from tolls must be used primarily for maintenance and then for improvements in public transport. In the longer term, it seems more equitable to move towards a system based on road user charging across the trunk road network as a whole. I see that developing over the years to come.

Mr Fox probably made a number of sensible points about congestion in the latter half of his question, but the first half reeked of someone having written it long before listening to the statement. We have set out principles in relation to bridges for which the capital costs have been paid off—that means the Erskine bridge but not the Tay bridge. That is the position.

Christine Grahame should know, because she—

Christine May. I apologise. Gosh—a big apology.

I would apologise to anyone whose name I got wrong. Christine May sent me many of the reports that followed FETA's proposal for a £4 toll. One report came from the Federation of Small Businesses; others came from different business organisations. All those reports included a significant amount of economic and financial data, which were part of the evidence that we considered when we appraised the application in principle from FETA's board. I hope that Christine May acknowledges that not only did we consider the data, but we acted on them as well. I think that Christine May argues for the complete abolition of tolls on the Forth bridge, but I cannot agree with her. As a Fife MSP, she knows the congestion issues. All the traffic modelling conducted by independent analysts—which is in the public domain, because it has been published as part of the review—suggests that congestion would simply get worse if the tolls were abolished. She will also know that costs to businesses and  individual travellers rise when congestion gets worse. I am sure that none of us wants that to happen.

The work on the Erskine bridge is already under way. The studies have been done, the financial assessment has been made, and the proposed work has been budgeted for, so although Mr Crawford's observation is interesting, it is somewhat late. Let us consider the consistency of the Scottish National Party. In an SNP press release dated 18 January, Nicola Sturgeon said that any increase in the tolls on the Forth bridge would be unacceptable. She stated: "The SNP says loud and clear £1 is enough." Is that consistent enough for Mr Crawford?

I expected that from Mr Fraser, because that is his standard line. He obviously was not listening. No matter how many times I say it, the Tories will never listen. I said clearly that the debt relating to the Erskine bridge has been paid off because the construction costs have been paid off.

Let us talk to the Tories about the Skye bridge. [ Interruption. ]

Yes, Presiding Officer, but, believe me, I am more than happy to be distracted on the subject of the Skye bridge and the Tories' record on tolls in the Highlands. Murdo Fraser and the Tories are not interested in the argument about air quality improvements, which is an important consideration. Removing the tolls on the Erskine bridge will help to improve air quality in Glasgow and will lock in benefits for Glasgow and the surrounding area by reducing congestion. That argument is profoundly important, but the Tories dismiss it.

Those are important and serious questions on funding. I cannot tell Margo MacDonald today how the crossing—if it is needed—will be funded. Work on that will be progressed by the Finance and Central Services Department of Government in the next year or so. If Government needs to make a decision on a new crossing, it will be important for the ministers of the day to be able to tell Parliament and others exactly how it will be funded.  Margo MacDonald is right about the importance of the timescales and of ensuring that decisions are taken to secure the crossing. I have said that that is what we will do, which is why the planning starts now. I take Margo MacDonald's point about the pressure on the construction industry. That impacts not only on the potential construction of a new crossing, but on the Executive's overall capital programme.

I hope that those men and women can be provided with alternative employment within the company that operates the tolling regime. Indeed, I understand that that is one of the options. For any members of staff who do not want to or cannot be part of that option, work is under way through the local enterprise company, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Department and our initiatives to help individuals who unfortunately lose their job.

I suspect that FETA's role will be to continue strongly with the current maintenance work on the existing bridge. FETA initiated the studies that I described earlier, and the Executive will want to look at them. FETA has an important role in ensuring that the studies come to fruition and that assessment is carried out as efficiently and quickly as possible. In the longer term, the matters under discussion will be considered over the next year. We will take advice on the construction of a potential new crossing and on the implications for organisations, such as FETA or Transport Scotland. I assure Margaret Smith that no future crossing option—if  such a crossing is necessary—will be ruled out. That is the nature of the initial work that Transport Scotland will undertake under the strategic projects review.

The logic was laid out in the statement—it relates to paying off the capital costs and redeeming the debt. I take Kate Maclean's point. I would be surprised if she did not know more about the traffic in the centre of Dundee than I do. That said, the traffic modelling indicated that if we were to remove the tolls at one fell swoop, congestion in the centre of Dundee would worsen. I can go only on the evidence that is presented to me. The bridges review was undertaken to assess all the information and evidence. In addition, the Tay road bridge joint board is considering options for the location of the toll plaza.

Work on the Markinch interchange will start this summer. That is our information, and I hope that Tricia Marwick accepts that assurance. I want the work to begin—as do many people, particularly commuters—because it represents an important part of the public transport links that we want to improve. That reflects the reasons behind our decisions. The analysis of the bridges review was predicated on consideration of how we put in place public transport improvements and of how we ensure that people have travel choices. The best way of ensuring that we achieve those objectives is by proceeding in the way that I have set out. If we simply abolish tolls, which appears to be a new SNP policy—[ Interruption. ] It was not SNP policy when the party issued its press release on 18 January. All traffic modelling shows that if we were to abolish tolls, congestion would rise and rise. I suggest to the SNP, as cheerfully and positively as I can, that that would not be a sensible way forward. In the longer term, road user charging must be considered in the context of the strategic roads network. That approach might well provide a better solution. However, at this stage we cannot create worse bottlenecks than the ones we have, which appears to be SNP policy.

Helen Eadie made representations to me about the FETA proposal for tolls of £4 and about the need to start—[ Interruption. ] May I finish? I was asked about the  need to start the crossing, if that proves to be necessary—[ Interruption. ]

I inform Helen Eadie that the approach that I described in my statement reflects a collective Cabinet decision—[ Interruption. ]

Transport Scotland officials meet Network Rail, the promoters of the proposed Airdrie to Bathgate rail link, regularly to develop plans for the early delivery of the benefits of double tracking the section east of Bathgate.

Mr Muldoon makes a good point about reliability, which is one of the essential components of the delivery of this rail capital transport project. I can tell him that we are aiming to start work on the doubling of the current single-track section east of Bathgate by spring 2007. As he knows, that does not depend on the passage of the bill but can bring some early benefits to the scheme that we all want to see in place as quickly as we can.

I cannot add greatly to the answer I gave Bristow Muldoon a moment ago. I can say that the arguments that have been developed in the context of the promotion of this line recognise the points that Fiona Hyslop has made with respect to the economy of the east of Scotland and Edinburgh in particular and the benefits that this capital investment project can bring to those areas. We are determined to progress it and I hope that I have given some indication of how we will do that in the context of the single-track section.

I would be happy to discuss with First ScotRail the issue that Mary Mulligan rightly raises. One of the aspects of delivering capital transport projects is remembering current commuters and others who currently use Scotland's rail services. Also, we should ensure that we can continue to improve, day by day, the delivery of rail services so that they meet the frequency and time schedules that I am sure are important to the people who use those services to get to work. I give Mary Mulligan an assurance that I will raise that issue with First ScotRail and see what progress we can make.

I last met First bus representatives on 19 October last year for a general discussion about FirstGroup operations and current initiatives.

I appreciate Paul Martin's concerns. We have discussed them. I know that there are considerable issues around the withdrawal of some services and the proposals to withdraw some services in Glasgow, and the impact that will be felt by people in many parts of the city. I recognise the figures he describes and, therefore, that we might have to seek a degree of co-operation with respect to important bus services through financial mechanisms such as the bus service operator grant—which was some £56 million in 2004-05—the grant-aided expenditure for local authorities in the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive area and other initiatives that are funded through the bus route development grant. As Paul Martin will know, local transport authorities have the power to introduce franchising in their areas by asking the Scottish ministers to approve quality contracts. No such contracts have, so far, been submitted for the SPTE area. I would be more than happy to discuss that with Paul Martin and with the local authorities with a view to tackling the issues that he raises.

We will be happy to consider a range of measures in the context of the national transport strategy. I suspect that local people who are represented by members of the Parliament would expect us to look closely at these issues rather more quickly than the national transport strategy may do, although it will lay out the framework that can be used in the context of the answer on quality contracts that I gave Paul Martin some moments ago. On price, Sandra White will be familiar with the regime that is currently in place. I will reconsider the issues that she raises but, ultimately, in this  context, they are a matter for the company concerned.

No. The scheme will include local and long distance scheduled bus and coach services throughout Scotland. The timetable by which such vehicles must be accessible has already been set under legislation reserved to Westminster. It has been agreed in discussion with the transport industry and the Disabled Persons Transport Advisory Committee.

Mr Gordon does not have to thank me for anything; he is quite entitled to say that he does not agree with my answer. I know that he is knowledgeable about this subject, so he will be familiar with the regulations that have been drawn up with the manufacturers and operators in the transport industry, and with the Disabled Persons Transport Advisory Committee. Those standards have also been subject to considerable wider public consultation. A balance must be struck between the timescale in which accessible vehicles should be introduced, the cost of replacing the vehicles and the replacement of vehicles before the end of their working lives. However, Mr Gordon made a not unfair point about rail.

My advice on the timescale is that all full-size, single-deck buses weighing more than 7.5 tonnes will be fully accessible from 1 January 2016, and all double-deck buses from 1 January 2017, although I grant that there are not so many double-deck buses in the Borders. However, since 1 January 2005, new coaches and buses weighing up to 7.5 tonnes have had wheelchair access. All buses that weigh up to 7.5 tonnes will be fully accessible from 1 January 2015, and coaches by 1 January 2020. Those dates were set down in the discussions to which I referred earlier and, I repeat, they were subject to widespread consultation. I am not aware of any application by Scottish Borders Council for quality contracts, but I will look into it and write to Christine Grahame. I disagree fundamentally with Christine Grahame's suggestion that the concessionary travel scheme will be no use to many people in the Borders. I could not disagree more. Of course, the Scottish National Party voted against the scheme, so I can understand why it would say that.

No.

I thought that we would get some rewards for giving straight answers, but obviously not from the Scottish Socialist Party. I am afraid that Ms Kane wilfully misrepresents the report that she alleges to know something about. The environmental mitigation report prepared by WA Fairhurst & Partners does not support the ground investigation carried out on the scheme and, in that sense, it is clear that the findings are not as Ms Kane has indicated. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency, East Lothian Council and Midlothian Council were consulted as part of the new environmental mitigation report and assessment. No land in the corridor occupied by the A68 Dalkeith northern bypass has been designated as contaminated land under the terms of the Environmental Protection Act 1990. We have to deal in facts, even if Ms Kane does not.

The cost about which John Home Robertson inquires is in the region of £1.9 million, although we have yet to receive final figures, due to the assessment process that has to be followed. The benefits of the scheme are widely understood and acknowledged, and he makes an extremely important point about the benefits to people who live in Dalkeith. It would seem that some people would very much like to see heavy goods vehicles continue to trundle through Dalkeith, but I think that most of us agree that that would not be good for local people. That is why, for some years now, there has been a strategic roads need to make the investment that we are now making.

It would be reckless and ill judged to ignore the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, which Mr Ballard clearly wishes to do, and to ignore East Lothian Council and Midlothian Council. All those bodies were consulted as part of the environmental mitigation report that I mentioned, which found that there is no need to designate land as contaminated land under the terms of the Environmental Protection Act 1990. I believe that that is the factual position, and I think that it is important to base any view on the issue on the facts that are presented under that act. I can only commend that approach to Mr Ballard. I cannot agree with his other assertions, other than to say that of course people have a right to make clear their views on any road proposal. However, it is important to recognise the benefits that the measure will bring to the centre of Dalkeith, and Mr Ballard continues to minimise those benefits. Finally, it is not true to say what Mr Ballard has said—not for the first time—about the Dalkeith estate park. The scheme does go through the estate, but it does not affect the Dalkeith country park, because it passes to the north of that. Again, that is an important fact that should be borne in mind.

In 2000, the Scottish Executive set a target to reduce the number of killed and seriously injured—KSI—accidents by 40 per cent by 2010 when compared with the 1994 to 1998 average. On Dumfries and Galloway's trunk roads, that target had been achieved by 2004. However, the number of injury accidents on our road network is still too high and we are committed to reducing accidents and improving safety on all Scotland's roads.

Elaine Murray has my assurance that the strategic overview that she seeks will happen in the context of the strategic projects review. I recognise her points about the recent fatalities on the A76. As she knows—we have discussed the matter in a recent members' business debate and at question time in recent months—we commissioned a report into safety issues on the A76 in response to some of the points that she and other members raised. The report is now being completed and a number of recommendations for safety improvements will be implemented in the forthcoming year. I am happy to discuss those with her when we meet in her part of the world in the coming weeks.

I am sure that local members know much more about the matter than I do, but I understand that Dumfries and Galloway constabulary recently undertook operation juggernaut on the A75 to target goods vehicles contraventions. I hope that that was a useful exercise; it will be important for me to learn how that work went and what, if any, prosecutions followed from it. Those matters will be addressed through normal police enforcement activity. I take Mr Morgan's point about alignments. We will continue to discuss those issues, but I hope that they can be addressed in the context of the strategic projects review.

Parliament sometimes affords publicity to issues that need it; at times it affords publicity to issues that arguably do not need it. This debate is certainly a good example of our ability—in particular, Jackie Baillie's ability—to use Parliament to bring an important issue to the chamber and, I suspect, to a wider audience. I thank her for giving us that opportunity and congratulate her on her motion on the thistle travel card scheme. I will respond on behalf of the Government. I warmly welcome the thistle travel card scheme. Like other members, I congratulate Enable and the range of partners that have been mentioned in the debate on the work that they have done in introducing the card. Transport operators are embracing the use of the thistle travel card. I pay tribute to them and in particular to bus companies for their continued support of the scheme. I encourage transport operators of all types—including rail operators, as Mary Mulligan rightly said—to work harder to participate in a scheme that is making a difference to the lives of many people across Scotland. More could be done. It is encouraging to see disabled people taking a more active role in society and enjoying a fuller and more independent life in their community. We remain committed to ensuring that transport is accessible to disabled people, although I recognise that that is not always the case. Progress has been made, but the purpose of a debate such as this is to take the matter forward. The thistle travel card is an excellent example of how support can be given to older and disabled people to make their travel experience easier. That must be at the core of our proposals. By the summer we will have, for the first time, a national transport strategy for Scotland. The strategy will provide a long-term framework for all Scottish transport developments in all modes of transport. It will build on the transport white paper "Scotland's transport future" by showing how transport can contribute to our five key objectives. One of those objectives is to promote social inclusion by connecting remote and disadvantaged communities and increasing the accessibility of the transport network. Members have mentioned  different aspects of the objective: Mary Scanlon and Fergus Ewing mentioned the rural aspect. Others have discussed different perspectives on the objective. The important point is that in the consultation on the national transport strategy, which I hope to publish shortly, there will be further opportunities to make such arguments. My officials plan future consultation with transport users, including older and disabled people, once the consultative draft of the strategy has been published. I would welcome any other ideas that members have about how we can promote the particular issues that have been raised in the debate. The debate is timely as we move towards the introduction on 1 April of the Scotland-wide free bus travel scheme for older and disabled people. The thistle travel card scheme gives disabled and older people who need special help as they get on and off a bus the comfort that the driver will recognise that they need help. I therefore very much encourage the use of the thistle card and encourage people to obtain one if they feel that it will be of benefit to them. I will give further thought to the comments on the national travel concessionary card, although Donald Gorrie made a fair point about the separate issues that arise. It is important to recognise that there is guidance in the concessionary scheme that covers disability access in particular. Many people who travel with concessionary cards will have a thistle card, but we need to do more to ensure the safety of the older and disabled people who travel under the new scheme. Drivers have a duty to take steps to ensure the safety of all passengers.  In the run-up to the launch of the Scotland-wide concessionary scheme, we will issue guidance for bus drivers that insists that they look after the well-being of people who travel under that scheme. We strongly supported the introduction of the thistle travel card scheme and will continue to support it. I will do my best to respond to the three challenges that Jackie Baillie set us—she always has a few challenges for us. Like other members, I welcome the briefing paper that Enable provided to members and I strongly support its three key priorities, on which Jackie Baillie asked for action. I confirm that we will work with Enable and its partners to evaluate the scheme's impact and that we will fund that evaluation, which will be used to refine the scheme. We will also support the publication of revised material for the thistle travel card scheme, to promote awareness of it among travellers and transport operators. I am happy to play any role that I can in doing what we can to ensure the scheme's continued success in the years to come.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

The new  national entitlement cards will not be issued to individuals until March 2006, as the Scotland-wide free bus scheme for older and disabled people will not be introduced until 1 April 2006. The Executive, local authorities and Strathclyde Passenger Transport are encouraging all eligible people to apply for their card now, to ensure that they receive it in time for the scheme's introduction.

I am grateful to Michael McMahon for raising this important issue at this time. We are working hard to achieve exactly the outcome that Michael McMahon desires, which we are looking to achieve on 1 April, and to ensure that the cards are ready and operate as smart cards using the appropriate technology, and that bus operators, both small and large, are ready to implement the system. We are working closely with the bus operators and the Confederation of Passenger Transport to achieve that. I ask Michael McMahon and other colleagues in Parliament to raise with their constituents the need for those who have not already done so to apply for the card, so that we can achieve the maximum take-up when the scheme comes into operation.

This sounds vaguely familiar. Ministers will consider the current charging proposals from FETA in conjunction with the future of the Forth road bridge. I am due to receive a report on the condition of the bridge at the end of the month, and I want to consider it carefully. We will take forward the bridges review in conjunction with those issues, and thereafter make an announcement.

Ministers have made it clear—indeed, we debated the matter this morning—that they have concerns about the FETA proposals. I am not going to add to what was said earlier or reinterpret it all over again. The issue was properly debated this morning, and I have nothing further to add.

The Executive is addressing road safety through a combination of engineering, enforcement and education.

I would be delighted to take part in the reception that Marilyn Livingstone mentions. I also congratulate Fife constabulary on its work on road safety, and I am happy to discuss the issue further. The member raises an important point about the incidence of accidents on Scotland's trunk and local roads, and the measures that we are taking. The 20mph zone scheme, which she mentioned, is particularly important for Scotland's schools: 173 primary and 123 secondary schools already take part in that scheme. I hope that we can do much more.

Is that the member's position or his party's? What is his position?

From comments that have been made by the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Allan Wilson, and various other ministers, it is clear that discussions were held with the Lexmark bosses and a rapid reaction plan is in place. The local enterprise company has brought forward an action plan for the local economy. There will be help with resources. The Executive is determined to assist  in attracting new jobs to Fife. We understand that this is a difficult time for the men, women and families who are affected by the closure, but the Executive is determined to work on the situation. I do not think that it is at all appropriate to start making cheap remarks about a line in a parliamentary motion. What matters is what we do to help people in really difficult circumstances. I turn to the wider points that were raised in the debate. As I said at the start, this debate is about the by-election so I will not say that we should avoid shabby political point scoring. To be totally honest, we have all indulged in that and I am probably no better than anyone else.

We can agree on that if on nothing else. Members have made serious points about the strategic importance of the crossing of the Firth of Forth. That is probably the one point on which there is consistency and agreement. I give credit to those members who, in the course of a bit of political point scoring, have raised serious issues. We take those arguments seriously and we will study them. A number of members have commented on traffic growth and on the condition of the existing Forth road bridge, not just in terms of corrosion. Tricia Marwick is quite wrong to say that we have all the information and that we must therefore make a decision today. If Tricia Marwick knew anything about government, she would know that that is just not how it works. We must ensure that we have the appropriate information in front of us.

No, I will not give way. I have responded to Tricia Marwick on that point several times at question time, as well as today. If traffic growth continues at its current rate, the bridge will be carrying 30 million vehicles a year by 2018. The rate of traffic on the bridge has grown at almost twice the rate of Scottish traffic and more than 70 per cent of cars at peak times have single occupants. There would be a 21 per cent increase in annual average traffic growth if we simply cancelled all the tolls now. We have to look closely at those facts and at the environmental scenarios. It is important to recognise that. Several members, such as Helen Eadie and Mark Ruskell, pointed out the public transport choices. The choice is not just as the Tories would have it—between the free bridge and the new toll bridge that they would have—but about public transport. We have made progress on the issues and arguments that Christine May raised about rail in particular. That is important.  I turn to the points that were made by Fergus Ewing and Bristow Muldoon.

I am trying to answer the questions. Fergus Ewing mentioned the timing of planning matters. The national planning framework and the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill have potential, and it is up to those of us who will scrutinise that bill and take it through Parliament to get it right. The bill has the potential to move the process forward. I take the point about all the pressures and interests that are involved in such a major decision, but if we were to back away from that process, or to try to circumvent it in any way, we would be taken to task. I did not agree with Bristow Muldoon's points about the Liberal Democrats—I state that for the record—but he made a fair point about FETA. I have a lot of sympathy with that point and we will reflect on his views, as well as those of the Local Government and Transport Committee, which he convenes, and others.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton asked me a fair question about the position with regard to land. He is not correct to say that his Government safeguarded the route; that is not my understanding of the situation. However, land was purchased and is still held by the Government. As I understand it, the Tory Government of the day did not safeguard that route, although land is still held on the north and south sides of the Firth of Forth. I hope that he accepts that.

I have dealt with the point. If the member will forgive me, I am being asked to wind up. Finally, I turn to the point about political chicanery. I can imagine the howls of protest from the SNP and the Conservatives if Government ministers had made a decision on tolls and the Forth road bridge during a by-election campaign.

He does not sit in this Parliament. The Conservatives in particular would have been sanctimonious in their abuse. I will not have it. There is a due process to go through; we will go through it and make the decisions at the appropriate time. When Ted Brocklebank winds up for the Tories, perhaps he can clarify their position, given that  Murdo Fraser changed it three times during the debate. He can also tell us his own position. I see from the "Leven News"—an important organ, I am sure—that the leader of Fife Council's Conservative group "hit out at Mr Brocklebank after the MSP's call to abolish tolls ... He said: 'He thinks you can tell people one thing to their face while your party policy says exactly the opposite. Ted has been a loose cannon since the moment he was elected in May 2003. I think a spell without a portfolio would give Ted time to'" think. It is about time he dealt with that point.

The motion that I seek to amend is that of Mr Fraser, on transport issues—it does not mention that closure.

I want to dispense with the pretence that the debate is an earnest intellectual contribution to strategic transport policy in Scotland, because it demonstrably is not; the debate is about a key issue in the Dunfermline and West Fife parliamentary by-election. Nothing illustrated that better than Mr Fraser's speech. In the first minute of it he said that he and his party were against tolls; by the sixth minute, he was saying that he and his party were in favour of tolls.

The Conservatives were against an increase in tolls yesterday and on Tuesday and Monday, but they are now in favour of it.

No, certainly not. I will come back to the member. In a moment, I will deal with exactly what the Conservatives have said this week, which has been different on every day. The Conservative motion asks the Parliament to accept that all other parties are in favour of bridge tolls and that, as they voted for the enabling legislation, they are therefore guilty as charged. The motion also dictates that the Scottish Government should start work immediately on a new toll-free second road bridge. I want to illustrate the utter hypocrisy of the Tory policy on both counts. The Scottish Government enacted the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001, which sets the framework for local traffic authorities that seek to introduce road-user charging schemes. The Forth Estuary Transport Authority is such an authority, but I want to make it clear that FETA's proposals for bridge tolls will be analysed carefully, fully and in detail and that then, and only then, will ministers decide on them. However, I was astonished, as were all the Scottish ministers, by the scale of the proposals.

I will repeat what I said, because Mr McLetchie clearly did not listen to it. FETA's proposed bridge tolls will be analysed carefully, fully and in detail. However, as every minister has said, we are astonished by the scale of the proposed tolls and there is consensus that the proposals will be considered in that light. It is important to reflect on the Conservative record on tolls. The Tory motion opposes tolls, although, by the sixth minute of Mr Fraser's speech, he was in favour of them. When in power, Tory Governments were in favour of tolls. Section 27(1) of the New Roads and Street Works Act  1991 authorises the charging of tolls by ministers. That Conservative act of Parliament was introduced by a Conservative Government and introduced Conservative tolls. Then there is Carrie Ruxton, the Tory candidate in the by-election. I presume that Mr Fraser thought he was doing her a favour when he dreamed up today's motion. However, let us read carefully what Carrie says in her campaign leaflet. When asked about resolving the problem of the Forth road bridge, she replies: "I would build another bridge. I think we should look at building a new toll bridge and making the existing bridge toll free ... So that people had a choice." That is the new Cameron-Goldie Tory transport policy. The Tories give the people of Fife a choice: they could use Cameron's crossing, the toll bridge, if they are green, liberal and concerned about the planet's future, or they could use Goldie's gateway, the free-market, freely available, free bridge. What a lovely policy that is; Cameron's crossing or Goldie's Gateway so that Carrie has a choice. What are the people of Fife to make of that Tory choice? It is a no brainer—people would have to have no brains to vote Tory in the by-election in a couple of weeks. Do members see poor Mr Fraser's difficulty? On Monday, the Tories lodged a motion advocating the Tory policy of no tolls. On Tuesday, the Tory candidate in the by-election supported tolls. On Wednesday, the Scottish Tory leader, who is up at the back of the chamber, enthusiastically proposed more tolls. Today in Parliament, Mr Fraser had it both ways within six minutes of his speech. To cap it all and to illustrate the depths of Tory hypocrisy, it was successive Tory governments that introduced, backed and implemented tolls throughout the United Kingdom. Mr Fraser's response to Tricia Marwick's intervention was illuminating. In answer to a question about who would set the tolls, he said that it would be the private sector. We all remember what happened when the private sector set tolls under a Tory Government. That was when Lord James Douglas-Hamilton was minister with responsibility for transport. On 3 May 1989, in response to questions from members of Parliament on the Skye bridge tolls, Lord James said: "The amount of toll will depend on proposals made by the private sector."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 3 May 1989; Vol 152, c 163.]

I will take no sanctimonious questions from Mr McLetchie about who will set the tolls. Under the Conservatives, they would be set not by Government, but by the private sector. To heck with the people who live in Fife; the tolls  would be set by the private sector. That is Conservative policy. I want to deal with the important issue of the state of the existing Forth road bridge. At the end of October 2005, FETA received the emerging conclusions on the condition of the bridge's main cables, which suggested that serious corrosion has occurred and that action needs to be taken now if we are to avoid major restrictions on the bridge. There are no immediate safety concerns and the bridge can carry existing traffic loads. I met FETA on 2 November 2005 and within a few days we commissioned the Flint & Neill Partnership to carry out a technical audit of the work that has been done. The report from Flint & Neill, which is one of the UK's leading consultants on cable-supported bridges, will be with me next week. Let me be clear that decisions about the Forth crossing are a matter for the Scottish Government. The Scottish ministers, and no one else, will decide on the FETA proposals and on the long-term needs of the Firth of Forth, including whether a replacement crossing for the road bridge is needed and what form of crossing that might be. The Cabinet has agreed to consider the current FETA proposal for toll changes in conjunction with the future of the Forth road bridge. It would make no sense to decide on tolls before we consider the related issues of the condition of the bridge and a replacement Forth crossing. As I have said on several occasions, I will of course keep Parliament informed of progress on that matter. I move amendment S2M-3863.2, to leave out from "opposes" to end and insert: "notes the record of successive Conservative governments in approving tolling regimes on bridges, and further notes that the Scottish Government believes that a Forth road crossing is essential for the Fife economy and that it will make its decision on the FETA toll application after examination of the condition of the current bridge and the need for any replacement."

Yes. Through processes such as the strategic roads review and the management of the ScotRail franchise, we have identified a balanced programme of improvements, which will bring benefits to all transport users across the whole of Scotland.

We had such a constructive debate this morning and agreed on so many aviation issues that I thought that that good principle could have continued this afternoon. However, I suppose that one out of two is not too bad when it comes to disagreeing with Fergus Ewing. Not for the first time, he talked a load of rubbish. He started by saying that there were no dual carriageway links around Inverness. The last time I drove to Inverness, there were several dual carriageway links all the way up the A9 and through the Black Isle and other areas. Perhaps Mr Ewing could state a few facts, although I know that facts never worry him. Moreover, between 2001 and 2005, £54 million has been spent on maintenance and minor improvements on a variety of routes around Inverness. I believe that those minor improvements have been pretty important, given the safety challenges that we faced and given the representations that, time and again, we received from different individuals. If Mr Ewing chooses to disparage those improvements, he may do so, but that is certainly not what I would do. In addition to that investment in roads, through Network Rail we have invested £10 million to £20 million on rail routes around Inverness in each of the past three years—including £17 million this year alone.

Members from across the parties have made good speeches in this positive and thoroughly enjoyable debate. A debate in which Fergus Ewing and Phil Gallie agree on so much is rare. I enjoyed several speeches, particularly  Kenny MacAskill's withering demolition of the Greens, which was something to savour. As Alasdair Morrison, Murdo Fraser and other colleagues mentioned, we have today arguably observed the death of the Green-SNP coalition. However, on the whole, the debate has been positive. I apologise to Bristow Muldoon if he was late today as a result of the transport system—we will do our best to address that. It was good to see David McLetchie back to full fighting political fitness. In a consensual debate, he still got a rather un-Cameron-like sense of irony into his remarks. It was brave of him—far braver than I would be—to contribute to a debate on different modes of transport. We could all do without yet another lecture from the Greens about the fact that they are the only ones who care about the environment. All members have views about the environment, which we express differently. As the Arbuthnott commission report on voting systems has been published today, perhaps we can recommission Professor Arbuthnott to examine the single transferable speech that we get from Mr Ballard on these occasions. Fergus Ewing made several serious points. Brian Adam talked about who should receive the credit for the measures that we are discussing. I in no way claim the credit, but one member made the fair point that it was Lewis Macdonald, the then deputy minister with responsibility for transport, who introduced the policy formally. I pay tribute to the members from different parties who pursued the construction of a generic scheme, as the fund provides considerable benefits to the wider Scottish economy. Ultimately, it is the Opposition's job to push the Government and the Government's job to take action, which is what we have done and will do again. Significant economic points have been raised in relation to the jobs that go with aviation. The issue is not just people who work for airlines; a strong argument was made about maintenance facilities at several airports, particularly Prestwick. I understand that more such jobs could be created. The crucial point is that if we invest heavily in our education system and high-scale economy, we will create more of the well-paid specialist aviation engineering jobs that we have at Prestwick and, to a lesser extent, in other parts of Scotland. We should advocate Scotland as a centre of aviation excellence and work hard across portfolios and the parties to achieve that. I accept Brian Adam's point that we need to meet the airport operators to discuss the challenges. I have already met all the airport operators in Scotland, including BAA, HIAL and the managing director of Prestwick airport, to  discuss the issues. I also meet the airlines regularly, although I see Loganair rather more regularly—some members will know why. Fergus Ewing's amendment is a little unnecessary. One of its substantive points is a request for a review of the fund. However, our national transport strategy consultation, which will start in short order, will provide an opportunity in Parliament, the Local Government and Transport Committee and further afield to deal with many of the arguments and to consider the issues that have been raised today and the wider connectivity arguments that have been raised in the past. After the consultation, the Parliament will consider, by the end of the summer, a formal national transport strategy for Scotland that will deal strongly with aviation. Murdo Fraser and others mentioned the need for a specific assessment of the routes that have received support. We will do that during 2006, although I cannot ignore issues of commercial confidentiality. Another substantive point in the SNP amendment concerns freight. Fergus Ewing and other SNP members made a fair point on that, as did members of other parties, for example John Scott. The freight strategy consultation is under way, and we aim to have a freight strategy that deals with air freight as part of the national transport strategy that will be in place by the summer. I welcome the consideration by the Local Government and Transport Committee—convened by Bristow Muldoon—of those issues; we will take on board its recommendations. Adam Ingram made a fair point about middle eastern connections and freight routes. I am sure that we all want to consider those issues. Murdo Fraser made a spirited contribution on the benefits of liberalisation and privatisation. As he was extolling the virtues of those processes, I reflected on Lord King's role, and on where his peerage came from. Far be it from me to make any further observations, but I remember the strong arguments from other airlines about access to Heathrow during the 1980s, when all the privatisations were going on. It was difficult for those of us who argued the case at the time to get any airline other than British Airways into Heathrow. That issue remains with me to this day. We had liberalisation, but not when it came to access to Heathrow.

I am going to move on. I wish to deal with some of the more questionable environmental points that were raised by various members. It is ridiculous to argue that more money might be spent by Scots abroad than is brought into Scotland by visitors and business travellers. First, that fails to take into  account the fact that some places are more popular destinations than others. It is somewhat pointless to blame the Scottish Executive, or indeed any political party, for our comparative lack of sunshine or our distance from the main economic, religious or cultural centres of the world. Secondly, there is an environmental argument regarding transport subsidies. However, as many members have rightly pointed out, it is disingenuous to suggest that those matters can be solved just in Scotland. On the one hand, such matters are reserved, and on the other hand they are truly solvable only at an international level. That is important in the context of Mr MacAskill's observations about what happens when planes circle over Heathrow—a significant point, which the Greens ignore at their peril. My response to Mark Ruskell's comments on sea services is yes, but his figures on the contribution of the public sector were wide of the mark. To suggest that only £1 million has gone into Superfast Ferries ignores investments such as the freight facilities grant. If the Greens are going to make an argument, for goodness' sake can they get the facts right? Mr Ruskell was wrong about Eurostar. The company said just last week that it now has a 71 per cent market share of air and rail routes between London and Paris and that it experienced a 14 per cent rise in sales of business-class tickets in the past year alone. That rather gives the lie to the suggestion that rail is not working as an alternative to air. Another important aspect of the environmental argument is the Scottish tourism industry and its commitment to sustainable development. On our ambition to make Scotland one of the world's leading sustainable tourism destinations, responsibletravel.com has ranked Scotland as the best eco-destination in Europe and the ninth best in the world. My colleague Patricia Ferguson is working on the green tourism business scheme, which is already Europe's largest green tourism accreditation scheme. Transport is very much part of that approach, which is widely welcomed throughout the industry. In addition, the airlines are considering introducing environmental labelling and using the quietest and most fuel efficient aircraft. Flybe, for example, is replacing its existing fleet with Q400 aircraft, which provide a 30 per cent improvement in fuel efficiency. The market is driving change from an environmental perspective. Charlie Gordon made a serious and thoughtful speech, although I point out that, in the context of Glasgow, Emirates has been the largest single investment of the route development fund so far. That should be borne in mind by a number of members. However, I share Charlie Gordon's disappointment with regard to the Brussels link, and I will be happy to consider what can be done.  Alasdair Morrison made the right arguments about our internal routes. It is disappointing for me—and I suspect for Alasdair—that the Greens dismiss so easily the improvements to island life and the challenges that so many of us face.

The Greens do not care about the fact that, compared with having to use two taxis, a train and a plane, a direct route with an hour's flight is an improvement for local people. Some of us care about rural transport issues, but clearly the Greens could not care less. To pick up Jamie Stone's point about PSOs, we will use that mechanism wherever we possibly can. In the context of Jim Mather's remarks, we will find the best mechanism to achieve the objective of reducing air costs. The fund has succeeded in its initial objectives. It shows the value of limited public sector investment. It is not by any means a permanent initiative; rather, it is intended to develop an air network that meets, as far as possible, the needs of Scottish business, including our tourism industry. The fund has shifted the perception of Scotland as a market in its own right. The fund is leading to significant economic benefits—low levels of investment by the Executive are forecast to lead to high levels of benefit. Airlines and airports have embraced the concept of the fund as a true example of partnership and risk sharing. On that basis, I encourage Parliament to endorse the motion.

I am intrigued that David McLetchie is vigorously pursuing the Executive on the issue of finances. As I said in my speech, a growth in international destinations from 13 to 40 has been achieved. Surely spending less money to achieve more is an admirable way of pursuing public policy.

Will Mark Ruskell give way on that point?

That is a slightly simplistic take on the issue. If we are to invest the limited amounts that we do in the air route development fund, it is important that we secure year-round services. That was very definitely the criterion and we achieved it. I do not mind whether we achieve it through two airlines or one. Surely the positive aspect is that more Scottish travellers can fly that route all year round.

Does Mr Ewing accept that before the air route development fund was introduced we had only 13 international connections, whereas we now have 40? That is the significant point in the argument.

Scotland's place in the world, and our attractiveness as a place to work, to live in and to visit depends on connections: surface connections by road, rail and sea; technological connections by the information superhighway; and air connections. In order to grow Scotland's sustainable economy and to be globally competitive we need fast, efficient and affordable worldwide transport connections. Scotland's transport system underpins our economy. Equally, the quality of this country's external links can aid or shackle our economic performance. In the 10 years to 2003, before the air route development fund, Scotland suffered a fall in direct international air connections, while our main competitors moved in the opposite direction. Before 2003, many of them were connecting better, competing better and creating opportunities in the global marketplace. Between 1989 and 2003, while Scotland's European and international connections fell by 6 per cent, Denmark's rose by 10 per cent and those of the English midlands rose by 135 per cent. Business after business—whether in electronics, tourism or oil—said the same thing, which was that Scotland's future competitiveness depends on better worldwide connections. We needed to tackle the perception that although Scotland was a good location to conduct business, it lacked direct access to key European and international business centres. Scotland's tourist industry in particular needed direct access as an alternative to transfers at Heathrow, Gatwick or Amsterdam. In launching the air route development fund, our immediate focus was to improve Scotland's connections with existing and developing markets in continental Europe. However, within 12 months of the launch of the air route development fund, two world-class carriers—Continental Airlines and  Emirates Airlines—announced their intention to commence new intercontinental services from Scotland. Those services have been a phenomenal success in providing connections to established key markets and in opening up easier access to the markets of Asia and Australasia. Before the air route development fund, Scotland had just 13 international destinations. By last summer, that had increased to 40. Some 22 year-round fund-supported routes continue to serve Scotland: there are two intercontinental destinations; 15 European destinations; five United Kingdom domestic routes; and 10 new routes are due to commence this year, including Delta Air Lines's Edinburgh service to the important United States hub airport of Atlanta. The success of the fund is not just based on external routes. Internal links have also been developed. The Stornoway to Aberdeen route started just this month, which is meeting clear local needs in the Western Isles. The Shetland to Stansted route will start in June. This year, 1.4 million passengers will be carried on fund-supported routes, out of some 20 million passengers who are served by all Scotland's airports in an average year. Three years ago, 291,000 passengers were carried on such routes; to achieve that massive improvement in Scotland's international connections, we have invested £2.7 million in the air route development fund. That investment will bring £87 million of economic benefit to the Scottish economy over three years, which will rise to £304 million over a 10-year period. That is the equivalent of a £15 return for every £1 of public money over those three years, and £53 for every £1 of public money over 10 years. That investment has begun to fill in the strategic connections that Scotland needs. Our economy has benefited enormously from the fund—nowhere more so than in the tourist economy. The industry is one of Scotland's top five economic drivers. Since the tough days of 2001, which were caused by the combination of foot-and-mouth disease and 9/11, tourism has come back very strongly indeed. VisitScotland estimates that tourism generates nearly £5 billion—up from £4 billion four years ago—of gross revenues for businesses of all sizes throughout Scotland. Direct air links into Scotland are a vital element of that growth.

The overall patterns of air travel have grown mainly because of the advent of low-cost carriers in recent years. There is a strong and clear difference between the growth of low-cost carriers and the strategic links that we have sought to invest in through the air route development fund. It is important to recognise that split. I will return to the short-haul argument in a few moments. However, I observe that some of the connections from Scotland to what we used to describe as regional airports are equally important for our economy as well as for the wider UK and European economies. Those are all factors in how the aviation market has developed in recent times. In 2004, 23 per cent more visitors came to Scotland from Europe than during the previous year. In the first nine months of 2005, visitors from Europe increased by 35 per cent compared with the same period in 2004. All the signs are that growth is continuing. We now have golfers coming here from the east coast of the USA for three to four-day golfing trips, which have been made possible by the convenience of the new direct services to Edinburgh and Glasgow from Newark airport. Large numbers of Scandinavians travel direct to Scotland to Prestwick, a journey which only a few years ago was extremely expensive and meant flying via London. Those figures are good news not only for tourism operators, but for Scotland as a whole. The economic benefits of increased tourism revenues flow throughout the economy. More visitors mean more spending on eating and drinking, on retail and on leisure and entertainment. A significant part of that increase has been enabled by the air route development fund. Expansion of our air routes in Europe complements this devolved Government's European strategy, and new air links enhance Scotland's close links with the new member states of the European Union. Scotland is now directly connected to more destinations in Germany and to Poland—our most important growing market in central Europe—with visitors numbers soaring by 222 per cent in the past year. Warsaw, Kraków, Gdańsk, Katowice and the Czech Republic all have direct air links as a direct consequence of our intervention. I turn to the environmental arguments that surround air travel and emissions from aircraft, which are important. We acknowledge the need rapidly to address increasing emissions from aircraft, which threaten to jeopardise global efforts to tackle climate change. Government must strike a balance between the need to protect our environment and the needs of our economy and society, but in respect of aviation, that will best be achieved at international level, which is why we  support the UK Government in its efforts to have European air services included in the EU emissions trading scheme.

So, should we not try? Surely one of the lessons to learn, even for the Greens, is that international efforts will offer the best progress in this important area. It is facile to argue that we in Scotland could alone control emissions growth. I want to touch on the simplicity of our argument as, I am sure, will other members, because it is one of the strongest arguments for finding coherent, sensible and workable solutions to the issues.

Mr Ballard says from a sedentary position that the scheme is not working, but his question demonstrated that the EU trading emissions scheme was working because he said that it would achieve some decrease in emissions. I would have thought that some decrease is better than none at all.

I find myself agreeing with Mr Gallie—

I find myself agreeing up to a point—that point being in relation to the alternatives that people should have. I would also, however, argue with Mr Gallie, because the rail connections that we wish to achieve would be a better solution than road connections. However, I accept Mr Gallie's historical analysis, which was fair. I cannot agree with people who would simply say no to any air travel—which already appears to be the Green position. However, to those who want to debate the issue rationally, I will offer two arguments from an environmental perspective. First, there has been an inexorable rise in the demand for air travel since its invention. The air route development fund is not responsible for that  growth. It can be debated whether it has added in a small way to the number of people who travel by air by making air travel easier but—as Mr Gallie rightly suggests—the vast majority of people travelling from Scotland would have done so in any case. They would, however, have used the air routes that cause the highest carbon emissions, which are short-haul flights through hub airports.

No. I have dealt with the point. In addition, people travelling to Scotland would still have travelled. The Greens do not accept that, but it is reality. Those people would still have travelled, but they would have used environmentally damaging short-haul routes or would have gone somewhere else—which appears to be what Mr Ballard's party advocates. The carbon emissions would have happened in any case but the economic benefits would have gone to destinations other than Scotland. As we develop our national transport strategy, it will benefit from the stringent strategic environmental assessment regime that has been introduced by this Government. In the meantime, it is facile to suggest that the ARDF has, of itself, been an undoubted contributor to increased climate change. The second environmental argument that I wish to offer is this: it makes sense to reduce train times between Scotland and London. At the moment, 142 flights a day fly those routes. This devolved Government could and would make rail the preferred choice for travel to London. We want to work with Westminster to achieve that goal. This debate is not just about delivering new routes; it is about ensuring that the airport infrastructure and public transport are in place to accommodate the increased demand. Air travellers throughout Europe take for granted the availability of direct rail links from major airports to the continent's capital cities. I visited Oslo in October—its rail link to the city centre is impressive. In the UK, Edinburgh and Glasgow are the two largest airports in terms of annual passenger numbers that do not possess direct rail links to their city centres. Companies that benefit from the investments we will make in improving public transport links should contribute to the costs. BAA will benefit materially from both those rail links and discussions continue to secure a contribution. We have done much, but there is more to do. In the latest available figures, Scotland's financial services sector accounts for 6.3 per cent of the total Scottish economic output, and 9 per cent of all people employed in the service sector are employed in financial services. Scottish Financial  Enterprise wants new air routes from Scotland to key financial locations. As we go further with implementing our strategy, SFE is seeking new routes to destinations including Zurich, Madrid, Boston, New York, Chicago, San Francisco, Hong Kong, Singapore and Mumbai, to name but a few. The air route development fund has narrowed, but not closed, the gap between Scotland and our competition. Others have not stood still. Work remains to be done to ensure that Scotland has an air routes network that meets the needs of companies, the needs of Scotland's role in the global economy, and our business aspirations. There are cities in key markets in Europe that do not yet have year-round connections—cities in countries in western Europe such as Germany, Italy, Spain, Switzerland, France and Austria, and cities in countries in central Europe and the Baltic states such Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and Slovakia. Further afield, Scotland has no direct year-round links with the Indian sub-continent, south-east Asia or—crucially—China. Direct flights to the far east would form a key plank of the enabling environment that this devolved Government is seeking to create for businesses that wish to work with China and the rest of Asia. There is more to do. Scotland's competitiveness depends, in part, on how much more progress we can make. I encourage Parliament to be ambitious for Scotland and for Scotland's economy. I move, That the Parliament endorses the success of the Air Route Development Fund (ARDF) in bringing direct Scottish air links to Europe, North America and within the UK; notes the economic advantages that have flowed to the Scottish economy and the reduced need for short-haul flights through hub airports; supports the development of a European regime that tackles the environmental impact of aviation emissions; further supports work to improve rail journey times between Scotland and London in order to reduce the reliance on domestic short-haul flights, and looks to the further use of the ARDF in developing Scotland's international connections.

At present, we are examining several issues in relation to the Forth road bridge: the operation and management arrangements in terms of the tolled bridges review; the Forth Estuary Transport Authority's plans to introduce a road user charging scheme; and the implications of the cable corrosion findings. That work is evolving and I will keep the Parliament advised of progress at the appropriate time.

I assure Lord James Douglas-Hamilton that urgent consideration is being given to emerging findings from the bridge master and FETA. I have commissioned an independent analysis from the Flint and Neill Partnership, which is one of the United Kingdom's leading consultants on bridges and cable-supported bridges. It is inappropriate to prejudge that analysis. It is important that we obtain that analysis and then assess the exact position. It is important to look at every issue. No motorist would forgive us if we got it wrong, so we should wait until the analysis is complete before we make any final decisions. I assure the member that we will ensure that Parliament is fully involved in that process.

I was sorry not to have participated in that debate. I acknowledge Scott Barrie's point about heavy goods vehicles. I am sure that he is aware that the prediction that has come from FETA and the bridge master is the worst-case scenario. That is why we commissioned the independent study, which we hope will report to us by the end of January 2007. I assure Scott Barrie that his point about the importance of the bridge and the Firth of Forth as a strategic corridor in Scotland is well recognised. That is why we will proceed with this issue.

I have yet to see in the public domain the independent analysis of the position of FETA and the bridge master, but we know what their emerging findings are. As Mr Crawford has also looked at the matter in detail, I am sure that he knows that those findings were based on a 5 per cent analysis of cables. I am sure that we agree that a fundamental decision on strategic investment in Scotland's road and rail network could not be made on such an analysis. That is why we are doing independent work. I do not wish Parliament to think that we had already accepted those dates. As I said to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and Scott Barrie, we will be in a better position to inform our decision-making process when the independent work has been completed. I assure Bruce Crawford that I am acutely aware of the planning and construction horizons for this project. It is self-evident that it is important that we get it right.

I would be happy to make sure that the presentation that I saw towards the end of November—I forget the exact date—is available to all members. It has rightly been made available to the board of FETA and I am sure that the bridge master will be more than happy for it to be made available to members. I will ensure that that happens.

In September, the promoter reported to Parliament that the estimated cost of the Edinburgh tram scheme is £634 million plus an allowance for optimism bias of a further £46.4 million. That gives a total of £714.7 million. The Executive was prepared to consider a grant of £375 million, subject to receipt of a robust business case. Indexation of that is under consideration.

It is interesting to hear the Scottish National Party oppose the trams for Edinburgh. I am aware as, I am sure, is Kenny MacAskill, that Parliament endorsed the general principles of the two tram bills at stage 1. Questions relating to tram schemes in other parts of the United Kingdom should probably properly be pursued by MPs at Westminster.

I am sure that the Edinburgh south suburban line will continue to be part of the City of Edinburgh Council's overall transport strategy, which it is for the council to implement. I have no proposals in relation to that issue. We are currently considering the measures that are before us. David Davidson is usually keen to point out that we are investing too much in public transport. I note this heartening change of emphasis on the  part of the Conservatives towards encouraging spending on public transport.

I am happy to agree that we need to be modern, radical and strategic about transport policy—that is what our two parties in the partnership Government are on these issues. Sarah Boyack is right to talk about the importance of regional transport partnerships and what they can do to ensure that strategic investments are made in Edinburgh and the rest of the country. One of the concerns that have been fairly expressed about some of Scotland's great cities is that they have been unable to look 15 or 20 years hence, to ask what investments need to be made to deal with the situation then and to stick with their plans to ensure that they happen. I hope that the two tram bills continue to make steady progress through Parliament and that we can take these issues forward.

The four voluntary regional transport partnerships have been delivering public transport improvements in their regions over the past few years. We are building on their success by developing the seven statutory regional transport partnerships that were established on 1 December 2005. The new partnerships have a statutory duty to prepare a regional transport strategy setting out how they will improve transport in their region. I am pleased to announce today a two-year funding arrangement for the new statutory regional transport partnerships. The £70 million that we are allocating to them over two years will allow them to deliver a range of transport improvements in their regions and build on the successes of the  voluntary RTPs and Strathclyde Passenger Transport.

That route is exactly the kind of route that could benefit from the capital allocations that we have announced today, as it is a strategic priority for the regional transport partnership in that area, and I hope that it will. This seems like a good opportunity to take that project forward. I hope that the package of work and the funding can be brought forward, as the route is an important one not only for Mary Mulligan's constituency but in a strategic sense across the region.

I am not familiar with the 2 per cent statistic. We might want to look closely at that. However, I recognise the point about the integration and availability of public transport, and about ensuring that there are alternatives to the car in areas where, as Stewart Stevenson fairly points out, there are no train services. We need to find a better balance. I am aware of the good work that Aberdeenshire Council does in its part of Scotland on initiatives such as demand-responsive transport. I can only encourage the council in that work through the capital allocations that we have made today for transport.

From January 2006, the number of bus compliance officers in Scotland will increase to six. Four of them will be funded by the Scottish Executive as part of our commitment to improving bus services in Scotland. That level of resource will enable the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency to adopt an increasingly effective and proactive approach to monitoring and enforcing bus registrations.

I am more than happy to take up Wendy Alexander's suggestion. I ask her and any other members who have concerns about particular operators to bring them to the attention of the Scottish Executive Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department and the appropriate regulatory bodies, so that we can ensure that the services that we all seek for our constituents are the best they can be.

The Executive has no plans to provide concessionary travel to mature students. It provides help with travel costs for mature students under further and higher education funding. Student discounts for travel are commercial decisions made by travel operators.

There has been a consistent policy on this matter for many years—as far as I am aware since 1999, when we were all first elected to the Parliament. It has not changed in that time and we have no plans to change the position. If Mr Harper wishes to pursue the issue with Lothian Buses, he can do so, but he seems to miss the point that we invest considerably in travel support for students—not just mature students but students generally—with the funding that we apply through my colleagues in the Scottish Executive Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department. That has always been viewed as the appropriate way to deal with such matters and we have no plans to change that position.

The Executive's maritime transport division and its state-aid unit have been offering advice to Western Isles Council on its proposal to provide a freight transport subsidy. The council is currently considering its next steps. There has been no contact with the European Commission, but that is a matter for the council to pursue.

First, I acknowledge Alasdair Morrison's role in the matter, work on which began, I believe, a couple of years ago. Reduction of tariffs on the routes across the sounds of Harris and Barra could be included in the service specification for tendering on the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services. Of course, we are considering such matters in the consultation on the specification of the Clyde and Hebrides routes. I agree with Mr Morrison's final point. It is essential that affected customers and businesses rather than just the hauliers themselves receive the benefit of any tariff alterations that we make through a contract or in other way.

That aspect of what is a transport issue would be highlighted by the enterprise company and by other appropriate employment and investment organisations in the case that Western Isles Council is putting together. I am sure that the council is considering such issues. Moreover, I have no doubt that, in the council's discussions with the European Commission, the wider its argument the stronger its case will be. After all, for the Commission, it is a specific transport state-aid issue, but it can be widened out in the context of the points that have been raised.

The problem with Mr McGrigor is that he reads out a question that he wrote some months ago, but did listen to the earlier exchanges. He just does not understand the issue. The fact is that we have state-aid rules. He might choose blindly to ignore them, but that option is open neither to the council, as Alasdair Morrison asked about earlier, nor to any Scottish Executive minister. If and when we deal with state-aid issues, which are the council's responsibility in this respect, we will see what we can do in policy terms. However, it is absolutely not the case that, as Mr McGrigor said, the policy of Scottish Executive ministers is to hold things back or to stop them happening.

Officials from the Scottish Executive have had discussions with officials from FETA and its advisers on the process that is involved in submitting the proposals.

The issue is a serious one for Marilyn Livingstone and other Fife members of whatever party, and for many Edinburgh members who have concerns about congestion in the city. The FETA board's toll proposals must be considered in the context of the emerging findings on the integrity of the Forth road bridge and the tolled bridges review that is under way. Congestion is a significant issue, so it is important to consider the proposals that have emerged from the FETA board in recent weeks. Should ministers approve the application, further opportunities for comment will be available as work progresses,  including a three-month statutory consultation period, a one-month objection period and a likely inquiry. Considerable opportunities will be available but, at this stage, ministers have not reached a decision on the proposals.

I hope that Tricia Marwick realises that the chair of the FETA board rotates and that, not so long ago, the chair was a member of Fife Council, at which time the board had a different policy on the issue. I make the observation that the situation changes depending on which side of the Firth of Forth the chair comes from. She also fell into the Jamie McGrigor trap of preparing her question before she listened to the answer. I will say it again for her benefit: should ministers approve the application, there will be further opportunities to comment as work progresses, including a three-month statutory consultation period, a one-month objection period and a likely inquiry. I hope that the member accepts that there will be considerable opportunities to comment on the proposals.

Sorry—I was hoping that we would get another Mr McGrigor question rather than a Mr Ruskell question. Those are serious issues. I recognise that the proposals are based on FETA's local transport strategy, which has been pulled together in discussions between the relevant local authorities on both sides of the Firth of Forth. That is how progress is being made on those matters. I will consider those further points from Mr Ruskell.

I accept Marlyn Glen's observations about the potential impact of those proposals and I am sure that she and many others will make representations on those matters, both in relation to ministers' decision-making responsibilities and in the ongoing consultation that I mentioned earlier.

That is why I gave the earlier answer to Marilyn Livingstone. We must bring together the emerging findings on the existing Forth bridge, the tolled bridges review and FETA's proposals to Scottish ministers in relation to a tolling regime. I hope that Mr Davidson will accept that it is logical to bring those matters together and to consider them in their entirety.

The Scottish Executive will work on issues for which it is responsible, with BAA plc Scotland, on the sustainable development of Aberdeen airport.

I recognise the growth of Aberdeen airport, which Mr Baker has mentioned. I use the airport frequently and I look forward to the terminal improvements, which will greatly improve the service for passengers. The Executive's decision to construct the Aberdeen western peripheral route will be of particular importance to the surface links. There are some specific issues concerning the junction that is closest to Aberdeen airport, and discussions are continuing to move matters forward. We also recognise the importance of  public transport links between Dyce station and the airport, and we are addressing that issue with the relevant agencies and Aberdeen City Council.

Mr Adam makes a fair point about the success of the Executive's route development fund, and I am grateful for his support in that matter. He is correct in saying that additional services from Edinburgh airport have been announced this week. He will also know that six routes from Aberdeen airport currently benefit from route development fund assistance. I strongly hope that that will continue. As Mr Adam knows, we work closely with BAA, through Scottish Enterprise, to encourage that. I take his point about the number of Poles who are working in a variety of businesses in the north-east, including fish processing businesses, and I hope that they will add to the commercial logic of improving international links.

I thank Alex Fergusson for bringing the debate to Parliament. His motion sets out a range of issues relating to this section of Scotland's trunk road network. I join other members in expressing condolences to all those who have been tragically affected by the recent accidents. Members have given considerable historical background to the A76, including the route action plan—glossy or otherwise. One or two members have also suggested that no investment has taken  place but, as Alex Fergusson and others have more fairly pointed out, that is not the case. There are two relevant works contracts in the 2005-06 transport programme: the reconstruction of the carriageway and associated improvements at Sanquhar, which have just started; and the resurfacing and associated measures in New Cumnock. The combined estimated cost of those projects is in excess of £1.5 million. The route action plan study recognised that, overall, the level of traffic on the A76 would not justify a major upgrading of the road from end to end. Subsequent analysis has not materially altered that position.

I will make a few more points and then I will give way to Mr Neil. Six schemes were identified at the time and were classified as short, medium and long-term objectives. The short-term schemes were at Crossroads and Polquhirter; the medium-term ones were at Brackenhill and Gateside; and the long-term ones were at Glenairlie and Cample. Two schemes were initially progressed: those at Crossroads and Gateside. The Crossroads scheme was completed in late 2003 and replaced an offset crossroads junction with a new roundabout and a section of overtaking lane. A scheme between Gateside and Knockenjig was prepared but it has not hitherto satisfied the necessary value-for-money criteria; some members have mentioned that this afternoon. Modifications were made to the original scheme but were not agreed by local landowners, as I am sure that members are aware. Dumfries and Galloway Council has been invited to assess the possibilities of another scheme in the area and I await the results of that discussion. A further route action plan proposal that is being taken forward is the promotion of the scheme at Glenairlie, which is south of Sanquhar. The scheme is currently being prepared and will provide back-to-back guaranteed dedicated overtaking opportunities. I hope to publish the draft orders for the Glenairlie improvement early in 2006. The remaining schemes on the A76 will be progressed subject to competing priorities on the network—all transport ministers face competing priorities.

As I understand it—although it was before my time—we did promote the improvements but we could not reach a conclusion on the value-for-money criteria. We modified the plans, but they then did not meet the aspirations of local landowners—I believe that there were issues to do with an underpass and local farmers. We have invited Dumfries and Galloway Council to help us with that particular matter. I will give way to Alex Neil on his earlier point.

I will come on to that when I talk about general roads policy in a moment or so. I did not say, and no transport minister has ever said, that the only criterion is the weight of traffic on a particular section of a road. Alex Fergusson said that the upgrading of the A77 to motorway standard has brought about a steady increase in traffic on the A76. That is not the case. Records since January 2000 show that there has been a very small increase in A76 traffic in line with national traffic trends. I am not persuaded by the argument that there has been a huge displacement. There has been some change, but we should not overdo that argument. Parliament will understand that I cannot comment on the recent A76 accidents because investigations are under way. The police have not indicated that the physical road environment was a contributory factor in the most recent accident, but my officials and the operating company are reviewing the circumstances to establish whether action requires to be taken. However, I acknowledge that the safety issue is core to the argument that has been made this afternoon. The safety performance of the trunk road network as a whole is reviewed annually and a programme of safety measures is implemented to mitigate identified problem areas. I have instructed the 2005 review of accidents to begin. That will identify safety schemes for implementation in 2006. The potential for accident prevention schemes at accident clusters on the A76 will be considered as part of that review. I am extremely concerned about accidents that have occurred on that stretch of our trunk road network, so I have asked the department to look at this as a matter of urgency. The report will be with me in January. The current trunk road programme is full, with more than 40 major projects that will serve  communities and users throughout Scotland, including the A76 Glenairlie scheme that I mentioned. In 2006—this answers the point that Alex Neil raised—we will start work on the strategic projects review, which will provide an opportunity to consider the major public transport and road transport priorities for the future. The review will take into account issues of national or strategic importance that affect the trunk road network throughout Scotland, including the trunk road network in south-west Scotland. The A76 will be part of that review.  I welcome the formation of the A76 action group, whose first meeting is, I understand, scheduled for Friday. The group will provide a useful focus for input to the strategic projects review. I can assure the Parliament that I have asked senior officials from the Executive's trunk roads divisions to attend that meeting on Friday both to report on progress on the A76 schemes and to listen to important local concerns in light of the motion that we have debated this afternoon.  Meeting closed at 17:48.

Design work is well advanced and I expect draft orders for the scheme to be published next spring.

Dr Murray is correct in her assessment of the situation. She is also correct about the cost of the scheme. Although this will provide no comfort on the timescale, I am pleased to say that because of the additional design work, we have been able to reduce the estimate of cost to £6.8 million. It is expected that the project will take 12 months to complete and I am led to understand that it will start during 2007. I will give the member an exact date as soon as I can.

I take seriously the point that Alasdair Morgan, Dr Murray and others make about the circumstances of the A75 and other routes. Several schemes, including those for overtaking, have been identified and are in preparation. In response to questions that were asked a couple of question times ago, I have undertaken to consider in coming weeks several specific issues that have come to my attention in relation to the A75 and the A76. I will pull all those matters together and instigate the urgency that we all need.

No. We expect the changes that the Procedures Committee is considering to speed the Parliament's consideration of the Glasgow airport rail link bill.

I take Mr Gordon's point. He sounds like an eminently sensible character to have on the Procedures Committee, but that is a matter for my colleagues rather than me. I assure him that in the discussions across parties and with the office of the Minister for Parliamentary Business and my office, we seek to streamline the procedure to ensure that the pace and appropriateness of scrutiny of private bills are improved. That is under active consideration at the Procedures Committee and we hope to introduce measures before the turn of the year.

Mr Davidson knows the answer to that question, because I was asked it—I forget whether it was by him or by another committee member—during the Local Government and Transport Committee's consideration of a statutory instrument the other week. The answer is of course yes—SPT will continue to do that task.

A programme for starting work cannot be set until the outcome of the current appeal against the road orders is known.

I understand the frustration of Janis Hughes and the people whom she represents. The delay is because of court actions and, unfortunately, such matters are quite outwith our control.

A decision on indexation of the £375 million grant for the Edinburgh trams has not yet been made. That will be considered along with other key issues in the tram business case.

Like my predecessor, I will respect the procedures for private bills. Any transport minister would do that. We will ensure that consideration of the business case for this project takes place once Parliament has concluded its deliberations. As Margaret Smith suggests, Parliament has already accepted the general principle behind having an Edinburgh tram network. Costings are under active review; we take such issues seriously. However, the first important thing to do is to reflect on the robustness of the case that is made by the City of Edinburgh Council, as the promoter of the project.

I accept Sarah Boyack's central contention. The length of time that we all take to bring such projects to fruition helps neither in meeting cost estimates nor in assessing the business case. We can do what we can, but we are reliant on the parliamentary process that the Parliament agreed to for the handling of private bills.

I am happy to agree with Mr Ballard that there is a considerable degree of excitement about the potential for the Granton area of Edinburgh. Many agencies, led by the City of Edinburgh Council, will come together to pursue ideas in that regard. We must ensure that we have the right public transport solutions for that part—and for other parts—of Edinburgh. As for Mr Ballard's final point, I can only reiterate my response to Margaret Smith and Sarah Boyack: the Parliament has accepted the general principle of the Edinburgh tram network, and we are now working on it.

The Scottish Executive has had discussions with local authorities and other relevant agencies in the preparation and implementation of the air transport white paper, "The Future of Air Transport".

Those points are fair, and I acknowledge the concerns of local people who live under the flight path of a major airport—or, indeed, any airport in Scotland. I am happy to have the appropriate discussions in this area, but I remind Mr McNulty that, the other week, the Local Government and Transport Committee agreed a particular aspect of the new aviation arrangements that will provide more assistance to and opportunities for individuals and organisations to make representations on these matters. I hope that the mechanism will help to address some of those detailed points.

We continue to be very supportive of rail freight. The rail and freight strategies that are currently being developed will address how and where it is appropriate for the Executive to intervene to encourage more transportation of freight by rail.

I accept the argument about the importance of moving freight from road to rail, including on the A9. I am happy to have my officials work with any parties in the supermarket industry, as Mr Swinney alluded to, or in other industries such as timber, where we are making some progress, to consider a consortium-style approach—or, indeed, any approach—that could achieve this objective. I should point out that, since July 1999, we have invested £39 million in 19 rail projects, which every year remove 19 million lorry miles from Scotland's roads. I accept that we could do considerably more and I am hopeful that a number of projects will come to fruition in the coming months. In addition, we have invested in and will make sure of the Mossend upgrade, which will help that overall package.

Mr Ruskell makes a fair point. It will obviously be helpful to our overall enterprise and economic policies in this area for us to move more freight on to rail. I will be happy to look at the projects that Mr Ruskell and Mr Swinney have mentioned. It is important that we keep the issue moving and that we can show a considerable modal shift during the period of this Administration. That is what we are committed to doing.

Scott Barrie is fair to point out the conundrum at the heart of rail operational policy. It is important that the route utilisation study that is being undertaken by Network Rail addresses the pinch-points that Scott Barrie rightly raises. We need to get the balance right between increasing demand through the First ScotRail franchise of commuter services such as the Fife circle and our overall objective of moving more freight from road to rail.

This is the final legislative stage of delivering the commitment that we first gave in the 2004 transport white paper to transfer the relevant rail powers of SPT to Scottish ministers. We have been clear and unambiguous in our statements to Parliament that a transfer of powers would take place.  The order before Parliament this evening is the right step to ensure a coherent approach to rail strategy and delivery in Scotland. Unlike the Tories, we feel that we cannot afford to have a fragmented structure as we try to improve the railways and their role in Scotland's integrated transport system. We were always committed to SPT's having a role in the development, management and monitoring of rail services. However, I understand that, despite the agreement reached at the meeting on 8 November, SPT cannot recommend signature to its authority. That state of affairs is regrettable. As a result, SPT will no longer work on the management and monitoring of rail franchise services and the staff involved in those activities will be transferred and begin work in the Scottish Executive next week. The process of transfer is being progressed with SPT this week and I thank it for its co-operation. Last week, I reassured the Local Government and Transport Committee that staff who transfer will not be disadvantaged by the move. Transferring staff to the Executive will allow us to retain their experience and expertise, which we will need if we are to continue to improve rail services in Scotland. This devolved Government argues for a unified, simplified rail structure for Scotland and a rail service that delivers for passengers and the Scottish economy. The Tories argue for fragmentation. [ Interruption. ] I will repeat that, because the Tories missed it the first time. They argue for fragmentation, chaos and no accountability—but they would, wouldn't they? After all, it was the Tories who privatised the rail industry; it was the Tories who were directly responsible for the resulting chaos; and it is the Tories who now admit that they got it wrong—but not, of course, in Scotland. I urge the Parliament to have no truck with a party that, when in Government, made such mistakes. This devolved Government is now putting those things right.

We are considering the findings of the tolled bridges review phase two and will announce our decisions on the outcomes in due course.

As I am sure Tricia Marwick would expect, those matters are being considered as part of the review. We continue to analyse the responses. There has been considerable consultation with regard to those points, and we will make our announcements in due course.

We had an interesting discussion the other day at the Transport and Local Government Committee about strategic, and indeed local, projects and how they should be taken forward in the context of the establishment of regional transport partnerships. I am keen for those partnerships to produce proposals and ideas for the road, rail and other public transport links that they regard as important in their areas. I would be happy to discuss those issues further.

The use of the Rosyth to Zeebrugge ferry service has been discussed on a number of occasions at meetings with the Scottish freight industry and other interested parties. I met representatives of Superfast Ferries on 10 November.

I very much accept Mr Barrie's points about the importance of Rosyth, its facilities and the ferry link. I hope that the company will be able to put the operation back on its previous footing; indeed, I discussed both that issue and the service's financial future when I met its representatives. Recently I have met representatives of the Freight Haulage Association, and I am well aware of the association's views on the importance to the Scottish economy of Rosyth and the ferry connection. That reinforces Scott Barrie's important argument about Rosyth's pre-eminent position.

I hope that Mr Crawford accepts that there is a difference between telling a commercial operator what it can do and being as constructive as possible, through agencies such as Scottish Enterprise and privately run organisations such as the Forth Ports Authority, to ensure that Rosyth is cost attractive and that Scotland has a viable enough economy and the sheer weight of freight to ensure that, in turn, the ferry service is viable and can return to its previous occupancy levels. We need to address some issues in that respect but, as I have said, I cannot tell the operator what to do. I can only strongly encourage and work with our agencies to ensure that we have the best possible service.

One important aspect of the Rosyth to Zeebrugge service was the growth in tourism that it encouraged in both directions. We want that growth to be not only maintained but enhanced. Air services and ferry services have different markets. As someone who comes from an island, I certainly believe in the importance of ferry services and, in working on our forthcoming national transport strategy, I will do all that I can to consider the best way of further promoting links from mainland Scotland to continental Europe. I encourage the Greens to be part of that debate. That said, I will not turn my face away from the importance of the route development fund, which brings important advantages to the Scottish economy. Indeed, the Scottish business community has told us for many years that having more direct, point-to-point links is important for business and the tourism industry.

Mr Adam was right to say that I have no constituency interest in rail, unlike in some other transport projects. However, I say at the outset that one of my predecessors, in representative terms, went down to the House of Commons fees office—I hardly dare raise the issue of expenses—and was given a travel sheet to indicate what mode of transport he would use and where his nearest transport points were. When asked what his nearest railway station was, he replied, "Bergen." Therefore, I have an interest in rail matters, albeit that they are sometimes in different countries. The debate has been a thoughtful one. I apologise for picking out just two members, but I would particularly like to thank Sarah Boyack and Alasdair Morgan for raising the important judgment calls that must be made in balancing the particular challenges of freight and rail commuters. I start by acknowledging what Fergus Ewing said at the outset. He gave a genuinely brave analysis of the position, and I hope that he does not suffer that terrible crime in politics of being selectively quoted thereafter. I certainly take the point that he made. I also take seriously Derek Brownlee's point about meddling. I can assure him that this is not a minister who wants to meddle in the system at all, which is why we have set up the transport agency. That is what it is there to do and that is why it will have operational responsibility. All I say to Derek Brownlee is that he should ensure that David Davidson understands that point, because he did not show that he did in his opening remarks. Operational responsibility is very much at the core of the transport agency. Having been told that it was not appropriate for a minister to meddle, I was then encouraged in many contributions to meddle hugely. Not least of those contributions was that of Mike Rumbles, who seemed to be getting into a bidding war with other colleagues on who should take personal responsibility for putting forward the aspirations of the community in Laurencekirk. I will watch that with interest.

I really should not, but I will.

I knew I should not have taken an intervention but I take the member's point. I have discussed the issue with him and I assure him that progress is being made on the project. A specific point has arisen to do with the developer's contribution. We will have to consider what can be done there before the funding package can start to take the shape that we will need it to take for the project to happen. Bristow Muldoon, Sarah Boyack and others talked about the strategic overview and the importance of Waverley. I will reflect on that and on a number of capital projects, and I will talk about why we are investing in those projects. The projects are not just simple solutions to pinchpoints; they are of strategic importance to Scotland, as Bristow and Sarah said. That is very much the case with Waverley. I say to Sarah Boyack that I know that City of Edinburgh Council is considering a number of options for further development of Waverley station, and we are very much encouraging that. The objective is to improve transport efficiency and passenger access, and to upgrade passengers' rail and station experience. Edinburgh Waverley should be a flagship for the whole of Scotland. It is a fantastic building in its own right and we should make as much as we possibly can of it. My officials and officials at Network Rail are assisting the council with the project. A number of colleagues have spoken about the Edinburgh airport rail link. That, too, should be a great project for Scotland not only for tourism but in providing the kind of transport experience that we Scots get in many other parts of Europe. I cannot agree with Mark Ballard that the link is just about Edinburgh. It is not; it is about the whole of Scotland. That is why it is such an important project for all members of the Parliament. I take Karen Whitefield's points about stations on the Airdrie to Bathgate line. We are currently looking into that and I hope that we can make progress as quickly as possible. Karen and others spoke about how the line could help to alleviate congestion and reduce pollution. They made important points about the strategy behind our capital investments in rail systems.

I wanted to pick up on that point and am happy to do so now—especially as the Minister for Parliamentary Business is sitting to my left. We would be very happy to work with the SNP  to make the parliamentary process better. I am sure that we can do that positively. A number of colleagues have spoken about car parks, again in the context of reducing pollution and congestion. Christine May and many others made strong arguments for creating more car parking spaces at stations throughout the network, to encourage more people to use rail. I am determined that we should find solutions to those challenges. Alasdair Morgan spoke about freight, as did John Swinney and Murdo Fraser. Murdo spoke about Highland Spring and I would be more than happy to find out about the particular circumstances there and to see whether we can help. In answer to John Swinney earlier on, I think I mentioned the route utilisation exercise that is under way. However, Alasdair Morgan was right: we have to make fundamental choices about the balance between city-to-city links, stopper services that satisfy more local transport needs and freight services. Striking that balance will be fundamental in our consultation and in our route utilisation study. That study is about finding out about the capacity of the system and how it can be used.

That is part of the consultation exercise. It is also part of the strategic projects review, which will flow from the national transport strategy next year. I believe that it will provide opportunities to take forward exactly those points. Unlike those who grandstand permanently from the back benches, Bristow Muldoon made a reasonable argument about staff and strikes. I will discuss the issue with the STUC. It cannot be in the interests of the franchise operator to cover industrial action, despite what Mr Sheridan may think. No one in the real world could believe that a franchise operator could subsequently win a franchise having allowed such a thing to happen, but then perhaps Mr Sheridan is not in the real world. How we take that forward is important, and we will do it in the right way and not in any other way. I am happy to meet Sylvia Jackson to discuss Crianlarich. I know that she has been concerned about that issue for some time. We need to find a resolution to it as quickly as possible. Many members raised the issue of costs as well as issues concerning Network Rail. I understand colleagues' concerns about projects that are not  proceeding as quickly as they should. The devolution of rail powers and responsibilities for Network Rail and the work that the transport agency will do give us a real focus on those issues. I know that many of the projects need a bit more effort—and a bit more communication with MSPs, apart from anything else—a little more efficiency and some quicker responses. I am determined to find ways to allow that to happen operationally through the agency. I can tell Fergus Ewing that I met Janette Anderson for discussions. We dealt with how we can best fast-track parliamentary bills with the appropriate scrutiny. I discussed with her the funding mechanisms and the process that Parliament undertakes on scrutiny. I hope that I have dealt with the Conservatives' arguments about bureaucracy. I cannot resist one bit of party politics, because this is a good quotation.

It is a one-minute quotation. Bristow Muldoon was right about the Conservatives. Rail was a privatisation too far, as the Tories have said themselves. I can do no better than David Willetts, a man with some knowledge of the Conservative party, who said: "I would not defend the way we carried out the railway privatisation ... Rail privatisation was a classic example of taking a model that had worked for one industry and wrongly applying it to different circumstances." We should all learn from that, and perhaps when the Tories are criticising us heavily they should reflect on Mr Willetts's words. This has been a good, useful debate in which important and strategic issues on the future of Scotland's rail system have been raised and we have debated what we need to do. We have come a long way from the experience of the passenger who got off a train at a certain stop only to hear an announcement ring out over the station platform: "Will the passenger who has just left the train please rejoin it immediately, as this was an unscheduled stop?" We are doing much better than that. In 2005-06, for the first time, we will be spending more than £1 billion—which will increase to £1.4 billion by 2007-08—of the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department's budget on meeting the commitments in the 10-year transport plan. Seventy per cent will be spent on public transport over the period of the long-term transport investment plan to fight congestion and to promote more sustainable transport. It is right to invest in that way, and Parliament has an opportunity to be part of it.

That is decent of the member.

indicated disagreement.

I thank Fergus Ewing and David Davidson, who lead for their respective parties on transport, for their helpful suggestions about the structure of today's debate. I genuinely hope that this can be an opportunity to consider longer-term perspectives on rail and why it is important to Scotland and that the debate can take place in that spirit. The biggest transfer of powers to Scotland since devolution has happened. Scottish ministers now have the central decision-making role in the future of rail in Scotland. We can and will bring a real focus—a Scottish focus—to the needs of Scottish passengers and businesses. This morning I travelled on one of Scotland's key commuting lines, the Fife circle. We are using our new role to lead a joint performance team to consider performance on that line. That team has already identified options for further investment over the coming years to improve its performance. That has been possible because of our new role in rail infrastructure and because of this devolved Government working in partnership with Network Rail and First ScotRail to deliver integration and co-ordination of their work.

That is an important aspect of the approach, which will be dealt with in the on-going consultation exercise. Mr Swinney might wish to bear in mind two specific points. One is the use of the freight facilities grant and the ability of that mechanism, which has been used widely in Scotland already, to be developed further. The other is the route utilisation work that is being undertaken by Network Rail, which will consider the pinchpoints, the balance between freight trains and passenger trains and how we maximise the use of our network. I will try to say a few more words about that in due course.  The opportunities to deliver performance improvements that I believe we have and can take are already being realised right across the Scottish rail network. As Minister for Transport and Telecommunications, I will not be complacent about the performance of First ScotRail and Network Rail. That is what the transfer of rail powers to Scotland is all about. I met First ScotRail and Network Rail bosses together in Edinburgh last night to discuss the issues at the heart of rail performance in Scotland. Rail architecture in Scotland is simpler than elsewhere, with fewer bodies, fewer companies and a unified approach. I want an approach with Government, First ScotRail and Network Rail working together to deliver for rail passengers.

Unlike Mr Sheridan, I do not want there to be strikes on the railways; I want the railways to provide good services for passengers. I will work with the Scottish Trades Union Congress, which I will meet shortly to discuss those and other issues. These opportunities offer a big but exciting challenge to build on what we have already done and on what we can do for the future. I hope that that is what today's debate can be about. I aspire to better connections across Scotland; faster connections between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom; and better use of the rail network to enable more goods to get to market, as well as more people to get to work, by rail. For the first time, we are asking in the consultation exercise what people and businesses in Scotland want from rail and where the balance lies between the transport choices that we face—the choices that people have about rail. That is why we have launched the consultation on rail strategic priorities. When I met the Confederation of British Industry earlier this week, I asked it those questions and I look to it, as to other business organisations, to consider why rail is important to business and to supporting the economy and how rail can give Scottish companies a competitive advantage. Today's debate is an opportunity to develop a new Scottish vision for rail. Why should we not have a high-speed intercity express network on a European or far eastern model if that is what Scotland needs for its future? Can high-speed links to and from Scotland help our economy and Scottish tourism and be a real alternative to the  plane in the context of London links, or is it right to focus simply on improving existing links and connections? We have the opportunity to set out the future of rail in Scotland. I want to set out a strategic framework that will allow us to do that, and I encourage my fellow parliamentarians to take this opportunity to debate the questions that really matter. The challenge for us, in Parliament, is to look 10, 15 or 20 years hence in considering these issues. Real devolution provides a new framework for rail in Scotland. It provides a new legal framework, as Scottish ministers today have far wider powers than before. It provides a new financial framework, with more than £360 million of funding transferring year on year to support us in our new role going forward, added to record investment in rail to date. We have a sound financial basis on which to build. Real devolution also provides a new operational framework, meaning clearer relationships that will enable greater co-ordination of activities and interaction by the key players. It means Transport Scotland having the flexibility to develop its own direct relationships with the private sector and better engagement between the rail industry, passengers and freight customers.

That £360 million is about Network Rail and the outputs that we will look for from it in relation specifically to the tracks and the infrastructure. We will discuss that matter further at the Local Government and Transport Committee next week, when I will be able to give a better and longer answer to those questions. We have made a record investment in rail, which is delivering for passengers. The First ScotRail franchise in its first year has delivered significant improvements. The number of train delays caused by First ScotRail was down 20 per cent in the first year of the franchise. A new regime for higher-quality standards for stations and trains that is unique to the ScotRail franchise is ensuring a continuing improvement in service quality for the passenger. Investment in customer-focused areas has seen 400 new staff join First ScotRail; a new customer contact centre in Fort William; better cycle storage facilities; enhanced customer information services; and train fleet refurbishment. Investment is gathering pace, with the franchise also set to deliver a £40 million package of improvements throughout Scotland, including the upgrading and improving of all stations and the  introduction of closed-circuit television and customer information systems at stations.

I would be happy to discuss the dynamic loop further with SPT. However, we need further information from SPT, as Margaret Jamieson knows. Once that is received, the matter can be taken forward. We are also supporting the growth of the rail franchise: 29 new trains providing more than 5,900 extra seats, complemented by longer platforms at 26 stations, thereby increasing capacity on key commuter routes by 30 to 50 per cent. We are delivering a large programme of enhancements to the rail network that will see passenger services, freight services, service quality, network performance and patronage grow and improve over the next decade.

The reopening of Laurencekirk station has been championed for some time and I know that it is important to Mike Rumbles. I have looked at the latest information on the matter, and note that a process must be gone through. However, I take his point about the advantages of new station openings. I ask him to bear it in mind that when decisions about station openings such as the one that he mentioned are made, there are consequences for the city-to-city connections that we also want to maintain. The balance of that argument is one of the matters that must be considered. The results of the consultation will be used to guide rail investment decisions in future. Other work continues, such as the route utilisation strategy for Scotland, which will identify hot spots on the network, the issues that affect performance and the options for alleviating them. We are also leading a study to produce a  Scotland planning assessment to look at what rail is good at and what it does best. That will indicate demand over the next 10 to 20 years and the extent to which the current network will have to change to meet that demand. A sustainable, effective and efficient transport system is crucial to the economic health of Scotland and its people. This is an exciting time for rail in Scotland. We have a huge opportunity to shape Scotland's railways for generations to come. I want Scotland's railways to be as good as those anywhere in Europe or, indeed, the world—a genuine renaissance for rail in Scotland. I ask Parliament today to give voice to that challenge.

Network Rail plans to introduce a bill into the Scottish Parliament early in 2006. The Scottish Executive will continue to work with Network Rail to ensure that it has the resources that are needed to achieve that.

I can give Mary Mulligan the assurance that she seeks on both points. On her question on the consultation, I understand that the information on some of the key aspects of the scheme has yet to be provided in its final form by the consultant Jacobs Babtie. Once that is done, the consultation can begin and the formal meetings can take place. Obviously, the information is required before proper consultation can go ahead. Again, on the two specific issues that Mary Mulligan raised, I give her the assurance that she seeks.

That question is a bit wide of the subject of the question that Mary Mulligan asked.  Certainly, we look at the possibilities that would arise from station reopenings or, indeed, new stations. As I am sure Margaret Mitchell will expect me to say, all proposals have to go through an appropriate procedure in relation to value for money and the need to justify costs in terms of the return that can be achieved. However, I absolutely agree with the central point that she made: the potential benefits can be considerable, in terms of advantages to commuters and local people and attracting people in general back to using our rail system.

It is very welcome that the SNP supports that legislation. I recognise that it will, as Fiona Hyslop rightly says, improve the private bill process and the mechanisms that are available to the Parliament properly to scrutinise these matters. In respect of the Bathgate to Airdrie rail link, as I said to Mary Mulligan earlier, I am confident that we can deliver the legislation within the parliamentary timetable. That would, of course, allow the link to happen within the timescale that we have set out. However, I appreciate Fiona Hyslop's kind offer.

We are supporting local authorities, Strathclyde Passenger Transport and the west of Scotland transport partnership on a number of transport projects in west-central Scotland. We are also establishing a new west of Scotland regional transport partnership with responsibility for developing a west of Scotland regional transport strategy that will deliver sustainable economic development. In their regional strategies, RTPs will have to consider measures to tackle congestion and reduce air pollution in their areas.

Mr McNulty has asked a number of parliamentary questions on the matter, and I certainly accept his arguments about air pollution and congestion. As he knows, phase 1 of the toll bridges review found that, as far as congestion is concerned, the relationship between different traffic flows is complex; however, it also suggested that air quality issues could be addressed in formulating an approach to the matter. The toll bridges review is on-going and I hope to report on the matter before too long.

I accept Jackie Baillie's remarks on the position that she has taken on the Erskine bridge and I acknowledge the views that she and many other members hold on the A82. It is an important and strategic road link and we must consider—and are considering—carefully the issues surrounding that particular roads project. I will be happy in due course to draw members' attention to the progress that we are making.

I would welcome a considered and reasoned debate from the Greens on the importance of tackling traffic growth and the measures that should be introduced in that respect. However, on no occasion have they given the devolved Government any credit for its quantum leap in public transport investment. I am sure that Mr Harvie will raise his points again and again in his members' business debate on the subject tonight.

It is certainly a novel experience for me to be praised by Mr Gallie, but I am none the worse for it. The arguments that he has made are relevant to the roads project that he mentioned, and I would be happy to consider his specific suggestions in relation to the other strategic road link. In assessment of roads projects, we consider—as any Government should—specific issues relating to air quality, and those matters have been carefully considered in relation to the project that he described.

We estimate that up to 25,000 jobs could be created in the area. Of those, the reporter suggested that 5,000 jobs might be new to Scotland.

I shall do my best to hold to your standards in answering the question, Presiding Officer, although it took a while to get to that question. Mr Ballard is not for the first time wrong on a number of points. First, in relation to jobs, he should know if he has looked into the matter—I shall be fair and assume that he has—that two separate studies were carried out by Scottish Enterprise. The reporter came to the view that there would be 5,000 new jobs for Scotland. I am bound to say that there is a disagreement with the reporter, who took the view that subtracting figures from one study, where the two reports used different methodologies, produced the figure that has been given. It is important to stress the difference in approach. For any roads project, or any capital public transport project, the value-for-money exercise relates not only to economic matters but to a range of matters under the Scottish transport appraisal guidance. Again, I would have thought that Mr Ballard would be familiar with that.

All the road safety and route accident reduction plan measures in the plan have been implemented, as have the traffic calming and traffic management measures in various communities along the route.  The provision of overtaking opportunity schemes is being developed.

I understand the concerns about the issue that have been expressed by Elaine Murray and other members, both in relation to the route accident reduction plan and to the measures that have been put in place, and I acknowledge the understandable and fair requests for additional measures, particularly in the light of traffic accident fatalities and accident statistics. If additional information on those matters is presented to the transport department, I would be happy to examine those issues again, and I give Parliament that assurance today.

I will be happy to consider the various issues that Mr Fergusson has raised, particularly the points about the section of road that he describes and the action that was taken in relation to the other package, which was considered previously. I will consider again whether we would wish to analyse the action in the context of the accident statistics, which are serious and must be addressed. I am always happy to  look at Conservative plans and we will also continue to consider a few others.

I can also do statements, but I had better not. Those are serious matters and I take very seriously the concerns that have been expressed by Mr Morgan, Mr Fergusson and Dr Murray. I will look into the issues that all three members have raised and see whether I can take the matter forward.

The Scottish Executive commits funding annually to a dedicated programme of accident investigation and prevention works on trunk roads. Funding is also provided to local authorities and the Scottish road safety campaign for road safety initiatives.

Our targets for reducing all road traffic deaths and serious injuries are exacting and tough—for example, we are committed to a 40 per cent reduction in such incidents by 2010. By 2004, the number of road deaths and injuries had been reduced by 37 per cent, so I grant that we still have some way to go. I should also point out that we set a target for road traffic deaths and injuries involving children of 50 per cent of the 1994 to 1998 figures. We have already exceeded that target and have reduced the figure by 55 per cent. We want to reduce it even further. Targets have to be tough not only because of the costs but because of the immense personal  and natural damage that such events cause to families and communities. Mr Maxwell's point is fair in that respect. That said, although we can debate the various financial mechanisms that are used, he should recognise that the Scottish road safety campaign, which will receive £1.7 million in the current financial year, focuses on drink-driving, drug-driving, speeding, cycle safety and young driver casualties. Moreover, the investment in the programme of accident prevention on the trunk roads and local road network is considerable, and I am happy to write to him with the figures.

I drove down the A90 this morning. Last night, I discussed that very issue, with particular reference to road safety mechanisms. I am happy to look into the specific circumstances of the two grade-separated junctions that the member suggested, but I cannot give him a precise answer today. I will write to David Davidson with the details, but it is important to acknowledge our investment in road safety in the trunk road network—which of course includes the route that Mr Davidson mentions—and in the local authority networks. We are tackling what are commonly agreed, across the political divide, to be serious issues. However, as I am sure Mr Davidson is aware, we do not have unlimited budgets and we have to make the right investments. We are spending £360 million on the trunk road network over the current three-year period to tackle the very problems that Mr Davidson highlights.

I am happy to praise any local authority initiatives that contribute to our overall objective of reducing road deaths and serious injuries by 2010. I would not avoid applauding any council that had brought in such measures. I will  be happy to look into the particular issue that Mr Welsh raises and to respond to him.

Legislation covering seat belts is consistent across the UK and is reserved. Existing legislation requires seat belts to be fitted to minibuses and coaches that are being used to carry children aged between three and 15 on organised school trips, including journeys between home and school.

I understand Nanette Milne's point. She will be aware that Executive guidance encourages local authorities to ensure that vehicles are appropriate—whether for urban or rural use—and that children are encouraged to wear seat belts if they are provided. The UK Government plans to extend the seat belt requirements to include seated passengers aged three or over—in other words, to include children over the age of three—on all buses and coaches on which seat belts are fitted.

I will be happy to look into the specific circumstances that Elaine Smith raises in relation to a particular area, if she would care to furnish the department with information. I am aware of the Scottish Consumer Council's review of school transport contracts and of the report that was published earlier this year. It is an important piece of work and it is picked up on in the guidance that we issue to Scottish local authorities. However, if Elaine Smith has a particular concern in relation to a particular contract, I would be happy to look into it.

The Scottish Executive has already responded to Dumfries and Galloway Council on the west coast main line local services report.

If Mr Ballance is familiar with the issues relating to the report, the way in which it was presented and its findings, he will know that it was appraised using the Scottish transport appraisal guidance. That appraisal, as I am sure he is aware, illustrated that there were a number of deficiencies in the report that needed to be addressed. The inaccuracies related particularly to the economic analysis and to the fact that certain risks and uncertainties had not been taken into account. To ensure that the report is full, comprehensive and complete, Dumfries and Galloway Council must consider those issues. We reported those matters to the council on 30 June and we still await a response to those specific aspects. Once those matters are cleared up, I would be content to consider the wider issues that Mr Ballance has raised in relation to developing rail strategy projects generally.

I would be happy to discuss those matters with Karen Gillon. She raises some important points about the wider implications and how best to develop the issues. I am sure that she would expect me to ensure that the analysis is robust and complete. I will be happy to examine the specific issues that she has raised with regard to the report and to consider how best to progress, through putting the project in the overall context of public investment in our public transport systems.

Mr Morgan makes an eminently  sensible point about the basic contradiction between three different desires that I am sure we all share in relation to freight, fast point-to-point passenger links and the inevitably slower commuter links. The route utilisation assessment that is currently under way is considering how best we can use the track that is available to meet those at times conflicting requirements of our rail infrastructure system. I would be happy to consider the specific issues that he has raised on the overall capacity of the routes, but one of the important aspects of the current route utilisation assessment is that it will seek to point up where the constraints are and consider how to address those issues.

The statutory processes for the road are complete. However, the department is currently updating the baseline environmental information. The mitigation measures previously developed for the scheme will therefore be updated and incorporated into the design.

The incredibly lengthy delay started when Lord James Douglas-Hamilton was the transport minister. I welcome the Conservatives' support for the Borders rail project, which will provide considerable benefits to Midlothian as well as to the Borders. I repeat the central point on the baseline environmental information. It is important that we get that right and ensure that it is properly assessed. I assure Lord James that, when that is done, I will make him aware of the contents.

I am disappointed that Mr Ballard has got it wrong at two question times—he tried to suggest that course of action previously. The Greens appear to be against a measure that would dramatically improve congestion in Dalkeith. They cannot have it both ways. Mr Ballard needs to be clear that the economics presented during the strategic roads review showed that the scheme provides value for money within a net present value of £14.5 million and a benefit to cost ratio of 2.25. It is important to recognise that, because it includes assessments of environmental considerations. In addition, as I said to Lord James a moment ago, the environmental baseline information is being updated. Those matters are important, but the crucial aspect is the ability to tackle congestion in Dalkeith, which is exactly what the bypass will do.

The cost of the scheme is expected to lie within the range £375 million to £500 million.

The devolved Government is proud of spending more on public transport projects than has ever been spent before. That is important to us and we have moved our policy forward in a progressive way to tackle Scotland's rail and public transport needs and to strike a  balance between road and rail. Mr Harvie is, not for the first time, completely wrong in his assessment of our transport plans. In answer to his ridiculous question about direct action, I can tell him that those are operational matters for the police. It would be extraordinary to be drawn into a we're-all-doomed analysis. It is important to keep a sense of perspective on the matter, which is what we are doing.

Following the announcement to buy out the PFI contract that my predecessor made on 17 June, Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd is seeking to secure that outcome. HIAL is undertaking a process of due diligence on the main PFI and associated contracts—including taxation aspects—that relate to the airport terminal prior to finalising an agreement. It will aim to secure best value for the taxpayer in those sensitive negotiations, at whose conclusion an announcement will be made.

I am sure that Mr Ewing will accept that the funding that the devolved  Government has placed with HIAL allows for the significant level of investment that he, I and the many members who represent constituencies across the Highlands and Islands expect. In 2004-05, HIAL received a £19.3 deficit grant, in addition to £2.2 million of capital grant. In the financial year 2006-07, the figures will be £18.6 million in deficit grant and £4.1 million in capital grant. Those significant amounts of public money are being spent appropriately on initiatives that are extremely important in strengthening the air networks.

In these circumstances, we are seeking to ensure that taxpayers' interests are protected and that Inverness airport can grow and expand. As I am sure Mary Scanlon appreciates, not least because of my answer to the previous question, the constraints on Inverness airport were clear under the contract. We are seeking to resolve that issue and I am sure that she will support us in that.

The objective of the current review of tolled bridges is not to consider the level of tolls at the bridges but to look at broader issues relating to the management, operation and maintenance of the tolled bridges. An announcement will be made in due course following completion of the review and its consideration by ministers.

I hope that Mr Crawford recognises the role of the Forth Estuary Transport Authority in this regard. Its policy on tolling is laid out clearly in the public domain. Members of the constituent local authorities serve on the FETA board and play a role in decision making. In taking forward the issues that he raises, we must remember the importance of assessing not just the tolls but the implications of tolling on congestion and traffic levels in the surrounding areas. We also need to balance the requirements that result from different levels of demand at different times of the day. Those are matters that FETA is taking forward. However, if Mr Crawford is making yet another SNP spending commitment, we note that with interest.

The matters that Mr Ballard raises are being taken forward by FETA. If he is particularly concerned about them, I am sure that he will discuss them with the FETA board at the appropriate time. It is important to recognise that there are proposals in relation to single-occupancy vehicles and what can be done to assist. However, I repeat that there is a balance to be struck between what we can achieve in relation to other modes of transport and the choices and opportunities that we provide to people who wish to move from Fife to Edinburgh in the morning for work or related purposes.

We do not have any plans for a new Forth road bridge, as my predecessors have made clear. However, as David Davidson rightly said, there are serious issues with the bridge's physical structure, which the FETA board and the  bridgemaster take extremely seriously. Indeed, they are providing briefings as appropriate to concerned members. The issues require investment and they are being actively considered.

The Executive's review of tolled bridges is on-going. All options for future arrangements at the bridges are being considered. An announcement will be made in due course following completion of the review and its consideration by ministers.

I appreciate the frustration that is felt by Trish Godman, but, unfortunately, Government has a process that has to be followed in relation to public money. That process is under way and the bridges review will come to fruition in the autumn. I hope that announcements can be made thereafter.

I have enjoyed my meetings with Trish Godman and Des McNulty and, indeed, with Jackie Baillie, who I am sure is about to ask a supplementary.

I appreciate their advice on the matter and I understand the issues that they raise entirely fairly in relation to their constituencies.  However, I cannot go any further than I have already done.

Jackie Baillie makes an important point on congestion, which has been discussed. I take her point about the analysis of the environmental case and the arguments about reducing congestion. Unfortunately, I cannot add to what I have said in relation to the timescale.

The Scottish Executive has received representations from the northern isles livestock shipping working group regarding the shipment of livestock under the proposed northern isles ferry tender. We continue to liaise closely with crofters and farmers on those issues.

Those are important issues. We are ensuring that livestock carriage will be covered in the tender, which was not the case in the past. We consider that to be an important step. The specific answer to Jim Wallace's question is that, although we will require the operator to have control over the system for carrying livestock to ensure compliance with the appropriate regulations and animal welfare considerations,  that does not have to mean ownership. Ownership by locally based organisations is possible or ownership could be shared between such organisations and the operator. I hope that the consideration and analysis of those options will help to tackle the specific issue that Mr Wallace raises.

The Scottish Executive has not been involved in discussions with Fife Council about reopening the Leven to Thornton rail link.

I hope that Tricia Marwick accepts that many people say that very modest sums could be invested. Many members argued yesterday that ministers should be robust when it comes to assessing very modest sums. The Executive is prepared to consider any proposals for enhancements or service improvements. However, I point out that such transport proposals would have to be appraised using the Scottish transport appraisal guidance, which has core objectives relating to value for money. Such an appraisal would have to be undertaken in relation to the project.

I would certainly be happy to look into those matters and discuss them with Christine May. The STAG appraisal that would be undertaken in relation to the proposals would also throw up some of those issues. Nevertheless, I will ensure that they are considered properly at the appropriate time.

Work is continuing on the development of the project and Network Rail, the project promoter, is aiming to lodge a private bill with the Parliament early in the new year.

Mary Mulligan makes entirely serious and sensible points about the timetabling of the project. I understand what she is saying and I agree with her. I will do my best to ensure that the meetings that she seeks take place in October and November and that the deadline for the bill's submission to the Parliament—which is the promoter's responsibility—is met. That would be advantageous for hitting the targets that we have set for the project.

I appreciate the passion with which many members have expressed their views. None was more passionate than Euan Robson, who knocked over his desk in the articulation of his argument. I recognise, as many members have, the range of people across the political spectrum who have long supported this project, both in a political sense and in a campaigning sense. It is right that we should recognise the ordinary men and women in the street, in the village and in the countryside who have articulated a strong message over many years. It should be a source of comfort to Parliament and pride to each of us that we can take forward a project that is not only an immensely important strategic one for Scotland, but which also meets many aspirations in the Borders and Midlothian. I acknowledge Euan Robson, Jeremy Purvis and Rhona Brankin and thank them for their support, constructive engagement and determination to see the Waverley line project realised. Many members have raised concerns about the possible rises in capital costs but it is important to recognise that capital cost rises are not inevitable. The Larkhall to Milngavie line is on time and on budget. I want us to hit all our budget numbers consistently, and I hope that that is what Parliament wants as well. Specifically, I want the Borders railway line to hit its budget numbers and be delivered on time. I say seriously to Des McNulty and the Finance Committee that I have no desire to see cost overruns on any of our public transport projects. I expect the numbers to be hit, just as I expect them to be hit across our capital investment programme. It is important to remember that this devolved Government's funding for construction is dependent on the production and implementation of a robust risk management strategy to contain costs. That plan is being developed in the context of the Waverley railway partnership and will be pursued in the most rigorous manner.  The Executive will play its part by sharing lessons that were learned from other projects. Members were right to raise points about the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line. In response, I can say that those lessons—such as those relating to mine workings and land valuations—have already been identified and passed on to the Waverley partnership. However, I cannot agree with Des McNulty and Christine May's suggestion that the project be stopped at Gorebridge. That does not seem right. I agree with the committee that we should take the project right down into the Borders through Midlothian. I recognise that the Waverley line is part of our overall transport investment plans, which involve spending around £3 billion on road and rail schemes across Scotland—Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Lanarkshire and our rural and isolated parts. We are making investments through the improved rail franchise, our bus route development grants and the national concessionary fares scheme and are making record investments in the rural transport fund.

I will give way in just two seconds. Christine Grahame made an entirely fair point about Leven. I say to her that the strategic investment plan that will be produced out of the national transport strategy allows exactly that sort of argument to be taken forward. I am sure that she will accept that.

I will not make up policy—financial or otherwise—on the hoof. I am sure that Mr Ewing would not expect me to do so. I apologise to Christine May for calling her Christine Grahame just before I let in Mr Ewing. I honestly did not mean to do that. Many members raised the question of Scottish Water and housing. Scottish Water confirmed to the Executive today that it is optimistic that water and drainage services will not be a barrier to delivery on housing. I hope that that is an important confirmation both for members in the chamber today and also for the Waverley railway partnership. The points that committee members and others—Conservative members in particular— raised on patronage and revenue were fair. The Waverley railway partnership has commissioned an independent review of the estimates. The conclusion of the review is that the estimates are sound and we regard them as appropriate. However, it is important to ensure that housing is delivered and that the railway is marketed effectively in order to generate the predicted levels of patronage and revenue. If Conservative members want further detail, I am sure that it is available from the partnership. I move on to address some of the more political arguments. Conservative members say that they have long supported the scheme—well, yes, but not during 18 years of Government. Their support seem dreadfully grudging. I will address two of their points; one made by Ted Brocklebank and the other by Derek Brownlee. Mr Brocklebank made a point about the 59-minute journey time. I am sure that he will accept that the Dunblane to Edinburgh journey time is 62 minutes and yet it is a thriving route that is growing in patronage terms. The route, which is an important commuter route, links one attractive part of Scotland to another. I ask Mr Brocklebank to compare and contrast that and accept the aspiration that the Borders railway could be the same as the Dunblane route.

I do not doubt that that is the fact. At least we will do it and at least the line will be in place and the opportunity will be there. If we had waited for the Conservatives, we would still be waiting. I say to Derek Brownlee that I take his point about the car; it was entirely fair. However, as the briefing points out, 24 per cent of households in the Borders, 28 per cent of households in Midlothian and 32 per cent of households in Gala do not have a car. I am sure that Derek Brownlee appreciates that the Executive has a responsibility to deal not only with people who have a car but to provide alternatives, which we will seek to do. I will finish by dealing with the SNP amendment and some of the remarks that were made in that regard. First, I commend Alasdair Morgan for his eminently sensible speech. It is unfortunate that Christine Grahame and Fergus Ewing could not be in the chamber for it, as it was the best speech made by a member on the SNP benches today. I want to deal with two of the points that Alasdair Morgan made. I accept his challenge on the parliamentary process. I suspect that all members,  both those who have sat on the private bill committees and those who have appeared in front of them, accept the point. That is why we will seek to make progress on the proposed transport and works bill, subject of course to the parliamentary process. I take the point that Alasdair Morgan made about transport investment in general, which was much the same point that Des McNulty, the convener of the Finance Committee, made. The point is a fair one and I accept it. I absolutely give the commitment to take forward the robust assessment of transport projects right across the board in the same manner. I am concerned that the SNP proposes a delay.

Let me quote the amendment: "the Scottish Executive should discuss with the promoter of the Bill". I wonder how many parliamentary questions I would get from Christine Grahame on why we were having further discussions, how long they were taking and so on and so forth. I would get 15 more from Fergus Ewing even if I got none from Christine Grahame. I want not to discuss, but to do. I think that that is what the Parliament wants to happen. I can only quote Christine Grahame from the Border Telegraph of 26 July, in which she said: "The focus must now be to ensure that the line is built on time and without any further delay." Indeed—so she should stop telling us to delay the line even more. The Borders rail link will benefit the Borders and Midlothian. The railway will stop at Tweedbank, Galashiels, Eskbank, Newtongrange, Gorebridge and Shawfair. Good bus connections can and must link the railway to Dalkeith, which is the largest settlement in Scotland without a railway station. We can improve accessibility, promote inclusion and reduce congestion by supporting the railway. I, too, read that Michael Palin last week announced his support for bringing back the Borders railway. I was reminded immediately of the scene in the "Life of Brian" when the question is asked, "What have the Romans ever done for us—apart from roads, sewers, aqueducts and so on?" We should see whether we can make a good answer to the question, "What has the Scottish Parliament ever done for the Borders and Midlothian?" and let the answer start, "Apart from the railway."

The houses will be built along the whole corridor.

I will do my best to bring this debate back to the Waverley line and the committee's preliminary stage report. I thought that Mr Ewing was a bit wide of the mark when he started discussing poetry and other matters. However, that is his wont. I thank Tricia Marwick and her committee for their work on behalf of Parliament. The committee has considered a huge amount of oral evidence during the preliminary stage of the bill, and an even larger amount of written representations. As Fergus Ewing said, it has been ably assisted by the clerks, and I would also like to express my appreciation of their work. I also hold that many of the improvements that have been made to the promoter's business plan have been made because of the solid work of the committee. I recognise the serious questions that Tricia Marwick raised and I will do my best, either now or later in the debate, to respond to them.  I cannot accept the Scottish National Party's delaying amendment. Time and time again, Mr Ewing argued for moving matters forward, yet his amendment would delay the process. I am thoroughly disappointed that Christine Grahame, as a member for the South of Scotland, would support her party's spokesman's proposal to delay the project. That is not an option that the promoter will countenance, and as the minister with responsibility for transport, I will give the promoter my full support in taking the project forward.

We have listened to Mr Ewing's arguments already and he has heard my view of them. I want to make progress. We have an important choice to make today for the future of the Borders and Midlothian. I applaud and encourage the efforts of those seeking to bring new jobs to those areas to replace the jobs that were lost in mining, textiles and electronics. Those efforts are vital, but the future economic prosperity of Midlothian and the Borders depends on better links with the growing Edinburgh economy. Today, we can choose to strengthen those links or we can choose to increase the isolation that, as Tricia Marwick said, many clearly expressed to the committee. The committee heard eloquent evidence of the feeling of many people in the Borders that they are cut off from the rest of Scotland and from the opportunities for jobs, education and leisure in Edinburgh. Too few people are accessing those opportunities due to the difficulty of travelling up the A7 by car or by bus. The railway will bring faster journeys, bypassing the congestion and parking problems that Edinburgh faces. The railway will provide a sustainable alternative to car travel and will make the capital more accessible. The confidence of the Borders suffered a series of economic blows in the late 1990s. Those blows pushed an already fragile economy closer to the edge. The Borders working party, involving many agencies, worked to invest in the Borders and instil some much needed confidence and buzz in the local economy. That work has continued. However, long-term solutions were needed and a step change was required to bring back belief. The return of the Waverley line has fired people's imaginations. The railway means more than just transport opportunities; it will be a concrete commitment of this Parliament to the Borders and an iron-clad demonstration that we are here for all of Scotland. Sentiment is running high in the Borders, as the committee has heard. Sentiment alone, though, is not enough. The Waverley railway partnership has presented evidence of the jobs and new opportunities for residents of the Borders that the  railway can bring, and of the boost that it will bring to Borders College and the Heriot Watt University campus in Galashiels. The business case for the scheme is positive and the Executive is backing that up with its commitment to the scheme. That commitment is £115 million, at 2002 prices. It amounts to 88 per cent of the construction costs, which compares to the devolved Government's contribution of 72 per cent to the Larkhall to Milngavie line and the 89 per cent contribution to the construction and reopening of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway. For Midlothian—another of Scotland's local authority areas that is currently without railway services—the challenges are different. Midlothian's economy is changing as jobs in traditional industries are replaced with those in new technology; it also has closer links to the Edinburgh economy. However, those changes have brought their own pressures, and traffic from Midlothian to Edinburgh adds to congestion in the capital. We need to provide new and better public transport links to support existing commuters and the large amount of housing growth that is planned and predicted in Midlothian. The Waverley line must be seen as part of the Executive's overall strategy for improving transport links to Midlothian and the Borders. In March, we announced bus route development funding of £1.18 million to strengthen services from Jedburgh, Hawick and Galashiels to Edinburgh. In June, we let the contract for the final design of the A68 Dalkeith bypass, which will reduce congestion and improve air quality in the town. We are investing in rail, road and bus to provide stronger links between the Borders, Midlothian and Edinburgh. Our investment does not stop there: with our plans for the Edinburgh airport rail link, we will be transforming the Borders from an area that can feel isolated even from other parts of Scotland into a place that is connected globally, with the benefits that that brings to business. The Borders rail link is a strong scheme. I am pleased that the committee subjected the scheme to a robust analysis before recommending that the Parliament agree to the general principles of the bill. The analysis highlighted the strengths of the scheme, which is to provide sustainable transport for people in Midlothian and the Borders who wish to travel to Edinburgh and spread the reach of Edinburgh's economic growth.

I believe that the Borders economy in general will grow because of investment in the Waverley line. Tourism, which Tricia Marwick mentioned earlier, will grow as well. We are talking not just about people coming to Edinburgh but about people visiting the Borders. I am sure that other members who know more about the area than I do will raise those issues. I can give John Home Robertson the assurance that he seeks on the financial position. I accept the arguments and the concerns that members across the Parliament have expressed on the need for the financial position to be robust. I assure him that I take such matters very seriously indeed. The committee identified a number of areas of concern with regard to the promotion of the scheme. I am pleased that the Waverley railway partnership takes seriously those concerns and that it has taken action to tackle the issues that the committee raised. The action plan that the partnership submitted to the Parliament includes positive steps to improve engagement with, for example, Scottish Water and housebuilders in order to deliver the housing growth that is required to make the railway economically viable. It is important to remember that the partnership has taken on this enormous project—

I will finish the point, after which I will give way. The partnership has taken on this enormous project because it is determined to deliver for the people of the Borders and Midlothian. However, it is not surprising that two of Scotland's smaller local authorities—even with the support of the City of Edinburgh Council—should find it difficult to navigate their way through the complexities of the rail industry. As we move closer to delivery, the partnership is moving to strengthen its team. The promoter will, of course, promote the bill. However, after my discussions with it, it will sensibly ensure that an experienced project manager builds the railway. The promoter hopes to announce how it will do that next week.

I give Tricia Marwick and all members of the Parliament that commitment. The four criteria that Nicol Stephen laid out in announcing the Government's commitment to the project are at the core of our analysis of the case. It would not be appropriate for me to back off from them in any way; I am certainly not doing that in today's debate. The people of Midlothian and the Borders look to the Scottish Parliament to invest in their communities; they look to us to make the devolution difference real. The railway will create a vital link between the economic growth of Edinburgh and the fragile economy of the Borders; provide a sustainable alternative to car travel along the A7 corridor; and expand the labour force for Edinburgh businesses, thereby fuelling a cycle of continued economic strength that will benefit all of Scotland. On that basis, I urge the Parliament to support the general principles of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill.

The Executive welcomes pass plus as a scheme that enables new drivers to gain additional experience and positive driving skills. The scheme is administered by the Driving Standards Agency, which chairs a board that promotes the scheme throughout Great Britain.

I would be happy to look into the points that Mr Arbuckle raises, but I do not believe that it is the responsibility of the Executive to tell Scottish local authorities what to do in that regard. It is important that they come to their own views on the appropriateness of the scheme in their areas. Nevertheless, I take his point about how effective pass plus can be in addressing the issue of young driver safety, in particular. The Executive also funds the Scottish road safety campaign for the development of key road safety education initiatives and publicity messages. One of the objectives of that driver behaviour strategy is the reduction of young driver casualties.

Freight facilities grants can be successful in the Highlands. As a result of the Safeway FFG contract, almost 5 million lorry miles were removed from Scotland's roads between 1999 and 2005. I am disappointed that, following its takeover of Safeway, Wm Morrison has decided to stop supplying its Highlands stores by rail.

Those are fair points. In the context of the debate on the A9, it is important that we make further progress on moving freight from  road to rail, not just with the supermarket companies that Maureen Macmillan highlighted but with other business users who can see both the environmental and cost benefits of a modal shift in freight transport. The Executive is currently monitoring the situation in the Highlands and Islands and we are working with businesses there where we can. We are also considering a number of innovative ideas to achieve objectives that meet environmental and cost criteria.

I thank John Swinney and other members for what has been a thoughtful continuation—the point that Mr Swinney was making—of a debate that I also wish had been concluded. I assure Mr Swinney and other colleagues that I have no plans to trot out a series of excuses about why the Ballinluig junction has yet to be started, but I can explain why, in technical terms, because that is what Mr Swinney asked for.  First, I should say that the Executive takes road safety very seriously and we need to use the right language and be appropriate in how we describe risk on roads. As some members have said, we must also acknowledge the role of the driver. A road engineer can design the perfect road but that will not stop accidents happening, and I know that members accept that. In 2000, we set a target of reducing by 40 per cent the number of people killed and seriously injured on Scottish roads by 2010, and by 2004 there had already been a 37 per cent reduction. We take such matters extremely seriously and the investments made across Scotland's road network are made for safety reasons, as has been reflected in tonight's debate. Mr Swinney and others have recognised that the number of people who have been killed on the A9 is high—75 have been killed on the trunk road section between Scrabster and Dunblane and a further seven between Dunblane and Stirling during the five-year period from 2000 to 2004. Although the A9 is Scotland's longest trunk road, the number of people who have been killed on it is unacceptably high. I also take the point that has been made recently about other injuries and incidents. Mr Swinney and others have argued this evening and previously for the dualling of the A9 between Perth and Inverness, but Mr Swinney knows that I have to deal in the world of priorities. Transport spending in Scotland is at record levels: it is more than £1 billion for the first time this year and is set to rise to £1.4 billion by 2007-08. Over the next 10 years, we are committed to spending more than £3 billion on transport capital infrastructure. I do not apologise for the balance of that expenditure moving from roads to public transport. I believe that that is the right long-term investment for Scotland. I am serious about what I said this morning about rail and bus connections. I absolutely take the points that Roseanna Cunningham, John Swinney and Murdo Fraser made about commuters into Perth or north to Inverness. I undertake to look into the issues about local commuter services and the requirement for better city-to-city connections. One of the challenges that we face in the system, particularly in rail, is to meet the desire for both better long-term, city-to-city connections and better commuter services. Roseanna Cunningham raised that issue in relation to Perth.

I obviously did not explain that well. I said that I accept the challenge of considering those issues, which I will do. I cannot solve every problem overnight. I was trying to explain that there are constraints in the rail network that cannot be solved instantly, much as Roseanna Cunningham and I might like them to be. I have undertaken to consider the issues. Upgrading all the A9 between Perth and Inverness to dual carriageway would cost in excess of £600 million. By any standard, that is a high level of expenditure and it means that other priorities would have to slip and change. There are a number of other transport projects—Margaret Ewing is looking at me in that knowing way that she has—and roads throughout Scotland that many members write to me about, as they did to my predecessors. Jim Mather mentioned a number and John Farquhar Munro never misses an opportunity to mention a number. All I am saying is that any transport minister has to make choices about such projects. We will make the best judgments that we can about the statistical evidence on the argument for change. As colleagues have mentioned, one of the main problems with the A9 is the lack of guaranteed overtaking opportunities, which is why north of Dunkeld we have instigated a programme of targeted improvements to provide enhanced overtaking, and why south of Dunkeld we are considering the options for improving the standard of provision on that most heavily trafficked section of the route. The outcome of that study will be available before the end of the year. I will deal with Ballinluig, which John Swinney raised. I am deeply disappointed about progress on the junction and frustrated by the delays in bringing the project to fruition. The only feasible location is constrained and technically challenging. As well as the road and railway, which Mr Swinney raised, the River Tummell passes very close to the site and, needless to say, there are significant environmental issues to address. The level of commitment that I can give Mr Swinney on this is that although the upgrade, with the grade-separated junction and the flyover that will be in place, on which construction will start next year, will be twice as expensive as normal grade-separated junctions elsewhere in Scotland—the upgrade at Ballinluig will cost twice as much as did the work between Perth and Dundee, for example, with which Mr Swinney might be familiar—I consider and all our analyses and value-for-money exercises show that the work is worth doing. The construction of the junction will begin next year. We expect to publish the statutory orders by 7 October and the drawing-board stages that John  Swinney mentioned have been completed. I am also committed to delivering the Bankfoot improvements that have been mentioned and will announce as quickly as I can the preferred scheme. I accept that there is much to be done on the A9 and I remain concerned about the relatively high number of fatalities on the road. I have asked my road safety experts to investigate in detail the nature and location of the accidents on the road and have worked with the A9 road safety group on recommendations about how the number might be reduced. That work is being done in addition to the work on the A9 that is already planned and the people involved will report back to me on it before the end of the year.  My commitment and the commitment of the devolved Government is to establish a safe trunk road network. We will spend resources on targeted improvements and continue to keep Scotland's people and its goods moving safely.  Meeting closed at 17:50.

There are no plans to build new rail freight lines in Dumfries and Galloway.

I understand the member's concerns about the possible increase in traffic. However, I can tell Rosemary Byrne that the Scottish planning assessment on future rail demand where the rail network falls short is under way, and proposals to bridge that gap will come forward. It is envisaged that the planning assessment will be complete before the end of this year. Its results will inform the national transport strategy, which, of course, we will bring to the Parliament next year.

I am happy to consider the issues that Mr Fergusson raises, but I hope that he will accept that the requirement of the planning assessment that I mentioned a moment ago is to deal not with fears but with the reality of the situation and with what we can do for the future. That is the intention of the assessment, which, as I said, will be completed before the end of the year. It will then feed into the national transport strategy. It is appropriate to take the matter forward in that way.

The route of the bypass was confirmed in 1993. The orders are made and there are no plans to revisit the matter. Revised estimates for the scheme are being prepared by the transport division's consultants, who are also reviewing the impact assessments.

I am surprised that the Greens are against the proposed bypass in Dalkeith, which would cut congestion in the town centre—I understand that that was the main reason for the project in the first place—and improve road safety and local air quality. If the Greens are against those objectives I differ from them markedly. Mr Ballard should also get his facts right, which he did not in his supplementary question. The current alignment does not go through Dalkeith country park but passes to the north of it. The scheme also takes into account the heritage of the Dalkeith estate and the ecology of the woodlands, so Mr Ballard's suggestions are quite erroneous.

I say to Lord James that the environmental assessment and the appraisal of the route options were undertaken under the Scottish traffic and environmental appraisal manual methodology prior to the 1992 public local inquiry. I am sure that he is pretty familiar with that. He may even have been the roads minister at the time—I could be wrong about that, but he was certainly part of that Administration. The appraisal satisfied all the requirements of the environmental assessment as set out by the prevailing standards and the assessment was undertaken in accordance with the appropriate design manual for roads and bridges that replaced the earlier methodology.

I begin by apologising for having shown my frustration this afternoon. I did not mean to do that but, occasionally, the genuine feelings in debates become too much for us and, this afternoon, I got frustrated by the utter nonsense that was talked by a lot of members of the Opposition parties. However, if I overdid it in an inappropriate manner, I apologise. It was genuinely interesting for us to be accused by the SSP of privatisation and by the Conservatives of nationalisation and of stitching up the contract. As for the SNP, I do not know what its position is apart from buying a little time at the cost of subsidy, jobs and services to the islands. We are not prepared to pay that price. The devolved Government cannot allow infraction proceedings that would put the Clyde and Hebrides service at risk; only the SNP, which is in opposition, has the option of expressing such a view. I will happily give way to Jim Mather if he can say whether he and his party support the Kay proposals that support route-by-route tendering.

SNP members do not support the Kay proposals; yet, half of them have spent the whole afternoon saying that they do support them. On one hand, they want a task force; on the other hand, they want to break the law. Now they do not want route-by-route tendering, except that Jim Mather, in an earlier answer, pretty much gave the game away on that one as well. The SNP does not know what its position is; its only position is that it wants another academic exercise.  As Michael McMahon and other colleagues have made absolutely clear, sometimes—and this is such a time—Governments have to make decisions and cannot just have more academic exercises. As a Government, we have made clear our commitment to protect the workforce; to improve and maintain the services that we see as important; and to provide lifeline services, particularly for the islanders who depend on them. To Brian Adam, who made one of the more sensible points, on Audit Scotland's investigation, I say that we will look at that. I said that yesterday, but Mr Adam was not at the Local Government and Transport Committee meeting. I made it quite clear that the Executive welcomes that investigation. We will look closely at the Auditor General for Scotland's recommendations. There is no question but that the invitation to tender will be issued after the Auditor General has reported. In that sense, there is time—I am very clear about that. I give the commitment that there will be time to take on board any lessons to be learned from the NorthLink tendering exercise. The Executive genuinely believes that improvements can be made to the process, and if the Auditor General can make solid recommendations on that front, we will consider them. At no time in their speeches did Brian Adam and Mary Scanlon, who also raised that point, recognise that the core responsibility of the Executive in the provision of services is to maintain lifeline services. That is a provision that we will maintain because that is Government's responsibility.

I cannot slow that process up. However, if there are particular points and lessons that come out of that report—I have no doubt that the Auditor General will make immediate findings—we will consider what we can do in that regard as well. The costs of tender were debated yesterday in committee and this afternoon in Parliament. Yes, we must face increased costs, but we do not apologise for incurring extra costs when that is done to protect pensions and to ensure that the taxpayer and the Parliament retain the ships in public ownership, so that, in the transfer, we hold on to those assets. Yes, there are costs to that, but those costs are important and they are costs that the Parliament and the devolved Government are prepared to pay. To Des McNulty I say that we would welcome any work that he and his colleagues on the  Finance Committee could do in that regard. I include the SNP members in that. If they could make a constructive contribution to that work, that would be very helpful—we will wait and see. What we have heard from the Opposition benches is an awful lot of blame game being played. If we could move the debate forward and look for some positive solutions, I would be only too happy, but I suspect that I will be waiting for some time. For the Conservatives to lecture us all on lessons of the past really is rich. I will read from Hansard of 24 June 1992 what was said by John MacGregor—one of those famous Tory transport ministers, of which there were many. I hope that the Conservatives do not mind my quoting their former minister directly. In relation to the introduction of the maritime cabotage rules, which the Conservative Government of the day wholly supported, he said: "I also hope that during the United Kingdom presidency"— the Tories had the EU presidency in addition to everything else— "the Community will take forward the increasingly rigorous application of the state aid rules in the transport sector so as to provide for full and proper competition in the single market."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 24 June 1992; Vol 210, c 248W.] Phil Gallie will love that last bit. That was the position of the Conservative party.

I will answer David Davidson's question because he suggested that we have done nothing to improve the services, but George Lyon and many others pointed that we have provided five new ferries since 2000—the Hebrides, the Loch Nevis, the Loch Portain, the Coruisk and the Bute. The Conservatives want to unbundle the CalMac network, allow the free market to operate and ensure that we lose all the advantages that are afforded by the bundled network. We would lose the maximum flexibility of the fleet to best serve the network. We would lose the simplified safety management structure. Dare I say it, there are many safety parallels with railways following the Conservatives' disastrous rail privatisation. We would lose the prevention of cherry picking and the opportunity to use economies of scale and, if we went with the Conservatives, we would lose the integrated nature of the services. We are not prepared to do any of that, but if Mr Davidson is willing to stand up and say that he has got it wrong, I will be more than happy to give way.

The Executive is determined to ensure that the services improve. However, that will happen only if we tender them as one bundle, and that is not the Conservatives' position. They would destroy the network by breaking it up. Mr Davidson cannot sit there and have it both ways; he cannot argue it from both sides—only Fergus Ewing can do that. Fergus Ewing was very quiet on the subject of pensions today. He lost that argument big time yesterday and he did not raise it much today. It is important that Parliament is reminded of what he suggested. He told ministers and the Executive that we should tell trustees of pension funds what to do. In fact, he says that we should have done that months ago. Would he have then been on his feet announcing a press release lecturing us all about being in contempt of Parliament? I think that he would, but he cannot have it both ways.

Fergus Ewing is telling me what to do again and he is telling me that I should tell the trustees what to do. He just does not get it. He does not understand the crucial difference between making decisions in a position of responsibility and standing barracking from the Opposition. I will finish by talking about the consistency of the EC's message on tendering. The one thing that I do not believe any MSP can criticise is the consistency of that message. Maureen Macmillan was right to say that many delegations have gone to the EC on this issue during the six years for which the Scottish Parliament has been responsible for the services. Those delegations have crossed many political boundaries and included many members of local authorities. Those delegations have also included the SNP and it is important to share a press release that was issued by the SNP's Alyn Smith MEP on 14 March. After a meeting that was well trailed in the press in advance and at which, we were told, the SNP would sort the issue out, he said:  "I feel more confident having met the Commission that a sensible way can be found to this issue. The meeting was a free and frank exchange of views," —I bet it was— "so I am limited in the extent to which I can comment upon the Commission view." Mr Ewing and Mr Mather were there on 2 September—it says so in The Press and Journal , so it must be true—but the SNP issued not a single press release afterwards. The Commission's position has been clear. Our position is also clear. Our position is that we want to protect the workforce, to maintain and improve the services and to protect the lifeline services; the position of the Opposition parties would do the opposite of that.

Grow up. Is that the best argument that Mary Scanlon has got?

Yes it has.

Mr Ewing makes a serious allegation, which I hope he can substantiate. He is factually wrong about the process, as he was yesterday and as he has been throughout. I have a copy of the judgment in my hand—it was not about what he says it was about. I read article 2 of the judgment to him yesterday, which states that Spain should terminate the current contact. Will he confirm that that is exactly what Spain did?

I did.

I gave Fergus Ewing an answer; he just did not like it.

Earlier this month, I travelled on the Caledonian MacBrayne ferry across the Sound of Harris. Two reflections struck me at the time. The first was the critical role that the services play for those who live and work in remote, fragile areas of Scotland. The ferry service provides a key transport link in the spinal route through the Western Isles and brings major economic and social benefits to islanders. Secondly, I was struck by the skill and the evident dedication of the CalMac crews and staff who operate those unique services. The captain of the MV Loch Portain, John Docherty, and the first engineer, Robbie Steadwood, told me of the treacherous, shallow waters that have to be navigated, involving some 18 planned changes of course during a one-hour crossing. The knowledge and experience of the CalMac staff is vital in ensuring that the services run all year round, in the wild winter conditions as well as on the calm seas that I was lucky to experience. In many ways, those reflections underpin the three objectives on which our policy on ferries must deliver. First, we have to ensure the maintenance of services that meet the needs and aspirations of islanders. Secondly, we must ensure that the services continue to be delivered to the same high standards that I witnessed. Thirdly, we must do all that we can to protect the jobs and terms and conditions of employment of the CalMac workforce. The devolved Government has, as we promised following the debate last year, reviewed the requirements of the European Union rules in the light of the objectives that I described.

I will be happy to take some interventions when I have made some progress. We have also considered proposals that, it was suggested, might avoid the need for tendering. Some of them were put forward by other parties—particularly academic observers—and I am grateful to those who took the time to prepare and submit alternative proposals. In addition, we formulated new proposals that  we thought might provide possible alternatives to tendering. We have carefully considered all those proposals and comments and we have raised, debated and analysed each option with the European Commission. We have also taken legal opinion, both internal and external, on the options. On Monday, I wrote to the Local Government and Transport Committee enclosing a detailed paper setting out the reconsideration of the requirement to tender. I also placed copies of the paper in the Scottish Parliament information centre. I will lay out in some detail the options that have been explored in line with the Parliament's request. The 2003 decision of the European Court of Justice in the Altmark case raised hopes that, if the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services met certain criteria, they would be exempt from the scope of the maritime cabotage regulation. Some of the alternatives to tendering that were floated used that decision as their starting point. However, we have had to conclude that that is not a viable approach. The Altmark judgment was about whether a subsidy could confer on the company that received it an advantage over others that did not. The European Court of Justice's decision makes it clear that the judgment did not seek to overturn sectoral rules relating to subsidy where those exist. The Clyde and Hebrides ferry services fall within the scope of specific sectoral rules—the maritime cabotage regulation, which sets out the European Union rules that govern subsidies for shipping services. The arrangements for the Clyde and Hebrides services must therefore be considered against the requirements of that regulation.

I know that the position of Mr Ewing and the Scottish National Party is to break the law and therefore that they—

Mr Swinney obviously was not at the Local Government and Transport Committee meeting yesterday when Mr Ewing enunciated the SNP's position of breaking the law. That option is not available to ministers, but it is obviously an option for those who wish to posture on the  sidelines and who never take any decision whatever. The maritime cabotage regulation requires that EU ship-owners must be treated on a non-discriminatory basis. The effect of that requirement is that member states must treat all Community ship-owners in the same way. If subsidy is to be made available, all ship-owners must be given the opportunity to qualify for it. Some commentators have suggested that the European Commission's recent decision on public sector compensation to services of general economic interest means that certain ferry services do not need to be tendered. That is not the case. The decision simply provides an exemption from the requirement to notify the Commission about certain state aids. Just as with Altmark, it does not exempt public authorities from any other requirements in relation to the state aid rules and any applicable sectoral rules. That means that the Executive must comply with the provisions of the maritime cabotage regulation.

Yes, I can. I shall come back to detailed points relating to staffing issues in due course.

No. I have already given way and I would like to make some progress. I must say that, even in my most rational and objective moments, I struggle at times to cope with European Commission rules against a criterion of consistency, particularly in respect of remote and peripheral areas. I can genuinely understand members' difficulties in making sense of what are extremely complex rules, which—on the surface, at least, and sometimes, I believe, more deeply—appear to be self-contradictory. The Commission's view is that the best way of complying with the regulation's non-discrimination requirement is through a tendering process. The Commission does not say that that is the only way of doing it, which is why we mounted a full review of all the options—both those submitted to us and those that we devised ourselves. The latter included the radical option of bringing the delivery of the services within the fold of the Executive, so that the CalMac staff would become civil servants. We also considered whether we could tender a contract solely for the management of Caledonian  MacBrayne, leaving the structure beneath that intact. However, as we have explained in the published paper, none of the options withstood detailed legal scrutiny. The only alternative to tendering that we concluded might comply with the EU rules would be to offer subsidy, on the same basis, to all operators wishing to offer services on a particular route or routes. That approach is applied by some member states—including France for services to Corsica, for example—but there are a number of difficulties with that approach for Scotland. It would not offer the certainty of provision that is secured by a public service contract and it would have to be applied on a route-by-route basis, thereby breaking up the network. We take the issue very seriously. Islanders expect alternative ferries to be available for relief or breakdown cover. I agree with them. A subsidy-for-all approach could attract low-cost operators, with consequential implications for staff terms and conditions. The Executive would not be able to set any of the requirements in relation to staff that we would be able to set via a tendered public service contract. It would also be highly unlikely that Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations would apply should the incumbent operator lose business to a competitor. For those reasons, I reject the Tory amendment.

We are putting in place a number of additional measures in relation to staff—I shall go on to say more about that in a moment. I believe that those measures will provide a lot of comfort. I have discussed those matters with the STUC and with the constituent unions on a number of occasions and I hope that those discussions have been positive on exactly those issues. In light of the review of all the options, I have concluded that tendering is the only way open to ministers and to the Parliament of protecting the vital lifeline Clyde and Hebrides ferry services. It has been suggested that other EU member states are ignoring the rules and that we should do the same. That is simply not the case. Following a review of experience elsewhere in the EU, it is clear that all other member states with subsidised ferry services follow or will follow maritime state aid rules. The European Commission has in the  past initiated formal action against member states, including Italy, Greece, Spain, Portugal and Denmark, to ensure that they bring their services into line. If the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services are not brought into line with EU rules, the consequences could be severe.

I shall give way in a minute. The Commission could order the immediate cessation of subsidy to Caledonian MacBrayne and could order the Executive—[ Interruption. ] It is, of course, open to the SNP to break the law, but that option is not available to those of us who care about the islands and about the men and women who work in the ferry services. The Commission could order the immediate cessation of subsidy to CalMac and order the Executive to recover from CalMac all subsidy that had been declared to be illegal state aid. That would put CalMac out of business and bring its services to a halt. Neither I nor any minister—nor, I believe, any member of the Parliament, except for the SNP members—would put the islanders who depend on the ferry services in such a high-risk position. However, that is the course of action that Mr Ewing and the SNP advocate today. I know that there are some who think that the European Commission could not contemplate such drastic action. I have to say that, following my discussion with the EU transport commissioner, I am clear that the Commission wants the issue to be resolved. The Commission has indicated that it has received complaints from third parties about the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services. Even more serious is the pre-infraction letter that was sent to the United Kingdom Government on 29 June 2005. That is a fact. If the action were to proceed to a full investigation, it could seriously jeopardise the lifeline services in the way that I have described. Because of those risks, I cannot support amendments from either the SNP or the Scottish Socialist Party that advocate a policy of breaking the law. I will address one of the key concerns expressed this afternoon by members of the Parliament and, in fairness, by many others. The Executive attaches great importance to the future of the Caledonian MacBrayne workforce. We will do everything that we can, within EU and domestic legislation, to secure the continued employment of those staff and the protection of their terms and conditions and pension rights. In particular, we are of the view that TUPE is likely to apply to the main Clyde and Hebrides bundle—the recent employment appeal tribunal ruling on the northern isles ferry staff transfer has strengthened our confidence in that. However, we are aware that  TUPE offers protection only at the point of transfer. It is possible that an operator could contemplate seeking to replace the current staff with others on different terms and conditions. We will make it abundantly clear to any bidders who are considering doing that that the compensation that would be payable to the existing staff would not qualify for subsidy payment and so would have to be funded from the operator's own resources. In addition, any savings in on-going staff costs that resulted from such an approach would be clawed back through an equivalent reduction in subsidy. On that basis, it would not appear to be financially viable for an operator to propose an approach that involved replacement of the existing staff. The TUPE regulations do not currently protect occupational pension scheme entitlements. However, the Executive will require the operator to ensure that transferring staff have access to an actuarially equivalent pension scheme and entitlements.

We dealt with the issue very firmly at the committee meeting yesterday. Mr Ewing was wrong yesterday and he will say nothing new today—that is for sure. The devolved Government is committed to protecting the pension provision of the transferring staff. As the Parliament will appreciate, we have strengthened the commitments that we are making to Caledonian MacBrayne staff significantly since the debate last year. I firmly believe that, should the need arise, the strengthened and structured approach to staff transfers provides a much greater level of comfort and security to Caledonian MacBrayne staff than would be on offer under any of the alternative options. It is important to recognise that Caledonian MacBrayne has confirmed that, were it to continue to provide the services, there would be no compulsory redundancies, that pay and conditions for its staff now or in the future would not be worsened and that it has no intention to introduce a two-tier workforce. The company has also made it clear that it has no plans to move its headquarters from the current site at Gourock. When I was in Argyll early in the summer, islanders said to me, "Whatever you do, Tavish, think of the islanders and end the uncertainty." Politics ultimately involves decision making. That is what the Parliament is about. This is a tough decision for all of us, but it is time that we took it. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's further detailed consideration of the EU requirements relating to the Clyde and Hebrides lifeline ferry services;  notes the serious consequences of these services not being compatible with the regulations; recognises the Executive's commitment to secure the continued employment of the Caledonian MacBrayne workforce and the protection of their terms, conditions and pension rights, and acknowledges that the tendering of the Clyde and Hebrides lifeline ferry services is required to protect these vital services.

Local traffic issues are a matter for the City of Edinburgh Council and will have been considered carefully by the council prior to its granting planning permission for the development.

The Scottish Executive is considering traffic congestion in west Edinburgh. Significant funding has been provided for the park-and-ride service at Hermiston, which will be opened officially tomorrow, in addition to the west Edinburgh busway system, Edinburgh crossrail, the Edinburgh airport rail link and the tram network. That is a considerable body of investment, which can in no way be described as local. I am sure that even Mr MacAskill acknowledges that money will be allocated by the Executive—and approved by Parliament—for those major projects that will help with the airport and the expansion that might happen in that part of Scotland.

Executive officials have been working closely with the Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership to complete their assessment of options. I expect to receive advice imminently on how best to implement the partnership agreement commitment to reduce the cost of air links.

The analysis will be with me this week. I confirm to Mr Wallace that I am not persuaded by the argument, made by some, that we should simply increase the subsidy to HIAL. My understanding of the figures is that such a move would reduce the cost of flying by less than £10 a ticket, which would not make the material change to which we are all committed in the partnership agreement. I certainly understand that Mr Wallace has been committed to this matter not just in this Parliament but in other Parliaments. Indeed, I used to write the supplementaries to some of the questions that he asked at Westminster.

I can certainly confirm Mr Ewing's figures; indeed, the cost of a full-fare return flight between Edinburgh and Kirkwall or Sumburgh can at times approach £400. That was one of the issues that I discussed with the chairman of HITRANS, Councillor Charlie King, at a meeting on 20 July. That is why the final assessment will be with me this week; after that, I hope that it will go to ministerial colleagues to ensure that they make progress with the matter. As for the impact on island communities—and, indeed, on the Highlands and Islands—I believe that, as Alasdair Morrison related this morning in his question to the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport during general question time, this development will have huge economic benefits. Tourism alone must be an economic area whose potential will be even more huge when we begin to put these measures in place.

There are no current plans to hold negotiations on the electrification of the east coast main line.

The provision of a modern and integrated transport network is very much the point and is our overriding objective. I accept Nanette Milne's argument in relation to that. However, I know from the Executive's research that rail passengers look for and expect us to deliver on punctuality, reliability and the comfort of trains rather than on how they are powered. It is essential that we focus on that. However, I will continue the discussions that my predecessor had with the north-east Scotland transport partnership in relation to the strategic overview of transport spend. We will make the best progress that we can on delivering on the key priorities of punctuality, reliability and the comfort of trains.

I begin by indulging myself and thanking all members who have congratulated me on my recent appointment. I had not appreciated how popular the minister for transport would be, at least at the beginning. More seriously, I thank Fiona Hyslop for introducing a genuinely thoughtful debate this evening as we wind up for the school summer break. I have connections to both institutions that we have discussed at length this evening. For many years I have attended the institution of the royal highland show, although I did not recognise Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's point about a day in the sun—a day in inclement conditions might be a better description. I acknowledge the point that many colleagues made about the importance of the show not just to this part of Scotland but to Scotland as a whole. The other institution is the capital's airport, which is a set of buildings and a runway of which I see rather a lot. Indeed, at times  I think that I know nothing else than the security queue at Edinburgh airport. I acknowledge the speeches that have been made this evening about the continuing discussions on the future of the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland's showground. Members recognise the economic contributions that the showground and the airport make to the wider Scottish economy. We wish to preserve and increase the economic benefits of both. I urge all parties to act constructively to ensure that a solution is reached that ensures the showground's long-term future and takes account of the predicted growth of Edinburgh airport. As others have said, the UK Government's air transport white paper set out a strategic framework for the development of airport capacity in the UK for the next 30 years. It set out the conclusions of the UK Government on the case for the expansion of airports throughout the country. In doing so, it took account of the views that were expressed in an extensive consultation exercise, which in Scotland was conducted jointly by the Department for Transport and the Scottish Executive. It recognised that simply building more and more capacity to meet demand was not a sustainable way forward—a balanced approach is necessary. We need an approach that recognises the importance of air travel to our economic prosperity—not least the point that Kenny MacAskill made about today's news—but which respects the rights and interests of those who, as Lord James rightly said, are affected by airport development. In the white paper, the UK Government invited airport operators to produce plans for increased airport capacity in the light of the policies and conclusions that were set out therein. BAA Scotland produced its outline master plan for Edinburgh airport in May. It is now out for consultation with a closing date of 31 August 2005. The master plan highlights the need to cater for the predicted growth of the airport. I take the point that Margaret Smith made about the overall scale of the area that we have discussed this evening. The plan sets out that 34 hectares of the land that is occupied by the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland would be required by 2020 for additional terminal and airport apron capacity and that another 51 hectares of the land that is occupied by the society will be needed by 2030 for further development of the airport.

The point fits neatly with one that a number of members made in their speeches this evening—indeed Margaret Smith made it herself. Given the economic potential of the area for corporate headquarters and other developments, it strikes me that land in the area would be at a premium. I am well aware that the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society believes that it should remain on its present site at Ingliston while still allowing for the expansion of the airport. As part of the preparation for the UK Government's white paper, much work was carried out to assess the future growth and development of Edinburgh airport. The work included a study to assess and attempt to reconcile the likely land needs of BAA Scotland and the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society, both of which were represented on the steering group for the study. As members have said this evening, many options were considered but no solution has yet been found. Accordingly, the white paper set out the issues and concluded that the UK Government's proposals "would therefore require the relocation of the RHASS, by around 2013". Following the publication of the white paper, the Deputy Minister for Communities announced that the west Edinburgh planning framework would be reviewed. I hope that that review addresses some of the wider points that Margaret Smith, Kenny MacAskill and other members made about the area. I fully recognise the special status of the royal highland centre as a well-located, year-round indoor and outdoor events venue—a point that Fiona Hyslop made extremely well. That is why the Scottish Executive is working with the society and other parties in the review of the west Edinburgh planning framework. The objectives of the review include a reconciliation of the land requirements of the airport with other land uses and consideration of the implications for the royal highland centre in particular. A study has therefore been undertaken to identify one or more alternative site options west of Edinburgh or elsewhere for potential relocation. The research used criteria that were based on criteria that the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society provided. The research is now concluded and, from a long list of sites, four potential sites have been identified and ranked. It is now for the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society to undertake further investigative work into one or more of those sites and to determine their feasibility. The society has been fully involved throughout the extensive white paper consultation process  and the subsequent review of the west Edinburgh planning framework. It has been given every opportunity to demonstrate how the showground can co-exist with the airport while providing for the predicted growth of the airport. However, I also recognise that, before closing off the option of co-existence, the society has sought the opportunity to respond to the BAA master plan consultation. I can only therefore urge the society to continue to engage actively with BAA Scotland and the Scottish Executive to find a solution that satisfies all parties and that ensures that the activities of the society and the airport continue to grow their contribution to the economy of south-east Scotland and Scotland as a whole.   Meeting closed at 18:49.

Yes.

I fear that Mr Ewing exaggerates the problem and is obsessed with finding problems where we are determined to solve problems. We are working with bus operators to pay for and  install new electronic ticketing machines with smart-card readers on all buses in Scotland. I would have thought that Mr Ewing would welcome that.

The concessionary scheme is a national scheme. It will build on existing local arrangements. If Mr Davidson wishes to highlight specific examples, I would be more than happy to consider them. However, we are determined to ensure that, in conjunction with general Executive policies relating to solving the difficulties of exclusion, we adopt a national approach.

The Executive is constantly looking to improve safety and a full accident analysis of the route has just been completed. The results will be used to direct the future roads programme for the route, which will be aimed at improving overtaking opportunities, junction layouts and reducing driver fatigue. That is over and above some £40 million-worth of work that is programmed to be carried out on the A9 over the next three years.

I can certainly give a commitment to look closely at the issues that Mr Swinney has raised about why the projects for those two sections of the A9 have not proceeded as quickly as might be desired by the member, his constituents and all who use the road. I am happy to look into that and I will respond to him as quickly as I can.

Mr Arbuckle is seated beside me, but I make it clear that I had no advance warning of that question.  I understand the strength of the member's argument, which I have heard in many previous parliamentary debates on the subject. However, Mr Arbuckle and other members will be aware that the estimated cost of dualling the entire length of the A9 is some £600 million, which is a considerable commitment for any Government to make. At this time, it would appear that, in terms of public resources, it is not within our budget to meet such a cost.

We are again indebted to the committee for identifying deficiencies in the bill as it was introduced, which in this case concerned the powers that will be given to RTPs to acquire, develop and dispose of land. Amendments 58 and 59 were inspired by amendments that Michael McMahon agreed not to press at stage 2. Amendment 58 applies to RTPs the same rules that govern the development and disposal of land that is not needed for transport purposes as currently apply to SPT. Amendment 59 applies the updated local government rules on the disposal of land that the Parliament introduced in 2003. I move amendment 58.  Amendment 58 agreed to.  Amendment 59 moved—[Tavish Scott]—and agreed to.  Amendment 83 not moved.  Amendment 60 moved—[Tavish Scott]—and agreed to.

Amendment 61 is straightforward and will ensure that the Scottish road works commissioner will be under a duty to disclose information, as is the case with other public authorities. I move amendment 61.  Amendment 61 agreed to.

During stage 2 Fergus Ewing lodged amendments that would have prevented a road works authority issuing a fixed penalty notice where the offence appeared to be inadvertent and its effect trivial. Nicol Stephen explained at that time that there should be no defence to the commission of the offence, but that there might be mitigating circumstances. We would expect road works authorities to behave reasonably in deciding whether a fixed penalty notice should be issued. Fergus Ewing withdrew his amendments on the understanding that we would investigate the matter further. We have therefore decided that to reduce the potential for dispute and to improve clarity for all concerned a code of practice, giving guidance on the operation of the fixed penalty regime, might prove beneficial. That is the basis for our amendment, which has been supported warmly by the roads authorities users committees. I move amendment 62.  Amendment 62 agreed to .

I never split hairs over Mr Ewing's arguments—I just pick large holes in them. I thank Mr Ewing for explaining his amendment. We fully support the principle that the transport agency should consider sustainable economic growth while carrying out its functions, but we think that amendment 49 is unnecessary and inappropriate. As Mr Ewing said, the Executive is already committed to economic growth, among other national priorities. When it is up and running at the end of this year as an executive agency, the transport agency will be required to carry out its functions in line with the national priorities that the Executive has set out, including those that relate to sustainable economic growth. In addition, delivery by the agency will be shaped by a national transport strategy, which we will develop over the coming year. Although we believe that sustainable economic growth is our top priority, it would be wholly inconsistent with the policy of developing a national transport strategy to set a single objective for the transport agency alone in the bill. The amendment would also pre-empt consultation on the national strategy. The wider stakeholder community is supportive of our efforts to develop the national transport strategy in order to give everyone a clear view of the future of Scotland's transport. I suggest that the process would be undermined by amendment 49. I ask Mr Ewing to reconsider and to seek permission to withdraw the amendment.

The group contains several amendments and its broad thrust is to place a duty on ministers to consult relevant parties and to require ministers to produce regulations and codes of practice when we have established working groups to inform such measures. I will explain briefly the intention behind each amendment. Amendments 38 to 40 will build on the stage 2 proposal to establish an appeals process to address disputes about the timing of road works. At stage 2, Bruce Crawford suggested that ministers should be placed under a duty to produce regulations so that the process was clear at the outset. The amendments will give effect to that proposal and will extend the duty to include the production of a code of practice. We hope that the code will provide clarity and good practice. It should circumvent the requirement to pursue appeals. However, should appeals be necessary, we will be ready with a process for them. Amendment 41 will place a duty on the Scottish ministers to produce a code of practice that gives road works authorities practical guidance on the placement of apparatus. That is consistent with the duty to produce regulations on the matter. Amendment 43 will enable the Scottish ministers to produce a code of practice to provide guidance on restricting utility works after road works authorities have substantially improved a road. We will return to that with a later group of amendments. Amendment 45 will place the Scottish ministers under a duty to produce regulations on resurfacing and amendment 47 will place a similar duty on them in respect of the associated code of practice. The resurfacing provisions are detailed and we must give practitioners as much assistance as possible on how they should be implemented. Amendments 46 and 48 accept and will improve Michael McMahon's stage 2 amendment by providing a general duty to consult undertakers and road works authorities prior to the making of any regulations or codes of practice. We have established working parties that draw on the expertise of the road authorities and utilities committee (Scotland) to inform all such regulations and codes of practice, so we are keen to draw on the expertise of others. It is appropriate that we  record our thanks to the members of the road authorities and utilities committee, both for their assistance in informing the bill's provisions and for the valuable work that their working groups are undertaking to inform those regulations and codes of practice. I move amendment 38.

I will respond briefly. Better reinstatement of roads is the intention of the amendments in the group. Such reinstatement will be done through the appropriate agencies. Ultimately, of course, the duty for such issues rests with local authorities, which is where the responsibility should lie.  Amendment 38 agreed to.  Amendments 39 and 40 moved—[Tavish Scott]—and agreed to.

At stage 2, members of the Local Government and Transport Committee expressed the view that a three-year blanket ban would be inappropriate, as it would not take into account a range of potential circumstances. Amendment 42  responds to the committee's concern by removing the reference to "three years". The amendment will provide us with the flexibility to balance the need to maintain the technical integrity of the road with the need to excavate roads to provide essential services. As with previous amendments, I can assure Parliament that any regulations on the matter will be informed by deliberations on the need to balance the technical requirements of the road with the need for access to underground services. I hope that members will agree that amendment 42 represents a reasonable approach. I move amendment 42.  Amendment 42 agreed to.  Amendment 43 moved—[Tavish Scott]—and agreed to.

We made clear during stage 2 that staff relations are critical to the success of any organisation and that we should do everything possible to ensure that staff employment rights are protected during a period of change. That is what section 13 is all about; it ensures that the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations will apply. The most significant transfer of staff that we expect from the bill—in the short term, at least—will be from SPT to the new west of Scotland transport partnership. We welcome the decision that the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Authority took at its most recent meeting to authorise SPT officials to engage formally with the Scottish Executive on transition matters. The Executive is ready to work closely with SPT, the current west of Scotland transport partnership and the local authorities in the west to assist in the creation of the new regional transport partnership and forge stronger co-operation on matters of mutual interest. We welcome the fact that SPT staff will continue to manage and monitor the rail franchise in the west of Scotland on behalf of the Scottish ministers; continue to promote key projects such as the Larkhall to Milngavie railway, the Glasgow airport rail link and the Glasgow crossrail; continue to operate and develop the Glasgow subway; continue to work with operators to provide better services, such as integrated ticketing and information; and continue to serve the people of the west of Scotland with dedication and professionalism.  The Executive and SPT have worked together successfully on many transport projects. The creation of the new RTP and the location of the new national transport agency in Glasgow will bring two major delivery partners closer together. We believe that there will be benefits to both from that proximity—a better understanding of each other's business, a more regular flow of ideas and information and more opportunities than there would otherwise be for staff to increase their expertise by moving between the organisations—as well as benefits for Glasgow. Amendment 31 seeks to give further reassurance to SPT staff. It is our intention that, once further rail powers are devolved to Scotland following the commencement of the United Kingdom Railways Act 2005, SPT's statutory rail powers—in particular, its role as a signatory to the Scottish rail franchise—should transfer to the Scottish Executive. It is equally our intention that SPT and, in time, the west of Scotland transport partnership should, on behalf of the Scottish ministers, continue to monitor and manage the franchise in their area and develop proposals for new rail infrastructure and services. There is no intention that SPT staff would need to transfer to the Scottish Executive as they continue their work on rail. Amendment 31 seeks to clarify that, under new arrangements entered into under section 12A, which will include those between SPT and the Executive for the management of the franchise, staff can remain as SPT employees, even when the statutory function resides with the Scottish ministers. I move amendment 31.

We have received representations from councils, Strathclyde Passenger Transport and the existing voluntary partnerships that the new regional transport partnerships will be hard pushed to get all their internal processes, standing orders, staff and so on in place and, at the same time, to start working on a tight timetable for the development of regional strategies. Therefore, we intend to create RTPs as quickly as the parliamentary timetable will allow us to, starting by lodging the order that will establish the RTPs in time for the start of the autumn session. That will allow the RTPs to have a period of shadow running when they will exist as statutory bodies but will not be expected to perform any functions. That should not hold up the work on the regional strategies and we hope that the extra few months that that provides should enable the RTPs to complete their strategies and submit them to ministers for approval by the April 2007 deadline. Amendment 21 is a technical amendment that is consequential on amendment 20. I move amendment 20.  Amendment 20 agreed to.  Amendment 21 moved—[Tavish Scott] and agreed to.

At stage 2, the committee agreed to an amendment from Michael McMahon on improving transport links to cities and major population centres. That provision now appears in section 5(2)(c), as a result of amendment 17. Section 5(2)(c) introduces a specific duty on the RTPs to provide for efficient transport links between heavily populated places. I hope that that formulation is acceptable to Michael McMahon and that he will therefore accept the deletion of section 1A, which is proposed by amendment 25. Subsection 5(2)(c), in common with the rest of section 5, applies to joint transport strategies as much as it applies to a strategy that has been drawn up by one RTP. I move amendment 25.

I am tempted to make a facetious remark but I will not do so. A definition will be provided in the guidance and we will ensure that Mr Ewing has access to that.  Amendment 25 agreed to.

Yes, I think that Fergus Ewing deserved only one clap for that. It is a great pleasure to wind up the debate this afternoon. The debate has been informative and broadly consensual; there has been broad support for the principles of the bill. I thank Pauline McNeill for reminding Parliament that she and I spent an enjoyable evening out looking at the nightclubs of Glasgow—purely in the interests of research, I add. I also thank Donald Gorrie for his praise, which was a surprise, although we are grateful for it. I noticed some eyebrows lifting when he mentioned his support for what sounded like a national identity card—Mr Rumbles certainly looked amazed at that point and I suspect that there are a few internal discussions to be had on that issue. I was disappointed that Paul Martin had to point out that we got thumped in the golf match on Saturday. I suspect that my non-attendance had nothing to do with that, one way or the other. I was grateful for Mr MacAskill's sinner-repenteth-nearly speech. He raised a number of serious points to which I will return. At the outset, I recognise that, as many members said and as I tried to say in my opening speech, the bill is not the sole answer—I have never argued that. The Executive and all parties have rightly pointed out that, in the longer term, the issue is as much about cultural change in Scotland as anything else and it most certainly cuts across many portfolios, not least those of the Minister for Justice, the Minister for Education and Young People and the Minister for Health and Community Care. However, we must also recognise the importance of the hospitality industry to Scotland. We need a thriving, viable and attractive hospitality industry, not least for tourism, but also for local people in local communities. I believe that the balance in the bill  is right, on detailed issues and more broadly. For example, the personal licence could become a qualification for people who work in the trade. To pick up a point that many colleagues made about training and careers, why should people not have a career in the trade? We hope that, under the bill, we will make progress on such matters. I will rush through the many detailed points that were raised. Bruce Crawford made the general point that there is not enough detail in the bill. We must consider the reality of the Nicholson and Daniels reports. As an aside, I point out that Mr MacAskill was wrong to say that nothing happened after Nicholson—of course, the Daniels report was specifically about the off-trade, which was a concern of members throughout the Parliament, although maybe not of Mr MacAskill. Mr Crawford must accept that the Nicholson report presented us with a framework and that it was Government's job to create legislation out of it. We have had to consult on many of the issues, simply because consultation is part of the Parliament's enshrining legislation and procedures, which is correct. The new national licensing forum will make progress on many of the details. As I have said repeatedly to the Local Government and Transport Committee and today, the Parliament will have many opportunities through the normal procedures to scrutinise the details of that work. On local licensing forums, several members mentioned the importance of giving local people the ability to influence the process and the system. Mary Mulligan's constituency case was possibly the best illustration of that. I hope that, under the bill, the problem that she raised will not occur, simply because the bill will allow any person to object. The measure is a direct response to the sort of case that Mary Mulligan correctly mentioned. The local licensing forums can play an important role. Licensing boards will have to have regard to the forums' views in deciding on policy. We hope that the forums will contribute strongly to a new framework that gives local people a strong voice and the ability to influence, for which many members argued today. My mind is open on Patrick Harvie's specific point that the forums should meet in public. We will consider the specifics of how the forums will operate and come back to the committee on that. Pauline McNeill rightly raised the broader issue of how the licences will interrelate. The proposed operating plan that we have put before Parliament strikes the balance that needs to be achieved between local policy and national guidance. The simplification of the current system of seven licences to a system of two licences is important. It will ensure that local licensing board policy determines the conditions that must be met. There is no reason why nightclubs cannot look closely at such conditions. Indeed, in our meetings with the  licensed trade, we have been very open to suggestions on how to take forward national or local conditions in order to address that point. I take Pauline McNeill's point that there may be an impact on competition. However, I am sure that Parliament would assume that high-quality premises in city centres competing to attract customers form a competitive marketplace. That is how the system will operate. On the broader point of grandfather rights and transitional arrangements, which many members highlighted, I very much appreciate the licensed trade's concerns. I am not persuaded by Mr Crawford's proposal for the two-tier system that would result from granting wholesale grandfather rights. However, we will carefully examine all the options and I fully intend to make an early announcement on the matter.

As I said, we will look closely at the matter. However, during the debate, it became clear that not only do we need to simplify arrangements in order to move into the new regime but we must not cut across other appropriate legislative and regulatory fields. I am sure that Mr Crawford would agree that it would be wrong for the Government to use the bill's powers to take action over, for example, building control issues. We will not do so. It is clear that we need to strike a balance in that respect. For the benefit of Margaret Smith and Paul Martin, I should reiterate that we are prepared to look further at the police's role with regard to applications for premises licences. I accept Mr Martin's point that the regime must be effective and appropriate. In fact, I have discussed that very issue with ACPOS and I know that we will come forward to Parliament with some proposals when the opportunity arises.

We do not have any such plans and I do not want to give Bristow Muldoon any indication that we will move in that direction. We are always happy to consider examples of good practice in other parts of the UK. However, as I said in an earlier intervention, the framework and package of measures that we have proposed are appropriate to Scottish needs.  The role of LSOs was raised principally by the SNP. However, although I agreed with some of Fergus Ewing's remarks, I thought that he talked utter nonsense on that matter. It is extraordinary for him to suggest that the Government should tell local authorities what they should do about particular appointments to their staff—

Yes, he did. I find it extraordinary that we would tell local authorities how many people they would have and how much they would be paid. We are not going to do that. The SNP can take an approach based on centralisation if it wants to, but the Executive will not. In that regard, I believe that Mr Crawford's amendment is wholly erroneous and does not address these serious issues. Indeed, its lodging has a slight element of opposition for opposition's sake, which contrasts with the serious look at these issues that we have all taken this afternoon. I know that Mr Ewing is a great talker, but I also thought that he was a great reader. However, he clearly has not read the bill. For his benefit, I will point out that the bill says that the role of LSOs includes providing "advice and guidance" and mediation; supervising compliance; issuing written warnings in cases in which licence conditions have been breached; and initiating a review of the licence by the board. I suggest that the SNP reads that particular section, because it will certainly help the SNP to understand these matters. A number of us were somewhat taken aback by the Tory approach to binge drinking. Apparently binge drinking is okay for pensioners, but not for the rest of society. To be frank, I find that position extraordinary. I reiterate, not least for Brian Adam's benefit, that we will tackle binge drinking and irresponsible promotions. I said so in the debate and ministers have said so collectively over a considerable period of time. We will ban sales promotions for the off-sales and on-sales sectors, as we are clear that such promotions encourage more and quicker alcohol consumption at great cost to local people, local communities and society at large. It is right to take action on that. On that basis, I ask that Parliament reject the utterly pointless amendment from the Scottish National Party.

I take Mr Aitken's point on the powers that licensing boards will have. Does he accept, however, that part of our approach is to give training to licensing board members, to  ensure that that training is up to date and to ensure that it relates in particular to the bill that we propose to pass?

It is important that Brian Adam does not say that the Executive did not produce a financial resolution. The Parliament decided that it did not want one. We took advice from the Parliament on whether a financial resolution was necessary and the advice from the Presiding Officer's office was that we did not need such a resolution. We offered to have a financial resolution, but the Parliament decided that we did not need one. I hope that Mr Adam is clear about that.

If the Conservative party position is not to support our policy on tackling binge drinking, what is its approach to the problem?

Mr Crawford is aware that a fees review is under way. That was flagged up well in advance and the committee was aware of it. Surely he is not suggesting that we cancel the fees review.

I begin by congratulating the new member on taking a place in this chamber. I notice that David Davidson arrived late, although I am sure that he was just waiting for Mr Brownlee to come in. I hope that Mr Brownlee will have many happy years in the Scottish Parliament—well, at least two; we shall see what happens after that. Too many Scots are in denial about the impact of alcohol on our everyday lives and about the fact that our cultural dependence on drink is as advanced as it is. For too many Scots, drink is the lifeblood, the shield, the excuse. It is this devolved Government's responsibility to propose licensing law reform. In the 30 years since Scottish alcohol legislation was last changed, society has changed. As the problems and challenges have altered, the need for reform has arisen. We need reform that allows Scotland's hospitality industry to invest and expand but which also allows us to control the misuse of alcohol and its unwelcome consequences for too many communities and local people. We need reform that can help to break the link between excessive drinking, binge drinking and crime. Why, in Scotland—city and urban, rural and island—is the misuse of alcohol, getting drunk and getting drunk quickly, a growing issue, not a declining one? Today's evidence is that we are drinking harder, earlier and quicker than ever before. What should Government's response be? Should we liberalise licensing laws, make alcohol more easily obtainable, endorse 24-hour drinking and encourage a continental, cafe society approach? Would that encourage more Scots, particularly young female Scots, to drink more responsibly? Given the national statistics on health, crime, the family and the social impact of alcohol, can we afford to test such a regime? The evidence suggests not. I will give just three illustrations of why that approach would not be right. We have rising levels of alcohol-related crime, an increasing amount of days lost at work through drink-related illness and higher levels of domestic violence, often involving children, caused by alcohol misuse at home.  Why is drinking—hard drinking, getting drunk—such a rite of passage for young Scots? Does alcohol break down one's inhibitions with the opposite sex? Do we need the buzz of drink to combat an acute lack of self-confidence? Perhaps those observations are too sweeping and general and do not reflect the modern, progressive Scotland of the 21st century—then again, perhaps not. Let me begin with the evidence in favour of reform, an enduring principle of this Parliament's legislative process. The cost of alcohol misuse to the national health service in Scotland is £110.5 million per year. According to the 2000 Scottish crime survey, nearly three quarters of the assailants in violent crimes were reported by the victim to be under the influence of drink. Young Scots aged between 16 and 24 drink more than any other age group, and the majority of 13 and 15-year-olds have drunk alcohol. That is the reality that we are absolutely committed to tackling. The Licensing (Scotland) Bill alone is not the answer. Legislation does not change culture, nor does it change attitudes. That is why ministers across portfolios—in the Health Department and in the Education Department—are working together on a plan for action on alcohol. However, the bill will contribute to our efforts to reduce underage drinking, tackle binge drinking and protect and involve communities and local people and it will reform an outdated system. There is a strong consensus in favour of the bill, in favour of reform and in favour of action. I particularly want to mention the work done by the Nicholson committee, the Daniels working group and the expert reference group on licensing in building the evidence for reform. That consensus on the need for reform is also reflected in the Local Government and Transport Committee's report.

Liquor licensing is very much a devolved matter. Although we are looking closely at what is being done in other parts of the United Kingdom, our approach—through the Nicholson committee, the Daniels working group and the expert reference group—has been to build the evidence for reform here in Scotland, based on the Scottish experience. I am grateful to the Local Government and Transport Committee for the excellent work that it has done on the bill. It took evidence from a wide range of people and it has taken a sensible and thorough approach to the matter. It endorsed the general principles of the bill, and I am grateful for  its recognition of and support for the proposed new licensing framework, the balance between national and local controls, the single premises licence, the end of permitted hours and the right for any person to object to a licence application. The committee made a series of recommendations, and I will respond to them this afternoon. First, it recommended that the proposed size and quorum of the licensing boards and the size of the proposed local forums should be increased. We are not persuaded that the maximum size of 10 for the boards should be increased. Councillors sit on licensing boards as part of a quasi-judicial tribunal, taking decisions based on detailed information from the clerk to the board, from objectors, from the police and, under the new system, from licensing standards officers. They will be fully equipped to take decisions using that wide range of information. We do not agree that increasing the size of boards would improve the decision-making process. However, we are happy to change the proposed quorum for boards. We will introduce amendments at stage 2 to allow a quorum of half the board's membership.

I know that Mr Ewing followed closely the deliberations of the Local Government and Transport Committee and the evidence that I and Scottish Executive officials gave, so I am sure he is aware that those matters will be considered carefully by the national licensing forum. That is why it will be set up. We are aware of the cost issues, and those will be taken forward. I also assure Mr Ewing that, as he would expect, we will bring those matters back to the Parliament, which will be able properly to scrutinise them. There will be plenty of opportunities for him to scrutinise them, too. We acknowledge the committee's concern that some local forums may need more than 10 members. We intend to lodge amendments at stage 2 to increase the maximum number of members to 15, with a new regulatory power to amend that later if required. The committee also raised concerns about the restriction of the police's role in new applications to the reporting of convictions for relevant offences. The police will, of course, continue to play a full part in the review of licences and they will be able to initiate a review at any time. However, we are prepared to consider further the role of the police in relation to applications for premises licences.  Police evidence to the committee suggested that we should reconsider allowing licensing standards officers to enter unlicensed premises. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland stressed the potential for licensing standards officers to become involved in dangerous situations that would be best left to trained police officers. I confirm that I am happy to lodge suitable amendments at stage 2 to deal with that issue. The committee asked us to reconsider some issues for which there are no immediate answers. We will reconsider licensing arrangements for ferries and entertainment vehicles and home deliveries of alcohol, including dial-a-drink services. Those are particularly complex issues and we need more time to work through them. A key concern in the committee's report is that the bill's proposed controls on irresponsible promotions do not extend to the off-sales sector. Most of the evidence that the committee took supported the extension of controls to off-sales promotions. We have discussed the matter further with the off-sales trade and Alcohol Focus Scotland and we considered the evidence on underage drinking, consumption trends and the misuse of alcohol. We also considered the committee's view that some controls could be imposed now on the basis of existing evidence. In recognition of that consensus, we have decided that a modified version of the controls should be extended to off-sales. We therefore propose to amend the bill at stage 2 to deliver a ban on some promotions in off-sales premises. We wish to ensure that the extension covers promotions that relate to an alcoholic drink that is targeted at people who are under 18; that are based on the strength of any alcohol; that reward or encourage, or seek to reward or encourage, drinking alcohol quickly; and that offer alcohol as a reward or prize, unless the alcohol is in a sealed container and is to be consumed off the premises. We also propose to amend the condition in the bill that requires on-sales premises to implement a non-differential pricing policy for 48 hours. We will extend the period to 72 hours, as recommended in some of the evidence that the committee heard. We intend to impose the non-differential pricing policy on the on-sales and off-sales sectors. I announce progress on establishing the national licensing forum. Forum members have been appointed and the first meeting is to take place on Monday 4 July. The forum is built around the individual expertise that it needs to enable it to perform a specific role in its first two years, which will focus on training, licensing standards officers and overprovision. I am grateful to the highly experienced individuals who have agreed to offer their time to that important work and I look forward to working with them.  The bill adopts a balanced approach that was achieved after an open consultative process and considerable work. It balances the need for national consistency with local flexibility and the need to recognise and support Scotland's vibrant and innovative hospitality sector with the stark reality that we live in a hard-drinking culture that puts an enormous strain on public resources. It recognises that most Scots drink responsibly but, for those who do not, we must take action. The Government cannot change Scotland's hard-drinking culture—people can. However, the Government can recognise what must be done. Licensing law reform is one part of that equation. The bill is not about liberalisation or deregulation and it will not allow 24-hour drinking. There is no evidence that such an approach would work. The liquor licensing reforms go hand in hand with sustained long-term action on education about alcohol and health promotion. Because the measures are sustained, are for the long term and are reforming, I commend the bill to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Licensing (Scotland) Bill.

The matter remains under active consideration by ministers, but I regret that I cannot be specific about when an announcement will be made. The criteria that are being applied to inform our decision are as recommended by the Executive for all relocation reviews. Those involve a first stage that balances socioeconomic benefit with business efficiency equally, followed by a second stage that focuses on the economic and financial appraisal of options.

As Parliament would expect, Mr McAveety makes a persuasive case for the part of Glasgow that he represents. All I can say is that these matters are under active consideration. I take his point about the uncertainty that is being experienced by staff and I assure him that the staff will be the first to know about the decision.

All letters from MPs or MSPs on devolved matters are seen and replied to by ministers. Those that relate to operational matters are replied to by the Scottish Executive agency concerned.

Ministers here are responsible and accountable for the areas under their responsibility. I reiterate the point that our responsibilities are to reply—and we do—to all letters that we receive from both members of Parliament and members of the Scottish Parliament. The matter raised relating to Westminster is one for the Government at Westminster. It is not for me or any other minister in this place to tell it how to run its business; I would not expect Mr Adam to suggest that it was. All that I can do is commend to him my own policy: I speak to my MP and he takes the matter up.

I can only repeat that our approach to the issue is as I have described. We respond to letters from members of Parliament and from members of the Scottish Parliament. Mr Pringle may know that, for example, the Ministry of Defence and the Department for Work and Pensions provide a ministerial response to letters from MSPs. However, those matters are an issue for a Government in a different place.

Business rates for new businesses will vary from property to property. The information that would be needed to provide a reliable estimate of the cost of giving them exemptions is not held centrally. The Executive is of course engaging with business organisations in a number of ways to build Scotland's competitiveness.

Scottish ministers, including the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform, are in constant discussions with a range of business organisations to discuss many ideas that are proposed. I recognise fully that at election times there are many new ideas and it is important that they are always well thought out.

These are all very excitable issues that will be dealt with properly and appropriately by Government in due course.

I fear that Mr Fraser gave away the game there—it appears that a leadership contest is also pending in other parties. Mr Fraser needs to recognise that the employment rate in this country is above that of the United Kingdom and is at its highest since records began. Only Denmark from the European Union 25 nations has a greater proportion of its people in work. Youth unemployment in Scotland is down by 57 per cent since January 1999 and long-term unemployment is down by 70 per cent since January 1999. There has been significant progress across a range of measures that relate to our competitive position. These matters are under constant review and are always being developed by ministers.

I hope that Alex Neil will forgive me for what I am going to say about oil. Some years ago, Winnie Ewing stood in a hostelry in Lerwick and regaled the assembled company with comments on who the oil belonged to. A large Shetland fishing skipper tapped her on the shoulder and said, "Winnie, it's no your oil; it's wur oil." I am sure that Mr Neil will be careful with his arguments about oil boundaries and boundaries for other utility substances. I, too, congratulate Rob Gibson on securing the debate, which is an opportunity to celebrate Scottish and Norwegian cultural, political and economic connections, traditions and opportunities. Despite what some members have unfairly said, the connections are real, positive and growing. The suggestion that none of us on the Executive benches takes any interest in Norway is untrue and I wish that members had not said that. Like Rob Gibson, I enjoyed the Grieg exhibition at the City Art Centre earlier this year. Sadly, the exhibition is now closed, but I encourage all Scots to become involved in other aspects of the wider Norwegian celebrations, such as concerts, exhibitions and literature readings, to name just a few. I welcome the opportunity to participate in the celebrations in Scotland—where the devolved Government will sponsor the forthcoming Oslo Philharmonic Orchestra concert—and in Norway. I want to mention not only the celebrations to mark the centenary of Norwegian independence but those to mark the 60 th anniversary of the Shetland bus, which is an event of great significance for both our countries. During the second world war, many Norwegians escaped across the North sea to Shetland in small boats and joined military units that were based in Shetland. Those units harried the German occupiers of their country. The heroic—and in some cases incredible—tales of men who ran the  Shetland bus from Scalloway in the west of Shetland and Vidlin in the east of Shetland right across to the coast of Norway are justifiably well known. They are memorably described in David Howarth's book "The Shetland Bus". However, those were not the only Norwegian units to be based in Shetland and, when the war ended, many Norwegians took Shetland wives home to Norway with them. Others have since put down roots in the constituency that I am honoured to represent. The ties that were forged in war remain strong in peace. The museum in Scalloway—the base that was used by the Shetland bus for most of its operational life—has an impressive display on the operations of the Shetland bus and is visited by most Norwegian visitors to Shetland. The bus vessel named the Hitra received a warm Scalloway welcome when she returned there with many veterans soon after she was found and restored by Norwegian volunteers. As Stewart Stevenson, Richard Lochhead and other members have said, the sea is an obvious connection between our two countries in relation to fishing, but it also provides a tourism connection, in Peterhead as well as in my part of Scotland. Norwegians come across on the ferry from Bergen and sail here in their own boats. In summer, the Lerwick Boating Club bar is often thronged with Norwegians—much to the benefit of the club's accounts—and Lerwick harbour is brightened by their moored vessels, not least during the annual Shetland race from Bergen to Lerwick and back. One effect of Shetland hospitality is that the return leg of that race is not always sailed quite as competitively as the first leg. On the subject of ties old and new, Phil Gallie mentioned the battle of Largs. In my part of the world, the two countries come together in the Up-Helly-Aa festival. I suspect that the historical basis of the festival may be doubtful—the Viking suits that are worn by the jarl squad might have taken the Vikings of old by surprise—but the toast to the festival, which is drunk each year in Lerwick town hall on the morning of Up-Helly-Aa, is drunk from a silver galley that was presented to Lerwick by its Norwegian twin town, Måløy. I was taken with Andrew Welsh's illustration of the connections between Montrose and parts of Norway. The twinning between Kirkwall, in Orkney, and Hordaland, in Norway, was celebrated at a service in St Magnus cathedral last night. Norway is an important historic partner of Scotland and it is our nearest neighbour. Shetland became part of Scotland only about 500 years ago. Norway is also our oldest twinning partner; indeed, the twinning partnership between  Burntisland and Flekkefjord may prove to be the oldest formal twinning partnership in the world. Our connections are rooted not only in past links but in links present and future through trade and culture. Norway is Scotland's 10 th most important export destination. A Scottish trade mission has just returned from Norway, and the next is planned for the autumn. That demonstrates that, despite what may have been said, our connections are real, live, thriving and growing. As the motion notes, Norway, like Scotland, is a modern, dynamic nation that is committed to a knowledge economy and that is seeking to update its international image. Like Scotland, it is also rich in resources. Scotland, like Norway, has demonstrated its keenness to play its part in the international community—for example, in our forthcoming work in Malawi. Very soon, the Nobel Peace Centre will open in Oslo. I was taken with Linda Fabiani's remarks about that. I have some experience of the movement towards peace in Sri Lanka, where the Norwegian facilitators played an immensely important role. What they achieved is an admirable legacy to the world around us. Our two nations continue to enjoy frequent interchange, building on our current commonalities. An estimated 2,000 to 3,000 Norwegians live in Scotland. The days of raiding are over, but Scottish and Norwegian ministers are no strangers. Indeed, my colleague Ross Finnie will be in Tromsø shortly to meet his fisheries counterpart, Svein Ludvigsen, and I—along with other colleagues—have today been delighted to meet and welcome the Norwegian ambassador. We work closely with Norway through the Scottish-Nordic action plan, which is delivering concrete projects of mutual benefit, and the Conference of Peripheral Maritime Regions of Europe, which is part of the European Union's arrangements. There are also many bilateral contacts.  I welcome the motion, which celebrates the centenary of Norwegian independence and, particularly, 100 years of ties between our countries. Our ties with Norway are, of course, far older and pre-date the earlier union between Norway and Sweden. Many would argue that there are 1,000 years of ties between Scotland and Norway, which situates us clearly as a key and continuing partner nation. I encourage all Scots to learn more about Norway and to participate in the celebrations. I also congratulate the Norwegian Government and its people on behalf of the devolved Government in Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

For most members the debate is not about concerts, costs or the opulent splendour of Gleneagles: it is about what must happen when leaders of the G8 countries meet and what this small country can do to influence their deliberations. As Sarah Boyack said, the issue is about tackling why a woman in sub-Saharan Africa has a one in 16 chance of dying in pregnancy compared with a one in 3,700 chance for a woman in North America. It is about Irene Oldfather's graphic illustrations of Malawi and about whether, as Andrew Arbuckle and others said, the G8 can make a difference. It surely must but, as Pauline McNeill observed, how we individually react to those challenges can make that difference. On the amendments, I gently observe that the rightward drift of Marxism epitomised by the Green's and the Scottish Socialist Party's support for what Mr Gallie described as aging politicians—

That is nothing if not a development in this Parliament's thinking. We are, of course, grateful for Tory support, but I was disappointed by a line on international aid in Mr Gallie's speech. During the Tory party's period in office, development aid was halved as a proportion of Government spending and reached only 0.3 per cent of gross domestic product—less than half of the 0.7 per cent target that the G8 now has. Although I agree with Mr Gallie's requirement for action rather than words, the same analysis should be applied to his own party's performance.

I think that we have dealt with Mr Gallie.

No. I will deal with Mr Swinney and the Scottish National Party's approach to the debate. I am sure that Mr Swinney would accept that Mr McCabe, rather than not setting out what we want to happen, did exactly that. On the 0.7 per cent target across the G8, EU member states and others, it is surely a little harsh to criticise the summit at Gleneagles before it has taken place. The question for Mr Swinney and his party, even if the summit produces nothing for Scotland, is whether they would turn their backs on the opportunity for this devolved Government, this Parliament and the people of this country to influence the world's leaders on the issues of African poverty and climate change.

Surely the whole point of the debate, of the Parliament and of all the parties within it, is to push on such issues. That is exactly why we are here. The inference that the devolved Government has not pushed those issues is mistaken. For example, on climate change, we have close working relationships at official and ministerial level with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. On Africa, Hilary Benn, the Secretary of State for International Development, made it clear that he welcomes the Scottish contribution to work on the subject, including the First Minister's trip to Malawi in May. All that adds up to the Executive having the ability to exploit Scotland's position in the UK to influence the summit's agenda in a significant way. Many members spoke about the right to protest, march and demonstrate. In relation to Edinburgh, Donald Anderson wrote in The Scotsman the other day: "The council and the police have 'can-do' attitudes and the city has a world-class events team which is experienced at smoothly organising major public events". Surely that illustrates the depth of commitment that there is to taking matters forward in a  productive manner and to learning from and using the experience of so many people visiting Edinburgh and elsewhere in Scotland. I reiterate that the Executive supports the aims of the make poverty history campaign and civil organisations that want to improve the lives of the world's poorest people. Scotland is ready to welcome anyone who wants to come here to protest peacefully and legitimately around the summit about any cause. Freedom of speech is a precious right. However, it is important that the organisers of potential additional events discuss their plans with the police and local authorities. People have the right to protest, but, as Andrew Arbuckle said, they should do so peacefully.

I will come on to the costs in a minute. I want to address the points that were made about the economic benefit that will accrue from the summit. There is no question that the G8 summit has the potential to have a considerable economic impact on Scotland. There will be not only a short-term boost to the economy from spending by the large influx of media and delegates but longer-term benefits to Scottish business, which is why we are committed to measuring the impact of the summit on the Scottish economy by commissioning a study to do that, which will be published later this year. The important issues are not the costs or other such matters, but poverty in Africa and climate change. That is why it is important that so many young people are interested in those subjects and that is why the J8 summit, which Iain Smith, Mary Mulligan and others mentioned in the context of their constituencies, is so important. The J8 summit will take place in Edinburgh from 3 to 5 July, just before the G8 summit, and it will produce a communiqué to be delivered to the world leaders at the summit. Roseanna Cunningham raised issues to do with her constituency. As she well knows, officials from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, the Scottish Executive and Tayside police are working closely with Perth and Kinross Council to ensure that the area reaps the maximum possible benefit from the summit while ensuring the minimum disruption. Of course there are concerns about insurance and the FCO has published advice on the matter.  I can say clearly to Margo MacDonald, as Tom McCabe said to Roseanna Cunningham, that the costs will not fall on local taxpayers. Legitimate costs will be met by central Government, as they should be. It is important to recognise that the costs of the summit fall to the FCO. Security costs are a separate issue.

I want to deal with Colin Fox's point about G8 Alternatives. It is important to understand that the notification from that organisation is being considered by Perth and Kinross Council and Tayside police, before a final decision is made by the licensing committee. We encourage G8 Alternatives to continue discussions with the council and Tayside police, to facilitate peaceful protest.

I return to the two main issues for the summit at Gleneagles. Sarah Boyack, Iain Smith and others acknowledged climate change as a global challenge and it is important that Scotland should contribute to international efforts to tackle it, while taking advantage of the economic benefits that the development of renewable energy technologies, for example, can bring. In relation to African poverty, if the world fails to act to meet the millennium development goals, 45 million more children will die between now and 2015, 247 million more people in sub-Saharan Africa will be living on less than $1 a day in 2015, and 97 million more children will still be out of school in 2015. That surely demonstrates the importance of action. The G8 must focus on those two enormous issues for the world—poverty in Africa and climate change. As the Prime Minister said to Charles Kennedy at question time in the House of Commons today, in the long term climate change is the single biggest issue that we face. During the understandable hype about Murrayfield rock concerts, perhaps we should remember that finding solutions to poverty in Africa and climate change should be the abiding legacy of Gleneagles.

I give Roseanna Cunningham the absolute assurance that she seeks in relation to local taxpayers, who will not be levied or subject to the costs of the summit in that regard.

I thank Mr Swinburne for choosing a thoughtful subject for this evening and for taking a considered approach in what he said. Indeed, he initiated what has been a considered and thoughtful debate. The powers of Parliament is an area of considerable interest, which will bring different political persuasions to bear. In particular, it is an area of deep philosophical interest for those of us who enjoy the world of politics. If I should say anything at the beginning of my remarks, it is that all of us in the world of politics must convince the public that the particular route that we advocate is the right and appropriate one. In 1997, and then in the election campaign in 1999, that spirit was epitomised, not least because there had been a referendum and the people of this country had endorsed the devolution settlement and the tax-varying powers that go with it. Although it was a debateable and argumentative point at the time, there was legitimacy to the process that was then undertaken.  John Swinburne has won debating time for an important issue. Members' business is highly valued and is best used—I speak as one who has benefited from it in the past—to raise important but invariably local issues in Parliament. He has raised an issue on behalf of the people who put him in this place. That is, of course, his right. I observe in passing that many of the issues that he has raised, while certainly being core to his party's manifesto, are reserved, which he mentioned in his speech. In some ways he might, as a unionist, be better to stand for election to Westminster. Perhaps he will, however, be so good as to recognise that it was the introduction of proportional representation that has given him and others the opportunity to be part of this Parliament. It is right to reflect on the achievements of devolution after its first six years. I agree fully with the motion's implicit acceptance that devolution has been a success. In some ways, one might summarise the motion as calling for us to go forward, not back. I can see why some members might find that thought to be attractive.

I will in a minute. There must be a coherent basis for constitutional change—and coherence is something that we expect from the Greens.

Thankfully, we live in a free world, a free democracy and a free Parliament. It is up to individual members whether they wish to attend. Perhaps the thought of my winding speech was enough to send many members to receptions that are taking place in Parliament this evening. For that, I can only sympathise and agree. People who debate the powers of Parliament must do so from a basis of coherence. In the spirit of the debate, it is vital that we approach such subjects in a responsible and adult fashion. I do not agree with the contention that we cannot have a responsible adult debate about our policies until we are responsible for raising our taxes. Even this week—this is a small but significant example—Parliament debated the effectiveness of a previously passed transport bill. It is right to consider what has been achieved by the  legislation that we have passed and how it needs to be improved. That is an adult and responsible approach to developing our own systems and structures and conducting our politics.

Mr Adam would accept that the Minister for Transport is responsible for public service obligations and the lifeline services to some of the Western Isles in the area that Mr Mather represents. It is a partnership agreement commitment that Mr Stephen will take forward proposals on Highlands and Islands air services generally. I do not accept the contention that he has no power in that area. Of course there is a live debate, such as we are having this evening, about what further powers might be gained in that regard. I will deal quickly with the points about pensioners that John Swinburne and others, such as Christine Grahame, made this evening. Pensioners have benefited from the current devolution settlement. Christine Grahame was fair to point out that because of this Parliament, pensioners in Scotland have free personal nursing care, free national bus travel and the central heating initiative, which I believe is a particularly important policy and which I know from my constituents is immensely valuable to many people throughout Scotland. I agree that it is not acceptable that 8 per cent of pensioners live in absolutely low-income households, but that figure is down from some 30 per cent in 1996-1997. That is surely progress on which we would all want to build, and is a demonstration of how the current devolved settlement works for the benefit of a key group of Scottish citizens. The devolution settlement that was agreed in 1999 has not been fixed for all time: indeed, Mr Adam mentioned the additional powers in relation to railways that have arrived on Parliament's doorstep. I have no doubt that the settlement will continue to evolve. The challenge is to build on those developments. I note the following for the benefit of members who made speeches from their political perspectives—and rightly so—about nationalism and an independent Scotland. When I worked at Westminster, there was only one question time a month for Scottish ministers and one Scottish bill a year if we were lucky. Scottish  ministers were rarely available in Scotland because of their Westminster responsibilities. There was no scrutiny before 1999. Jean Turner was right to make the point about the number of people who lobby actively in this place and who make their case to MSPs of all political persuasions. That is the basis for the settlement that we have.  Ultimately, as with all such issues, it is right that the people decide.  Meeting closed at 18:23.

The Scottish Executive is currently working with local authorities and local enterprise companies including Highland Council and Highlands and Islands Enterprise to identify suitable locations for the relocation of departments, agencies and sponsored public sector bodies. The list of potential locations will published on the Scottish Executive website in June.

Mr Stone makes a pertinent point on the connection between the development of renewable power and the potential for considering the various bodies—from industry and the public sector—that might be involved in the process. We will be happy to consider proposals. Another point worthy of note is that Highland Council has itself been a leading light in relocating posts within its area. It has already relocated harbour management to Lochinver. That is a good precedent that I can only encourage other bodies in the Highlands and Islands to follow.

I will be happy to discuss with health ministers the issues raised by Ms Scanlon. She raises important points on NHS 24 and she is of course aware that a review is in progress. I would not wish to mislead her, so I must say that I do not think that the review is considering location. However, I will be happy to take up the points that she makes with colleagues in the Scottish Executive Health Department.

New guidance on the relocation review process was published in January 2005 for consultation. Responses are being considered and finalised guidance should be available in June. However, many of the principles in the guidance are already being applied. For example, reviews are now being published and they show that locations are being compared more consistently. That demonstrates an improvement in transparency and consistency in the review process.

Mr Purvis was at the Finance Committee when the issue was scrutinised. He raises points about effectiveness and efficiency. The operational effectiveness and efficiency of government can generally be enhanced by relocation. He mentions particular areas and I commend him for his perseverance. However, while he was speaking, I heard Mr Robson, who is sitting to my left, quietly mention a couple of other places. The exciting aspect of the relocation policy is that there is no lack of choice.

I will make two points. First, I hope that Mr Swinney will be pleased that the Scottish Executive is considering the strategic overview of relocation to ensure that socioeconomic factors, which are already a big part of the process, will be enshrined in decision making—I hope that that will enhance and augment the arguments that he makes for parts of his constituency. Secondly, the small-units aspect of the relocation policy will be of particular importance to the areas that he mentions. We encourage local enterprise companies and local authorities in his part of Scotland to suggest locations. We will be happy to consider those suggestions along with the suggestions from other areas that make similar cases.

We have identified students as a target group for the fresh talent initiative and are working on a number of strands of activity to encourage international students to come and study in Scotland, and to remain here at the end of their studies. Significantly, the fresh talent working in Scotland scheme, which will be introduced in the summer, will enable international students who graduate with a higher national diploma or an undergraduate, masters or PhD degree from a Scottish university or college, to apply to remain in the country for up to two years following their graduation.

I agree with Sarah Boyack's points and assure her that there have been discussions with the Home Office about visa matters. Those discussions will continue, although they are on hold at the moment. On the point about marketing the fresh talent initiative and the elements of it that are happening now, I can only agree about its importance and about the need to ensure that employers, the universities sector and the rest of the academic sector are aware of the advantages that the fresh talent initiative can bring. We recently launched a challenge fund for activities to support international students during their studies and we  are, of course, funding a new international postgraduate scholarship programme. Those are all elements of the fresh talent initiative that we hope will build on its success.

That question strikes me as being rather wide of the fresh talent initiative mark. Of course, as in so many things, Mr Fraser is quite wrong. The amount of students who stayed to work in Scotland after graduation in 1999 to 2000 was 79 per cent. In 2002-03, that figure went up to 89 per cent, so the Scottish Executive is making demonstrable progress. Parliament and I would have a lot more time for the Tory position on fresh talent and attracting new people to Scotland if we did not see that Murdo Fraser's party is currently conflating immigration and asylum. That is an utterly barbaric policy, which means that under the Tories, the 10,000 th refugee from Darfur would get into the UK, but the 10,001 st would not. We are talking about a party that has turned its back on the 1951 United Nations "Convention relating to the Status of Refugees". The Executive believes in addressing and promoting the interests and future aspirations of people, not in conducting a despicable campaign that is based on pandering to people's fears.

If we can agree on anything in this morning's debate, perhaps it is that the art of taxation consists in so plucking the goose as to obtain the largest number of feathers with the smallest amount of hissing. So said Jean-Baptiste Colbert, the finance minister to Louis XIV, some years ago, I guess—possibly even earlier than 1954. It is a serious observation that no system is perfect. As Wendy Alexander and a number of other members have pointed out this morning, there is no perfect system of national or local taxation. Different groups will have observations as to the effectiveness, efficiency or fairness of all systems of taxation. The Executive has initiated the review so as to provide an opportunity for those different aspects to be independently assessed and properly scrutinised against a number of important and balanced criteria. Let me respond to the points that were made this morning. Brian Monteith pointed out that the council tax was introduced by the Conservatives. He also mentioned the simultaneous increase in VAT. If my memory serves me right, the increase was on VAT on fuel, which hit Scottish pensioners, families and businesses pretty hard. We certainly recall the Conservative context of VAT increases.

If Mr Monteith wants to confirm that, I am happy to let him intervene.

Increased, reduced, increased, reduced—yes, we remember VAT during the Conservative years. The real point about the Conservatives' position is that, because of the James review, which is a product of their current thinking—although not in Scotland, because they do not talk about the James review in Scotland—

The Conservatives talk about the review depending on which question time it is. They are advocating increased spending but lower taxes—one of the more extraordinary positions being taken at this time.  Bristow Muldoon, Wendy Alexander and Michael McMahon argued fairly from their perspective for a property-based tax. Michael McMahon rightly pointed out that the SNP is debating a devolved issue in this chamber; that is a principle that we would all accept. He was also right to point out that Sir Peter Burt's review is open in assessing the different systems; it does not have a presupposed remit to work from and will take a clean-sheet approach. That is an important principle in carrying out the review. It is also important to point out for the sake of accuracy that, since 2000-01, when this Parliament authorised and approved the annual budget and therefore the allocation to local government, council tax increases set by local authorities have increased by 28.9 per cent, including the current year's increase. I state that for the record as a fact. On the same theme, I point out to Bruce McFee that the Scottish Executive's investment in Scotland's local councils has increased significantly since devolution, rising from 47 per cent to 55 per cent by 2007. Funding for core local authority services will increase by 5.5 per cent in the current financial year. Margaret Smith pointed out from a Liberal Democrat perspective, first, that the SNP motion does not mention local income tax—the SNP seems to be making overtures to the Scottish Socialist Party by talking more generally of a fairer system of taxation—and, secondly, that there are advantages in a system that is based on ability to pay. I reiterate the point that I made in response to Alasdair Morgan: because of the review, ministers have decided that there will be no revaluation. All that I can say about Mr Ballard's contribution is that my colleagues greatly appreciated his candour. As for Colin Fox's speech, of course the SSP has changed its mind and introduced a Trojan horse bill so that it can get rid of the council tax and then sit around in a nice circle deciding what will replace it. However, the party's real intentions were made clear when it revised Mr Sheridan's proposed bill last autumn: the SSP wants a national tax and is no friend of local income tax. I am surprised that the SNP motion lines up with that position. I have no doubt that the debate will continue. The issue is important, even fundamental. We look forward to the review's findings.

It is a great pleasure once again to take part in a debate on local government finance, and the council tax in particular, and to set out the Executive's position on the future of local taxation in Scotland. I appreciate the early start. At least Mr Morgan is dressed soberly, which perhaps cannot be said for Mr Monteith in his suit; however, I bow to his sartorial elegance once again. After the 2003 election, this devolved Government made a commitment in the partnership agreement to set up an independent review of local government finance. We have delivered on that commitment. Local taxation is an important issue that affects us all. During our lives we will all at some time use the vital services that local government provides. We need to have the right system in place to provide the funds that local authorities need to carry out their tasks and responsibilities. It is no secret that there are different views on what that system should be; there are different views even within the coalition. That is what the independent review that we have established is now examining and we will need to wait to see what conclusions it reaches.

I am not quite as worried or cynical—perhaps it is unfair to use that word—as Mr Morgan, although I accept that these issues are complex. I cannot remember back as far as 1954, but I grant that we have considered the issues in detail in the past. That is not to say that we should not review where we are and examine the issues again. Sir Peter Burt's review committee has made an excellent start to its work, and the recent consultation has received more than 300 responses. The extended deadline for responses is tomorrow, and I trust that all political parties have grabbed that important opportunity to contribute. The committee has been set a challenging remit. As Mr Morgan rightly said, it is not the first review of local government finance: a number of studies have been conducted both north and south of the border. The Layfield committee, which pursued arguably one of the most far-reaching inquiries, reported in 1976. In the event, however, it could not decide between a property-based tax and a local income tax.  Perhaps that was the point that Alasdair Morgan was making earlier. More recently, the House of Commons and the former Local Government Committee have concluded reviews of local government finance. The report of the former Local Government Committee, which was published in March 2002, included several recommendations covering council tax, non-domestic rates and the need to strike a balance between Scottish Executive funding and council tax funding of local services. Although it is clear that there are no easy answers, that should not prevent our seeking the best answer, which is what Sir Peter Burt's committee has been charged to do. Members will know, from the review committee's recent consultation paper, that it has approached its remit in a thorough and comprehensive way. The committee has made it clear that its consideration will cover options for property-based local taxation, including the council tax, domestic rates and land value tax, and options for non-property local taxation, including a local income tax. If the Tories wish, they can re-submit Michael Howard's poll tax—they will find the spirit of openness very welcome. I trust that all members who have views on those or any other options will have responded to the committee, giving their reasons and evidence. The Scottish Executive acknowledges and understands the concerns about the present council tax system, which reflect the concerns about the previous system. We all want a system of local taxation that is fair, reliable, predictable and stable. Those are the themes on which we will assess systems of local taxation. I will not speculate on what the review may conclude, but I guarantee that we will examine the review committee's recommendations carefully and act on them. I move, as an amendment to motion S2M-2693, in the name of Alasdair Morgan, to leave out from the first "council tax" to end and insert: "Scottish Executive has established the independent inquiry into local government finance consistent with the Partnership Agreement of May 2003; notes that, because of the ongoing inquiry, there are no plans for a council tax revaluation in Scotland; notes that the Labour Party has submitted clear and detailed proposals to support changes to the council tax and that the Liberal Democrats have submitted clear and detailed proposals to support a local income tax, and therefore encourages all parties and others to make submissions to the inquiry."

I presume that Mr Morgan accepts what is in our amendment, which is that there will be no revaluation—ministers have already decided that.

I seek to draw out some of the points that have emerged from what has been an informative morning, but not in a prepared speech. I accept Stewart Maxwell's absolute right to set out his arguments in favour of nationalism, but we are making wind-up speeches about the debate. In fairness, David Davidson did that. I did not agree with any of what he said, but I will come to that in a minute. Overall, there has been a role for the debate. Margo MacDonald, who represents the independents group on the Parliamentary Bureau, and her independent colleagues, were entirely correct to have used their rights under the Parliament's standing orders to introduce the debate. The debate has allowed contributions across parties, and of no party, in areas that do  not usually get an airing in the regular, more politicised atmosphere that permeates our discussions from week to week. In that sense, today's innovation has been no bad thing. Even at this young stage in its life, a new and evolving institution such as the Parliament should be able to consider its procedures and should not become fossilised. I am happy to take back to ministerial colleagues the vast array of informative issues that have been raised. I cannot comment on—nor indeed do I know—the detail of many of those issues, whether they are Margo MacDonald's points on prostitution or Helen Eadie's powerful arguments on skin cancer. The point that I tried to make at the outset—possibly not that well—is that this generation of parliamentarians and politicians has an obligation to look to the long term. I agree with Margaret Ewing's central point that if we cannot do that in a new institution and, as Kenny MacAskill fairly said, in this building, that would be a missed opportunity. I was not, as David Davidson suggested, reading out a litany. I sought to set in context some of the measures—I cannot trot them all out in an eight-minute speech—that the Executive is trying to implement for the long term. It would be easy for me to stand up and demolish the Tory manifesto or any other party's manifesto, and for other parties to do the same to my party's manifesto, but we are better having speeches such as Helen Eadie's, and those of colleagues across the parties, on serious issues that we should consider not only today and tomorrow but over the next 10, 15 or 20 years. That is why Margo MacDonald was right to introduce today's debate. In that sense, Pauline McNeill was right to draw us back to the arguments that were made at the time by those of us who campaigned for this institution. Karen Whitefield's speech may have shown the real value of the debate. Not only did she articulate what she is trying to achieve with her proposed member's bill, but she took interventions from right across the chamber—a real issue leading to some real debate. Bill Aitken said that words do not matter, and that we should concentrate on our actions. Well, in unemployment and economic growth, words matter. Bill Aitken's party considered that 3 million unemployed was a price worth paying—we all remember those words. I utterly refute the charge that this Administration takes no responsibility for economic growth, for driving forward entrepreneurship and for the principle of decentralisation. This Government has taken forward decentralisation. This Government has pursued the relocation, for example, of civil service jobs. The Conservatives, when they had the power, never did that in the co-ordinated way in which we are now doing it, which, I would have  thought, will be advantageous to all parts of Scotland. Words matter, too, on water charges. The Conservatives' policy position is to privatise Scottish Water because, as Mr Davidson said, that would reduce our water charges below those of England. However, the average household charge in Scotland in 2005-06 will be £280. That compares, for example, with average bills of £283 from United Utilities and £296 from Southern Water. The suggestion that the Tories trot out as usual, that competition will be the master of all those problems, as usual does not stand up to scrutiny.

Mr Davidson should remind us that the Conservative party did not write off the Scottish water industry's debt when it was in Government. Had it done so, we could compare like with like, but we are dealing with a situation that we inherited from the 18 discredited years of Tory economic mismanagement, rather than the position that Mr Davidson would like to employ in an ideological pipe dream. Jean Turner made an informative and interesting speech on health and our international responsibilities, and members from all parties picked up on that latter point. Again, I take to task the Tories' argument that, under their proposals on health, all would be well whereas, by definition, everything is at death's door under the initiatives and action that we are taking. The investment that we are making will rise by £3.2 billion over the next five years, but the Tories have three kinds of health policy: uncosted, unfair and, more to the point, unbelievable. The Tories talk about choice—a subject that they were keen to trot out again today—but that means choice for the few and longer waits for the rest of us; it means subsidising private treatment for those who can afford it, which would cost the NHS £1.2 billion before a single extra operation had been performed. It is clear what the Tories' patient passport would do for real people who need real treatment and whom we are committed to assisting. Robin Harper made a series of important points on education. As a member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee in the previous parliamentary session, I remember that committee's report on lifelong learning, which picked up Robin Harper's point about balancing the vocational and academic routes into work for young people. That will be, and is being, built on by the Administration. A variety of other points were made on enterprise in education and on education in general. I was somewhat taken aback by Mr  Davidson's argument that the Conservatives were a decentralising party, that he valued councillors and the role that they play and that the Conservatives wanted to decentralise services because that was the right way forward. Of course, it is Conservative policy to remove education services from the local authorities' control, so it is beyond me how that argument hangs together. The debate has been useful and informative and has allowed a wide variety of issues to be brought to the Parliament's attention. In that sense, it has raised the importance of attracting, and dealing with the needs and aspirations of, the people of Scotland.

It has to be said that Mr Davidson has given us a bit of a litany. How will privatising Scottish Water help with the provision of affordable water?

As far as I am aware, every minister—from the First Minister on—has said that the economy is the number 1 priority of this Administration. Is that not good enough for Mr Aitken?

I am grateful for that clarification. To avoid doubt, I had better stick to the ministerial script. Margaret Curran is here to make sure that I do not speak my mind on a number of issues. As a Liberal Democrat, it seems appropriate to start by wishing my good friend and colleague, Charles Kennedy, and his wife, Sarah, congratulations on the birth of Donald James yesterday. They will be ecstatic to know that they will shortly receive a minute from my parliamentary colleagues to congratulate them on the birth. I am sure that that is just what they have always looked forward to at this joyous moment in their lives.

Not a bunch of flowers, but a minute. After all, we are Liberals. Today's debate is about the future of Scotland. Margo MacDonald introduced the topic today by suggesting that we can be innovative and possibly even experimental in our style. I encourage and welcome suggestions on any new ways in which we could consider the issues that confront us as a Parliament and a devolved Government. There have been immediate successes by this young and evolving Parliament, which was elected by proportional representation—by fair votes—with scrutiny of the Executive by Parliament and its committees, which have real teeth. We have legislated to improve the quality of health care, education and transport, to tackle violence and inequality and to protect our children and vulnerable people in society. We have created Scottish policy solutions to Scottish needs, such as free personal care for the elderly, the abolition of tuition fees and the proposed ban on smoking in public places.  In today's debate for the future, I will address two themes. First is the need for a long-term perspective in addressing Scotland's future, although that might be a bit difficult in the middle of a general election campaign. The second theme is not just what we in Parliament and Government can do, but what other people can do wherever they live or whatever their circumstances. Devolution has given us the opportunity to take decisions in Scotland for Scotland. We are determined to make the changes now that will mean that Scotland is a better place in 10, 20 or 30 years' time. The state of the nation's health will play a massive part in determining Scotland's long-term future, so our investment in our health service and health promotion is crucial. We are promoting safer, healthier lifestyles and healthier eating, particularly in our schools. The future of Scotland depends on our children and young people; encouraging them to eat more healthily will help to ensure that the future is, indeed, healthy. We have ensured that our youngest children receive free fruit in school and we have delivered dramatic improvements in the nutritional standards of Scotland's meals, some of which have even appeared in recent television programmes hosted by famous chefs. We are tackling two of the biggest health-related factors in our society—smoking and alcohol. They are time bombs that have long-term impacts that we must address now. Smoking is the single largest cause of preventable premature death in Scotland. Some 13,000 families a year in Scotland lose a loved one through smoking-related death and 1,000 of those are associated with passive smoking. Some 35,000 Scots are treated every year for smoking-related diseases. Each and every year we see among lifelong non-smokers 865 deaths from lung cancer, heart disease, stroke and respiratory conditions that are related to passive smoking. Statistics show that non-smokers who work in a pub where smoking is allowed are at least 20 times more likely to develop lung cancer than other non-smokers. We cannot accept such statistics in modern Scotland; we have to act now and for the long term, which is why this devolved Government has committed itself to introducing a comprehensive ban on smoking in enclosed public spaces in order to reduce smoking, save lives and help to transform Scotland's national health. We also need to tackle the problem that alcohol poses in our society. Too many people in Scotland drink to excess; that is why we have introduced the Licensing (Scotland) Bill to reform Scotland's licensing laws. This year's bill will crack down on irresponsible drinks promotions that encourage binge drinking—drinking too much too quickly and  its inevitable consequences. The national health service in Scotland spends £100 million every year on treating misuse of alcohol, so we as a country must ask ourselves some hard questions: Is Scotland serious about alcohol? Do we care that getting drunk at a young age is a rite of passage for both sexes? Why are more and more young women drinking too much?

Mr Ewing should read the bill and the explanatory memorandum—there is a presumption in the bill against 24-hour opening. I state that for the record here and now and I will do so again when we begin consideration of the bill and when we launch it. Mr Ewing chooses simply to misinterpret and to make uneconomical statements about the position of the bill. I would respect Mr Ewing's position on alcohol a lot more if he were being straight about what we said instead of just making things up. A bill alone will not change Scotland's long-held convictions on alcohol. Reform of the nation's licensing laws must go hand in hand with health promotion and educating the next generation to think responsibly about how much alcohol they consume. That will bring a long-term improvement in the nation's health. There are other long-term issues, such as growing Scotland's economy. We are investing in transport to get Scotland's people moving and Scotland's goods to market. We have set out a 10-year transport investment plan with a £3 billion transport capital programme over the period. We are investing in road, sea and air connections and 70 per cent of that budget will be invested in public transport. We are investing substantially in quality housing that will be available for the long term. In the most recent spending review, we committed £1.2 billion over the next three years and we are increasing our affordable housing targets from 18,000 to 21,500 homes. Nearly 5,000 of those homes will be developed for low-cost ownership; we on the Executive benches think that that is a good thing, even if the Scottish National Party does not. We will help more people to take that vital first step on the property ladder. We know how important that first step is to people, which is why we have announced the new homestake initiative, which is a shared equity scheme to help would-be home owners who are on low incomes and who cannot afford to pay the full price of a house. By  2008, we expect about 1,000 homestake houses a year to be funded throughout Scotland. That will make a long-term difference for this country.

I was going to come to exactly that point. Growing the economy is this Government's number 1 objective. When I look at the statistics for the number of graduates who are graduating and staying in Scotland, I see that numbers are increasing—I will get the precise figure before we finish today's debate. The number of Scots who graduate, stay and pursue careers in Scotland is rising, which I am sure Parliament agrees is not only an important step, but an important stage upon which we must build. If Government is to make a real difference, we need people to consider their lives, futures and responsibilities and to make choices. A healthy and prosperous Scotland will come about only if people make the right choices; for example, to drink less, not to smoke, to eat more healthily and to pursue their aspirations in education. We cannot legislate to make people take those choices, but we can assist them through education by ensuring that our schools provide comprehensive health education, including education on drugs and sexual health. We can assist in that progress. Education is not just about health; we also need to help people to become financially literate and to end financial exclusion. Today in Scotland, 11 per cent of our population and as many as 18 per cent of people who are on low incomes have no bank account. Some 37 per cent of Scottish households have no savings and for many, credit is the only option for making large purchases. We have announced support for three separate financial education projects over the next two years, which will help people to make better and more informed decisions about which products best meet their needs, thereby helping them to plan for their futures and to ensure that they do not enter unmanageable debt. Politicians have responsibilities to the people but, in turn, people have responsibilities to themselves and to their communities. That is a long-term approach to this country's needs and it is one manner in which the motion could be taken forward.

I thank Karen Gillon for her lucid explanation of the proposals that she has made on behalf of her colleagues. Parliament's consideration of the report marks another step in establishing a distinct and relevant regulatory process for Scottish public appointments. As Karen Gillon illustrated, the process originated in a consultation that Scottish ministers commissioned and which revealed widespread public support for the creation of a Scottish commissioner for public appointments. We took steps to establish that post in the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc (Scotland) Act 2003,which rightly envisages a number of specific roles for Parliament, including consideration of breaches of the commissioner's code of practice that are referred to it. Taken together, we believe that they will allow Parliament to play a full part in helping to maintain what we believe is a robust and fair process. During the passage of the bill, we said that we would have no objection to a dedicated parliamentary committee's being set up to deal with such tasks, but it was always recognised that the relatively small amount of work that was likely to be involved would probably not justify the establishment of a stand-alone committee. Therefore, we were happy to leave it to Parliament to arrive at its own conclusions on the workload, which are now embodied in the report, as Karen Gillon illustrated.  I am sure that the proposed extended remit of the Standards Committee is extremely sensible and is in proportion to the range of its responsibilities. The choice of the Standards Committee to lead on the issue is relevant and will benefit Parliament's consideration of any proposals that are put to it by the commissioner. I need hardly add that I doubt very much whether many breaches of the code will be referred to it. The Executive's track record on compliance with the UK commissioner's code of practice over the years demonstrates that material breaches of the code have been rare. I am sure that that will continue under the new regulatory regime. The creation of a Scottish commissioner is central to the Executive's plans to provide Scotland with an independent, accountable and open public appointments system that is based on merit; we remain committed to that vision. I am sure that the Scottish commissioner's enhanced powers and the Scottish Parliament's increased involvement in the ministerial appointments process will improve public confidence in the system and provide demonstrable reassurance that allegations of patronage and cronyism are totally unfounded. I am therefore delighted to endorse the report and to confirm Scottish ministers' support for its adoption.

I sometimes wonder if some members, not least Mr Morgan, have read the Finance Committee's report. As Des McNulty and a number of others pointed out, one of the building blocks that the committee asked the Executive to consider was the construction and publication of a capital or infrastructure investment plan. We have just done that; we have published the infrastructure investment plan to underpin the Scottish economy and its growth. We want real step changes in how public services are delivered throughout Scotland. We want to deliver real improvements in every aspect of Scottish life. That is why there is the degree of detail and the range of portfolio in the document.

I want to make a bit of progress first. We want to eliminate the dilapidated public buildings and facilities left by the Tories; we want to improve the provision of public services; and we will provide new, modernised and improved services for the people of Scotland. The plan shows that this Administration is determined to achieve a radical improvement in Scotland's infrastructure that will have a lasting effect on people, communities and businesses throughout the country. The plan is a first and it will be updated as a standing feature of our efficient  Administration. It will improve the information that goes to the private sector, as it will be informed of likely future projects. We expect the commitments given to be two way, so there is a challenge to the private sector to respond with sufficient capacity and skills to achieve our ambitious infrastructure improvements throughout Scotland.

At First Minister's question time this morning, it struck me that we are in an election period and that there will be a ratcheting up of the rhetoric across the chamber. I am very comfortable with a Liberal Democrat-Labour coalition that is delivering for Scotland. In this case, we are delivering a capital investment plan that is needed and that builds on the funding and investment that we have made. It will end the conflict between public and private sector delivery and recognise and use the best of both, celebrating successes as well as learning from mistakes. It will build the mixed-economy approach to funding. There will be conventional and partnership arrangements, PPP and a prudential regime, but the process will be managed. A current example of that mixed-economy approach is Glasgow City Council's use of the prudential regime to invest £25 million in its primary school estate.

As members would expect of any Government, all the funding mechanisms that the Executive uses are subjected to the kind of review and scrutiny that have been asked for. PPP has delivered 80 schools that either have been completed or on which work is significantly under way. Those will benefit some 64,000 pupils across Scotland. It has also delivered three new major hospitals, nine water projects, three further education colleges and many other projects. Some £3.1 billion of projects that will use that mechanism are in the pipeline. That represents significant progress on our desire to invest for the long term in Scotland's public estate.  I will pick up some points that were made during this afternoon's debate. Given that Mr Mather was previously a member of the Finance Committee, I hope that he will reflect on the importance that the committee placed on having a capital or infrastructure investment plan as a building block for growing the Scottish economy. It was disappointing that he made no mention of that. When Mr Mather's party produces its position on fiscal policy, monetary policy, interest rates and which central bank it wants, then we will be able to have a debate on the economy. The SNP failed to state its position this Tuesday in Dundee and it failed to do so today here in Edinburgh. It is about time that it stated its position. We are more than happy to have the debate on the economy. Entirely missing from Mr Mather's speech was any mention of the "Framework for Economic Development in Scotland". The five key drivers for economic development that are identified in that document include investment in the country's electronic and physical infrastructure. What can one say about Mr Monteith's speech? We are all happy to reflect on the Conservative years and the Conservative achievements, which Mr Fraser was so keen to mention. We will reflect on achievements such as the poll tax, 3 million unemployed and 15 per cent interest rates. It is funny that those were not included in Brian Monteith's amendment. One can only wonder why.

I seem to remember that the Tory charge on unemployment was that it was a price worth paying. I want to deal with a number of points that members raised. Des McNulty highlighted the importance of water and sewerage investment. As he rightly pointed out, the Tory solution appears to be privatisation. Housing investment is arguably one of the most important long-term investments that we can make in the fabric of Scotland. Between 2005 and 2008, we will invest 46 per cent more in housing, over and above the current record levels of spending. Over the three years, we will invest £1.2 billion in affordable housing, which was never a priority for the Conservatives. Stewart Stevenson questioned the level of capital funding for Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd. For many of us, HIAL is an important capital  funding priority. If Stewart Stevenson wants to argue that it is a bad thing to spend £10 million on a runway extension for Sumburgh airport in my constituency, he and I will disagree.

No, I will not give way. Mr Brocklebank was keen to raise the issue of unemployment. He mentioned the current difficulties as he saw them. I can only repeat that Scotland has the second-highest employment rate in the European Union. It is second only to that of Denmark.

From a sedentary position, Mr Brocklebank asks how many real jobs that represents. That shows the Tories' contempt for the jobs that have been created since this Government came to power. On transport, this Government will make no apologies for moving away from the Conservatives' approach, which was solely about road building to the detriment of public transport, towards a balanced approach that involves investment in rail, bus services and other public transport options. Under our 10-year transport plan, we will invest £1.4 billion by the end of the current parliamentary session. I hope that even Mr Ballard and the Greens will accept that that is a sustainable investment in the future. Mr Fraser asked me about the A8000. Work will start on that this year.

We will do it. They just planned it, but we will do it. Rob Gibson raised a point about sustainability. There is a chapter on that, as I am sure he has read, in the document that we are discussing today, in "Building a Better Scotland" and in the spending review process. That theme is repeated throughout the investment plan and we shall build on that strongly in the coming years. It was a delight to see Brian Monteith's amendment. It took us all back to student union debates and the length of amendments that I am sure he was proud of at that time. Usually we see such long amendments only from the Scottish Socialist Party, so there is yet another alliance across the chamber. Brian Monteith's amendment states that the Executive "has a poor record of spending", but The Herald confirmed this morning that the Tories have no idea that they will do anything differently. They have abandoned their own  Scottish James review before it is even started. They propose no efficiency savings in Scotland, and they have no plans and no thoughts on how to match this Administration's efficient government programme, yet the same amendment that criticises Government spending proposes more spending on roads and transport—really, just on roads—accompanied by tax cuts that take away our ability to pay for those very same improvements. There is a black hole at the heart of Tory finances, with massive spending promises and no money to pay for them. The English Tories have proposed £35 billion of cuts in England. The Scottish Tories claim that they will feed themselves off English cuts. One wonders how many English Tories know that Brian Monteith has not done any work in that area. The SNP policy continues to be to tax and spend, and we have heard a little about that this afternoon. There is a £1 billion hole in the SNP's spending plans, simply to account for the announcements that SNP members have made this week, and there is no estimate of how long Mr Mather's trickle-down economics will take to work. That is not an isolated incident, of course. In December, SNP members told us that they would put a nationalised cap on council tax and, even this morning, Fiona Hyslop apparently announced another £18 million of local government spending on pre-school education. At the same time, the SNP proposes to cut hundreds of millions from local councils across Scotland. I think that most pre-school children would be able to work out that the SNP's sums just do not add up. That sums up the choice before the chamber today. I saw in the papers on Tuesday that West Kilbride has become the unidentified flying object capital of Scotland—the top place for extra-terrestrial sightings, according to Ministry of Defence files. My message for stargazers everywhere is that, if they want to see black holes, they should just look at the Opposition front benches. The SNP and the Tories present us with two black holes, more spending and less tax. It does not add up. At least Alex Salmond got a laugh when he launched his manifesto by saying, "All it takes is imagination." I cannot imagine why members would support either of those parties today, but they should support our capital investment plan, as I support the motion.

For clarification, where does the A8000 appear in the Conservative amendment?

Where is the A8000 mentioned in the amendment?

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome the tone of the debate and the constructive motion that Linda Fabiani has presented. I also bear with her through this time in which she is feeling, as Kenny MacAskill put it, under the weather. The matter that we are discussing is important. Although the term "civic participation" is probably not widely understood by people who are not in our walk of life, the role of ensuring that people properly understand government; of explaining the principles and processes of government, as Rosemary Byrne put it; and of reaching real, ordinary people, as Donald Gorrie put it, is important. Similarly, I concur absolutely with Cathy Peattie's assessment that the Scottish Civic Forum has considered difficult options in relation to difficult legislative areas. In terms of its work overall, the Civic Forum has had an extremely important role in the first five years of devolution and will continue to have an extraordinarily important role in the future. The Executive is not suggesting that the Civic Forum will cease, and I would not have taken that point had it been made. The Executive is firmly of the view that the remarks of Linda Fabiani, Kenny MacAskill and Maureen Macmillan about the separation of responsibilities between Government and Parliament mark an appropriate way forward and I certainly support the general tenet of Linda Fabiani's motion that Parliament has considered this evening. I have a number of observations in relation to specific points that have been made by members this evening. First, I will deal with Linda Fabiani's legal point. Her interpretation concurs with the way in which I consider the issue. Indeed, I wrote to the Presiding Officer last February about the ability of the corporate body to consider its position in relation to financing the Civic Forum. The legal interpretation suggests that that can be achieved. It is not for me, any minister or the Government to tell the corporate body how to pursue the issue, but I believe that the option is available to it were it to embark on that route. It is important to recognise that we have provided the Civic Forum with pump-priming funding of £880,000 since 1999-2000. That funding is supplemented by the cost of providing several Executive secondees to the organisation. I take the point that was made by Maureen Macmillan and Donald Gorrie with regard to changes in officials. When Margaret Curran and I  met the Civic Forum last week, we apologised for our inability to get a straight message across. That was not acceptable, and I repeat that for the benefit of the chamber tonight. On 1 June 2000, the then Minister for Finance, Jack McConnell made it clear that the Civic Forum should not rely exclusively on Executive funding. He said: "Its success will be measured by the credibility that it develops in civic Scotland, and by the funding that it attracts to replace the pump-priming support from the Executive."— [ Official Report , 1 June 2000; Vol 6, c 1205.]  I gently suggest to colleagues that our approach—far from being an immediate step—has been clear for five years and, dare I say it, that the issue had to be dealt with at some stage. Last year was a year of transitional funding. That was made absolutely crystal clear; I assure colleagues that there was no question of any mixed message about the way in which we sought to engage with the Civic Forum on that issue. At this time, we consider that it is important for the body to move on in the way in which we have suggested. I believe that Linda Fabiani's motion is entirely consistent with that approach. The Civic Forum will be invited to tender for specific projects or pieces of work. I take Cathy Peattie's point about core funding of the voluntary sector; I know that she knows a lot about that subject and understands the principles. However, the separation argument that has been made by many colleagues is an appropriate way to go. It would be better if the Government provided funding through specific projects or pieces of work, and that is very much our intention as we go through the next financial year. That is entirely sensible and consistent with developing the forum's independence, which I strongly believe is a principle with which we are all in accord. I was pleased to hear that the Green party accepted Kenny MacAskill's point. I do not believe that any member suggests that there is just one body that either cares about or progresses civic participation. The chamber will be familiar with several Government initiatives in relation to such work, one or two of which I will mention. The education for citizenship programme is now one of the five national priorities for education. I am a parent with children at primary school and secondary school. When I was at school, I believed strongly in modern studies and, as a result, I believe that there is much to be gained by that core principle in education. The work of the new and—I would argue—ground-breaking Centre for Confidence and Well-being in Glasgow in developing international research on education, social work and mental health work will be supported by the Executive. That is a clear example of the development of civic  participation, as is the £150,000 that has been made available to rural communities this year to continue the innovative rural voices pilot initiative, with which I know that Maureen Macmillan is familiar. That project embraces communities from Wick to Kirkcudbright and from St Monans to the Isle of Eigg. Consultation activity is important. The Scottish Civic Forum has contributed to the Executive's legislative proposals, not least those on smoking in public places, which have already been mentioned. The fact that 37 per cent of the adult population of Scotland claimed to be aware of the consultation on that issue and that more than 53,000 responses were received is a tribute not only to the forum, but to the people of Scotland. That is a direct answer to the important point that Kenny MacAskill made. When politicians in Parliament and in Government produce proposals on matters that are of genuine concern to people throughout Scotland, people will respond. That is our experience as parliamentarians, in relation to the proposals on smoking in public places, the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill and the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill. It is important to remember that the bill on land reform that emerged from the consultation process was a very different beast to the bill that was consulted on. That was a direct result of points that were made by the citizens of Scotland and by many groups and organisations across the country.  The Executive agrees that the relationship between the Scottish Civic Forum and Parliament is vital to the work of developing and promoting a participative democracy. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, the fact that some of the forum's most successful work has been done in partnership with the Parliament would seem to be very much in tune with the principles and vision of the consultative steering group. The Executive strongly supports the motion, which suggests that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body should investigate the possibility of funding the forum.  Meeting closed at 18:02.

A total of £985 million of local authority housing debt has been repaid by central Government since 1999. That has arisen from the whole-stock transfers by Glasgow City Council, Dumfries and Galloway Council and Scottish Borders Council, and will help to generate nearly £2 billion of housing investment in those areas in the next 10 years.

A number of stock transfer options are available to councils. I am sure that the Minister for Communities will be able to fill Mr Adam in on the precise details, but as far as I understand it, the range of options that are available to local authorities to meet the Scottish housing quality standard—an objective that all in the chamber would share—include a retention strategy, using the prudential regime that is available to all local authorities; whole-stock transfer; and a mixed retention and partial transfer strategy. Those options are currently being considered by the authority in Mr Adam's area and we look forward to the development of proposals.

I understand that seven authorities are currently considering either partial or complete stock transfer. If I have got that wrong, I will write to Mary Scanlon with clarification. I understand that the Minister for Communities will have further details to announce on the overall programme in due course.

To date, the Scottish Executive has relocated more than 1,400 public sector jobs as a result of its job dispersal policy. In November 2004, we announced the relocation of the national health service central register to Dumfries and Galloway. It comprises a team of 17 staff and is a vital component in the smooth running of the NHS in Scotland. The unit will relocate to Dumfries this year.

The small units initiative, which I thought Mr Ballance understood, relates not only to Dumfries and Galloway but to every area of Scotland. I hope that he has noted, as most of us have, that there have been four small unit relocations in recent months. Those have benefited communities as far afield as Tiree and Tain. Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway and Dumfries and Galloway Council have played a positive and leading role in submitting a joint  proposal to the Executive and to the officials responsible for putting together the list of potential relocation areas and have identified areas in Dumfries and Galloway that would legitimately benefit from the relocation of an Executive small unit. We will make further progress on that as relocations come round.

Mr Morgan will be familiar with the Finance Committee's report on the relocation of public sector jobs and with the Executive's response to the report. The point that he raises is entirely legitimate. We seek to balance the necessary and at times conflicting requirements of relocation policy in relation to economic development and areas of deprivation or population sparsity—about which he and I might be particularly concerned. We need to strike that balance, but in our response to the Finance Committee we provided a level playing field from which I hope that our policy can be taken forward to benefit all areas of Scotland.

It is my pleasure to wind up the final debate on the 2005-06 budget. The debate marks the end of the Parliament's deliberations and the real start to the plans that the Executive announced last September at the conclusion of the spending review 2004. A number of important points have been raised in the debate about the process, the significant amounts of money that the budget contains and the need to meet the priorities of people throughout Scotland. It is important to recognise—indeed, I am sure that Mr Morgan does so—that budget roadshows are one of the highlights of the ministerial year. We learn much from them. The debate in committee is also important. No minister undertakes the scrutiny to which all of us are put with anything other than very serous consideration, which is as it should be. Des McNulty was right to illustrate the sheer scale of budgetary growth that has come about since 1999 and which it is our responsibility to deliver. By the end of the current settlement period, core funding for local authorities will have increased by 55 per cent since 1999-2000. Over the next three years of the 2004 spending review period, there will be a 30 per cent increase in funding for further and higher education; a 47 per cent increase in transport spending to develop the infrastructure and fund new concessionary fare schemes; and a 35 per cent increase in funding for affordable housing by 2007-08. Health spending will reach more than £10 billion by 2007-08 to fund improvements in waiting times and commitments to primary care and health promotion. Those are all investments in the long term to ensure that spending matches priorities, meets the partnership commitments and builds a better Scotland.  We have taken matters forward through the budget process, under the scrutiny of Parliament, as is correct. In responding to points that have been raised by members, I think that it is important to recognise that spending on capital and resource is long term. Andrew Arbuckle, who is a new member of the Finance Committee, will recognise that the capital investment plan that will be announced shortly by Tom McCabe will give the long-term perspective that the Finance Committee and Parliament have requested of this Administration. Of course, Parliament will hold finance ministers to account over the period of the plan. The Executive's action is in direct response to some of the concerns that have been expressed about the need for a long-term perspective. Mr Ballard of the Greens raised what he saw as the obsession with the Scottish economy. Presumably he therefore criticises our objective of moving into the top quartile of OECD countries and is not satisfied that we want to build on the second highest employment levels in Europe. People being in jobs and creating wealth may be unknown concepts for the Greens, but I hope that even they would accept that the "Framework for Economic Development in Scotland" and "A Smart, Successful Scotland" define economic growth in terms of economic sustainability. If we are to plead guilty to anything, this Administration pleads guilty to an obsession with growing the Scottish economy. Mr Monteith's entertaining tour de force came somewhat unstuck on the basis of his spending commitments. He has been keen to criticise the SNP and, in his latter remarks, this Administration for spending commitments. However, if I got them right, he committed his party to spending £100 million more on roads and to funding 1,500 more police officers, which did not square with his "everything was all right prior to 1997" picture, because if we now have record police numbers, it is curious that he is committing his party to 1,500 more. Mr Monteith also committed his party to a council tax cut of £614 million, all to be covered, we are led to understand, by the commitment that Mr Letwin has apparently given him that he can keep all the consequentials of the £35 billion of public spending cuts to which the Tories are now committed. It strikes the Parliament that the Conservatives, as usual, cannot have it both ways. The efficient government gains are built into our budgets. It is not possible to have efficient government aims built in and increases in spending. The Conservative position is a fraudulent one. Mr Morgan made many protestations about the tax take, but before I get to that I must mention oil. He is keen to mention oil and recycle the old "It's  Scotland's oil" routine. I remind him that many moons ago, when Winnie Ewing stood up in a hostelry in Lerwick and said, "It's our oil," she was tapped on the shoulder by a fisherman from my constituency who said, "Actually, it's our oil." The SNP has not coped with that since. We look forward to the work of implementing the budget—which will come into effect in just under two months—and the commitments that it will fund. We look forward to the modernisation of our universities and colleges, enhancing our research capabilities and increasing participation, particularly by communities that have not previously benefited from higher and further education. We look forward to the major developments that are planned for our transport network, the new rail links and better-quality roads. We look forward to the development of our new school buildings, focusing our plans for Scotland's infrastructure, enhancing our asset base, providing the basics that business needs to expand and growing our economy. Growing our economy is the Administration's top priority, and the budget will do that. It will deliver excellent public services; support stronger, safer communities; and develop a more confident and democratic Scotland. It is a budget for enterprise, opportunity and fairness, and I commend it to the Parliament.

rose—

From the outset of the debate, there has been considerable  discussion about good cops and bad cops. The finance ministers and the justice ministers are very keen to be good cops, which is why we have put 17 per cent more funding—£64 million, as Paul Martin rightly said—into policing and police resources over the period that we are discussing. I hope that Mr Monteith will regard that as a good-cop approach to life.

Mr Monteith is sadly wrong. The 17 per cent increase that the Minister for Justice sought and secured through the spending review and the local government settlement that we are discussing represents exactly the kind of approach that is necessary in meeting the requirements that have been laid out in partnership with the appropriate authorities. Mr Monteith's amendment is the same as the one that he lodged last year. In fairness, he is nothing if not consistent. However, it is important to acknowledge that the pre-budget report consequentials are for one year only and amount to just £12 million, compared with the £419 million in 2005-06 that the Executive is investing in local authorities. I hope that Stewart Stevenson and others who mentioned ring fencing—and always raise the issue—will acknowledge that only 9 per cent of the 2005-06 settlement will be ring fenced and that more than 70 per cent of the 9 per cent figure represents police specific grant. I did not quite follow the tenor of Andrew Welsh's argument. He spoke about a generous settlement but then appeared not to support particular measures in Angus. I am sure that he supports those measures; indeed, he said that he supported the new road initiative in his constituency and a number of other areas in which Government policy is taking issues forward. I will quote Mr Welsh's colleague Mr Ingram, who on the radio this morning said: "No, it's a local authority responsibility". In fairness, he was talking about education. He added that local authorities "get a large package of money into education. How they split it up between the various priorities in education is down to the councils." I am sure that Mr Welsh will be happy to discuss that with his colleague. Mr Welsh also mentioned the need for a narrative—he will find all the  narrative that he wants in the Budget (Scotland) Bill. We have had considerable discussion about methodologies, an issue that was raised by Tommy Sheridan, Christine May, Mike Rumbles, Paul Martin and others. I hope that Mr Sheridan will accept that the road maintenance distribution methodology includes a secondary indicator to allow for the number of vehicles that use the roads. Just as we can have a series of suggestions in relation to urban deprivation, we can have a series of suggestions that relate to sparsity. Murdo Fraser came up with the new concept of the council tax as a stealth tax; it must be the only stealth tax that comes in a brown envelope through the post. To Mr Brocklebank, I say gently that it is not appropriate to say that all council workers in Fife are interested only in themselves; that is just a cheap shot at council workers. We expect better of the Tories. I inform Mr Adam that we are analysing the report by Professor Midwinter that he mentioned and that we take it seriously. However, as Mr Adam knows, Professor Midwinter recommends several actions that councils can take to improve services and deliver the more effective use of resources.

I have dealt with the point. Councils in Scotland already benefit from the three-year local government settlement that we have introduced. In the next three years, local authorities will benefit from a cumulative increase of 10.4 per cent in Scottish Executive core revenue support. As Bristow Muldoon, Margaret Smith and others mentioned, since 1999, local authorities have benefited from an increase of £2.1 billion, or 40 per cent, in revenue funding, which is surely a significant advance in any terms. Margaret Smith, Michael McMahon, Bristow Muldoon and others mentioned the range of positive initiatives that we have taken in relation to local government. I will add to the list: we have introduced the three-year revenue and capital allocation, the prudential borrowing regime, the abolition of spending guidelines, revenue grant increases, council tax powers over second homes and the independent review of local taxation, which are all positive developments for local authorities in Scotland. If SNP members sorted out their views, I might have some sympathy for them. Once again, we got calls on the one hand for spending and on the other hand for taxing. They never can sort out their views. As we know, the SNP wants lower corporation tax, business rates and water rates— the list goes on—and yet we are now told that it wants a nationalised cap on the council tax, which of course means national control and a cut in real terms in the money that is available to local authorities. It is time for a rethink of nationalist thinking on an issue that the nationalists simply do not understand. By approving the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2005, the Parliament will confirm the revenue grant support for each council for the coming year. The allocations within the order will enable councils to keep council tax rises in line with previously published estimates for the coming year. I urge councils to keep those increases as low as possible. The order will deliver better services for our citizens and a fair deal for local taxpayers. I commend it to the Parliament.

The Executive is committed to working with community planning partnerships to develop strong, successful rural and island communities. The closing the opportunity gap framework includes a specific target to ensure a strong focus on service delivery for rural Scotland, so that "agreed improvements in accessibility and quality are achieved for key services in remote and disadvantaged communities." A range of other activities that are under way across the Executive also contribute to the protection and development of rural services.

I recognise and accept the importance of the research that Maureen Macmillan has highlighted. The importance of community planning in that context lies in pulling together the appropriate agencies and ensuring that they all play a full and appropriate role in business development. I would be happy to consider the specific piece of research in that context and to seek to find ways in which community planning partnerships can play a full and appropriate part in delivering what we all hope to achieve—a growing and better Scottish economy.

The Scottish Executive seeks to pay all invoices promptly. We are constantly improving our procedures to speed up our invoice processing. Our e-procurement Scotland system and our use of the Government procurement card offer particular benefits to small and medium-sized businesses.

I accept that the figure that Mr Maxwell gave for our performance on payment in 2003-04 was unacceptable. The Executive has taken steps to make a substantial improvement in performance. Overall, we are now paying more than 90 per cent of invoices on time. That contrasts with the figure of 77 per cent, which Mr Maxwell was right to mention. I expect the performance of the Executive and its agencies to get even better by the end of the current financial year. We want ministers to be clear about the need to ensure that, in future, timeous payment rates get back to the level at which they were before the change in the system that took place some years ago. We also expect local authorities to achieve the targets that we achieve.

I accept that late payment is a serious issue in the private sector as well as in the public sector. If Mr Gallie wants to raise a specific example, we would be more than happy to consider it on his behalf. It is certainly our intention that, in all the areas in which we have influence with regard to the payment of invoices, we will seek to achieve the standard that we achieve internally across all our responsibilities.

In line with United Kingdom Government policy—pension policy is reserved—the NHS pension scheme in Scotland is currently under review. The review is being conducted by the Scottish pensions review group, which is a partnership between NHS employers and trade unions. A public consultation on options for the scheme was launched on Monday of this week. The consultation period ends on 25 April 2005.

I am pleased that the trade unions in Scotland will be part of the review and the consultation. They will have a considerable opportunity, as will other interested parties and individuals, to make representations as part of that consultation. Overall pension policy is reserved. Ministers are strongly of the view that there is a logic to maintaining reasonable continuity in pension arrangements throughout the United Kingdom. That remains the position, but the consultation will clearly raise issues on that matter.

Finance ministers discussed the funding for the Borders railway as part of the spending review 2004 and have regular discussions with the Minister for Transport about all the Executive's major transport capital projects. A final decision on that particular project will be made in the next few weeks.

I confirm that it is not a negative issue whatsoever.

I recognise the words of Patricia Ferguson and Nicola Sturgeon about the Western Isles. In the context of a debate about international events since boxing day, it is important to express our condolences to and sympathy for those who have been affected. As a fellow islander and representative of communities that are surrounded by the sea, I can only sympathise with what Alasdair Morrison must be going through. I pass on my sympathies to him. The sympathy and condolences that we have all sent individually, as members, as political parties, as a Government and as citizens of this country have—rightly—been immense since events unfolded on television screens on 26 December, as many members have said. How many of us have watched our children build sandcastles on a beach only for the incoming tide to wash them away? How many of us can begin to understand the terror, numbness and helplessness at losing homes, livelihoods or—even worse—our loved ones to such a deadly event as the tsunami? Ten  years ago, I visited Sri Lanka, where my sister worked. Unfortunately, unlike Mr Harper, I could not reach Trincomalee at that time, because it was in the Tamil part of the country. As more newspapers have procured more photographs, the abiding image of the past few days for me has been of the cricket ground at Galle, which is just behind the port. I remember watching 10 and 11-year-old young lads playing a game of cricket there 10 years ago. A picture in one of our national newspapers in recent days showed that absolutely nothing remains. The houses that surrounded the cricket field, the shops and the businesses have all been swept away. That aerial photograph gave a graphic illustration of the scene of utter devastation that has affected many in south-east Asia and around the Indian ocean. We have heard significant speeches from all members who have contributed. Fair trade and international debt have dominated our considerations and provided some context to our concerns about how we believe, individually and collectively, that matters should be developed. I say in response to a comment by Mark Ballard that commentators have suggested that possibly the most important development at the Cancún world trade talks last year was the emergence of alternative blocks of nations to represent countries of emerging economic importance, certainly in South America, which are determined to develop, articulate and deliver on their trading needs. Like many, Murdo Fraser was right to raise the issue of free trade. I am very much with Karen Gillon on what we define as free trade. We could debate all morning what free trade is. Perhaps the most important characteristic is consistency. Dennis Canavan was right to express our concerns—and, I suspect, those of many in the chamber—about a definition of free trade that includes the sale of arms. We might all reflect on that and consider carefully Murdo Fraser's correct point about the need for consistency in examining such issues.

I have no difficulty in agreeing to Christine May's suggestion. We would be happy to have that meeting. Des McNulty has—rightly—received considerable praise for his work on the subject  and in connection with the make poverty history campaign. I was impressed by the range of statistics that members—of whom Rosie Kane is but one—used to back their underlying and reflective concerns, such as the facts that about 1 billion people throughout the world live on less than $1 a day, that 100 million children cannot go to school and that 200,000 people die every day from preventable causes, as Dennis Canavan said. There has been considerable discussion of how the international community should use international aid. The scale of that aid is of course important, but I was struck that several members said that what matters is not just the scale of aid, but what it is spent on. Rosie Kane talked about immunisation in Mozambique. It is precisely the point that that international aid—that debt relief money—was used for that need, which is right. Many members talked about education for all around the globe and for both sexes. What Stewart Stevenson, Des McNulty and others said about women was right. We representatives of fishing communities might reflect on how much it means at times when men are lost, which happens in such circumstances. In that sense, we can but have common cause with the fishing communities of southern India or Sri Lanka. Michael Matheson was right about the need for the international community to act. We are part of that community and we are proceeding to act. As many members said, the challenge is to sustain action.

Nora Radcliffe talked about twinning communities. Just as the First Minister praised Glasgow for its role in that, I mention my constituency of Shetland, which is collaborating with Help the Aged on a twinning project with an Asian community that the disaster has devastated. That will involve a reconstruction and rehabilitation programme that is sustained over several years, after the focus of attention and the media hype have disappeared. That is the right approach. I will finish with an important quotation, which I read in a paper this morning. In response to everything that has happened, the Indian Prime Minister said in a speech just the other day: "It used to be said of the British Empire, from whose yoke Gandhi freed us, that the sun would never set on it. If there is an Empire today on which the sun truly cannot set, it is the empire of our minds, that of the children of Mother India, who live today in Asia, Africa, Australia, Europe, the Americas and, indeed, on the icy reaches of Antarctica." I agree. As he said, we cannot close our minds to  what has happened. We all surely support that. We must act for the future. As for the motion and the amendments, I make it clear that the Executive would be happy to withdraw its amendment in response to the points that many members have made, if all parties agreed.

The main suggestion that has been made in the debate is that there will be a proliferation of supercasinos throughout Scotland. That is absolutely not the case, as those members who have contributed rationally to the debate have illustrated. The main issue that has been raised has been that of supercasinos or regional casinos. The regulatory regime that I have described and that I discussed at length with the Local Government and Transport Committee on 14 December is clear. Pressure has been put on the UK Government's policy on the number of supercasinos and several licensing and regulatory checks will be put in place if the motion is passed. However, those hurdles will not be put in place if  the Parliament follows the SNP-Tory coalition on the issue. First, the powers of licensing boards will include a specific provision to say no to additional casinos of any size. Licensing boards can take a different approach to the three categories of casino, which is the answer to Robert Brown's point. I stress again that, if local people and communities do not want more casinos, the licensing board can reflect that view and not have any. Secondly, national conditions will be set by the Scottish ministers, who are accountable to the Parliament. Again, those conditions will be important checks in the licensing regime. Related to the conditions will be a consultation on the national planning policy guidance that will be used by local authorities, which will impact directly on the development of such casinos. That is a further check in the regulatory regime. Thirdly, in direct response to the legitimate concerns of many members, I reaffirm that the UK Gambling Bill will include a clause with regard to consultation with the Scottish ministers. UK ministers have said that they will give the greatest possible weight to the Scottish ministers' views in their consideration. SNP members will weep and wail that that isnae enough—for them, it is never enough. However, if they thought rationally and logically about the matter—I am perhaps departing from reality in even making that suggestion; after all, why should we allow a rational argument to get in the way of a synthetic rant?—they would realise that, in circumstances in which ministers consider an application and communicate a negative view to Whitehall, it would seem logical that such a view could not be ignored. Mr Crawford raised the issue of consultation. He was wrong about live entertainment, as he has been wrong on the whole issue all along. A consultation exercise in Scotland, which included responses from licensing boards, showed a majority in favour of removing the current restrictions on live entertainment.

No. Mr Crawford would not give way to me, so he can just sit down. The debate has had little to do with gambling and everything to do with the astonishing fact that the Tories and the SNP, despite having diametrically opposed views on the subject, will once again vote together. The SNP will oppose a Sewel motion that gives Scottish ministers and the Parliament more power, not less. The nationalists believe that, as with all reserved powers such as defence, foreign affairs and social security, the Parliament should have responsibility. Of course, the Tories want no new powers for the Scottish  Parliament—Mr Mundell was explicit about that. The Tories never want new powers for the Parliament; in fact, they did not even want the Parliament in the first place. There is no greater illustration of their commitment to the Parliament than the fact that Mr Mundell, Mr Johnstone and Mr McGrigor all want to go and live in another place. So much for their commitment to Scotland. The SNP and Tories are working together for diametrically opposed reasons. There is no greater illustration of the paucity of the Opposition parties' argument than their complete indifference to the actual issue and the crumbling inadequacy of their stance of opposing each other while voting together.

Mr Ewing can carry on standing. The debate is about additional powers being given to Scotland on a reserved matter. If the Parliament rejects the motion, as the Opposition parties want, MSPs will be unable to hold ministers to account for the use of those powers and the UK Government will simply retain them. Of course, that is what the Tory-SNP Opposition wants. I presume that the pro-independence Greens and SSP will support that position. It is about time that the pro-independence Greens and SSP got more attention—they are very quiet about that policy plank. We should use the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 on the SSP and Green policy plank on independence. I urge the Parliament to reject the SNP-Tory coalition's political posturing on the constitutional question, which leaves those parties electorally sterile and impotent in each other's arms. I commend the motion to the Parliament, as it will give ministers greater powers and will therefore allow the Parliament to hold the Government to ever greater account.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to reaffirm the Executive's position on this important motion, which the Local Government and Transport Committee considered, debated and supported on 14 December 2004. The Gambling Bill is fundamentally a matter for the United Kingdom Government and the UK Parliament, because gambling is reserved. Therefore, there is no question of handing power back to Westminster—as the Opposition constantly alleges—because we do not possess the power in the first place. The motion on the Gambling Bill simply suggests that we should agree to a framework that will give Scottish ministers more power—not less—to regulate gambling in Scotland. This is a debate less on gambling than on the constitutional position of the Scottish National Party-Tory alliance. Despite having diametrically opposite views on the subject, it appears that they will once again be united in voting. Dressed up in synthetic fury, Mr Crawford—who, to be fair, does synthetic fury rather better than does Mr Ewing—will highlight supercasinos as contributing to problem gambling and no doubt will imply that only nationalists care about such issues. If the Tories follow the lead that Mr Mundell took in the committee, they will also oppose today's Sewel motion. The aim of the UK bill is to introduce regulatory powers over commercial gambling, because the current powers are being undermined by new technology. For instance, there is currently no regulation of internet gambling, which the bill will remedy. Increased responsibility is one of the bill's key aims, which I want Scottish ministers to be able to play a full and active role in achieving. For the most part, the UK bill will simply tighten the rules to cover new forms of gambling and to provide new protections for children and vulnerable persons that will apply throughout Great Britain. A powerful new body—the gambling commission—will be established to regulate the industry. During my meeting with her yesterday, the chief executive of the Gaming Board for Great Britain, Jenny Williams, stressed that the current powers are becoming inadequate and that there is  a need for the important role that the new gambling commission will have. Social responsibility will become an explicit condition of an operating licence and breaches of the licence will trigger penalties, which could include the loss of the licence. Local licensing boards will have an important role in being responsible for the licensing of all premises. That accords with the vast majority of responses to the Scottish Executive's consultation exercise, which was additional to that carried out through the normal mechanisms for UK legislation. Licensing boards will be required to prepare three-year licensing policy statements. Boards will have the power to decide whether the local community—local people—wants any more casinos in its area. If so, the casinos will be regulated by conditions set by Scottish ministers. It is important to stress that the motion will allow a new power to be established, under which local decision makers, licensing boards and people will—rightly—have wide scope for saying no to casinos at any time. We welcome that extra measure of control. Moreover, the bill will include a specific clause to ensure that there is consultation with Scottish ministers prior to any decision by UK ministers to approve areas of Scotland as being suitable for new casinos. Scottish ministers would consider such a proposal extremely seriously when reaching a collective view. UK ministers have indicated that, if the view of Scottish ministers was that there should be no new casinos in Scotland, they would give the greatest possible weight to that view in their consideration. Gambling is a reserved matter and there is no power to legislate on it in the Scottish Parliament. The only realistic way in which Scottish ministers can acquire new powers is through this Sewel motion. Scottish ministers would have a wider range of controls under a new system than they have at present. Parliament would have more say and there would be greater accountability. That alone is a good set of reasons for supporting the motion. I move, That the Parliament agrees the principle of including in the Gambling Bill provisions which confer powers on the Scottish Ministers, including powers to set fees and make regulations on the conditions to be attached to gambling premises' licences and permits, and agrees that the relevant provisions to achieve this end should be considered by the UK Parliament.

Aggregate measures of productivity in the public sector for the countries and regions of the United Kingdom do not presently exist. At UK level, the measurement of public sector output and productivity in the national accounts is being explored by the Atkinson review. The Scottish Executive, together with the other devolved Administrations, is heavily involved in that important work. We look forward to the outcome of the Atkinson review, which is due to be published early next year.

There is best practice and there are examples of good experience in the private sector from which the public sector can learn. I do not want in any way to avoid that potential benefit. We are examining closely the balance between the public and private sector on this issue. When the findings of the Atkinson review appear in the  new year, we will look closely at those detailed points.

And a merry Christmas to Mr Neil. I will pass on to Rab McNeil all the warm words that have been said about him when I meet him for a new year's dram in Lerwick over the festive period. He will be fascinated by the warmth of the responses to his earlier contributions to The Scotsman . I am reminded of a phrase along the lines of, "He has gone back to my constituency to prepare for Christmas." I thank Mr Mather for quoting so fully from Ben Okri's entertaining "The Joys of Storytelling", which is a text that has an appropriate title for the SNP. I will give another quote that the SNP might want to hold on to: "The acknowledged legislators of the world ... dislike mysteries, for mysteries cannot be coded, or legislated, and wonder cannot be made into law." Perhaps Mr Mather will hold on to that thought.

I would like to finish my introductory points. I was taken by Wendy Alexander's spirit of Christmas and certainly by Stewart Stevenson's recollection that Christmas day was a working day. It is disappointing that he did not share with members what job he had on Christmas day. After all, there are many that he can choose from.

I knew that I should not have said what I did; we all bow to Mr Stevenson's range of work-life experience. I thank Mr Fraser for his new year resolutions. However, it would be helpful if the Tories made a new year's resolution to be consistent on lower taxes and cutting public services. We did not get that resolution from them today, although that would have been more honest of them. I thank Mr Ballard for his appreciation of all things Scottish socialist. It always seems to me that he is not in the right party, although he may get back into it one day. He is a closet socialist in sandals if ever there was one. Mr Gallie is no longer in the chamber, but I was disappointed that he did not work the ills of the European Union constitution into his speech. That was missing. Elaine Murray rightly mentioned Mr Swinburne's great adulation of the poll tax. We look forward to his submission to the independent review of local government finance. We welcome back David Davidson every year. He has now made speeches about the budget for six years. He must be worried about being portrayed as a bit like Banquo's ghost in such debates. I read the Finance Committee's report with considerable interest and have listened to this morning's deliberations with keen attention. I include what Mr Adam said. I assure him that we caught every word and I will return to a couple of things that he mentioned. I recognise that council tax and efficient government proposals are of great interest to members, but I remind them that the debate is about the draft budget process, which is part of the annual consultation process that leads to next month's Budget (Scotland) Bill. The focus of debate might better have been the Executive's spending plans for 2005-06. The Finance Committee report—for which I thank Mr McNulty and his colleagues—is largely positive about the draft budget process, and it contains much that is positive for the Executive. There are many examples of how we have worked and are working with the Finance Committee to enhance the quality of the budget documents and the processes that we use to scrutinise them. I was particularly pleased to note the committee's positive response to the introduction of the central unallocated provision and its acknowledgement of the Executive's prudent financial management in  setting aside resources to meet pressures in future years. As always, the Finance Committee feels that there are areas in which the Executive could improve. I acknowledge that—it is to be expected. We will continue to develop and enhance the way in which we work, and we are always keen to hear the committee's recommendations. I will respond to some of the issues that have been raised in the debate, particularly on the reform of budgetary processes and on the recommendations on streamlining those processes. The aim is to have a clear, differentiated two-year cycle. We are happy to agree with the committee on that point. The new cycle will recognise the central phase of the spending review in the setting of spending plans. It will be a transparent, straightforward cycle, which will aid the clarity and scrutiny undertaken by subject committees and the Parliament. As a result of that recommendation, I am pleased to confirm that there will be no annual evaluation report next year. That will reduce repetition and will ease the burden on committees. The Finance Committee made suggestions for improvements to the format and presentation of information in the budget documents. It sought clearer information on priority areas for new resources. We support the committee's aims in that regard and will consider how to make those improvements. Our plans, as set out in "Building a Better Scotland" and the draft budget, show how each portfolio will deliver against our cross-cutting themes. We note what the committee has said about how we present cross-cutting information, and we will work with it to improve that for the next budgetary year. The committee's report makes a number of comments on equality proofing the budget. I do not regard this year's approach as a retrograde step. In accordance with the committee's recommendations from last year, we have improved the consistency of information on equality work across all portfolios, and we are continually looking for ways to improve the quality of our equality information. We will continue to work with the Equal Opportunities Committee in that regard. I regret that the time that the Finance Committee has had in which to scrutinise the draft budget has been more limited on this occasion. Spending review years are somewhat busy for all in the Executive as well as in the Parliament, and I wish to make it clear that the delay to the spending review announcement was due to the publication of the Fraser inquiry report. Time needed to be set aside to debate that. Despite what has been suggested, that had nothing to do with negotiations on the partnership agreement, which  were completed a year earlier. An effective scrutiny process is in all our interests, and we will aim to ensure that committees are given the maximum possible time in which to consider our proposals the next time round. I am pleased to see that the report acknowledges the improvements that we have made to our key performance targets. As the committee suggested in previous reports, we have substantially reduced the number of targets so as to focus on issues of greater importance and more relevance to people throughout Scotland, which really make a difference to individuals' lives. That means that we will measure our progress on the things that matter most. We are committed to improving the quality of our targets, making them as outcome focused as possible. The emphasis is on what we actually achieve, not on the process behind the policies.

The appropriate time to consider what would be quite a fundamental change would be in a spending review period. We would be happy to consider any committee recommendations in that or other areas in the context of the preparatory work that has already begun for the spending review of 2006. We will not now change the targets that we have set. That would only cause confusion, and we would undoubtedly be criticised for doing that. We will review the small number of targets that were highlighted by the Finance Committee as being process based to ensure that they reach the high standards that we have set for all our spending review 2006 targets. The committee's report commends the priority that we have given in the draft budget to programmes that support economic growth. That has been the subject of some discussion this morning, and I want to deal with the points that have been made. We are committed to creating the conditions for higher growth in Scotland. The draft budget shows that commitment, with major investment in areas such as transport and further and higher education. As the committee's report concludes, economic growth depends on a wider range of factors than those concerned with the Executive's own programmes. The actions of the private sector, the business cycle and conditions  in the global economy, to name but three, are also important. To reach meaningful conclusions on the achievement of sustainable economic growth requires more than just three years' worth of figures. I will deal with Jim Mather's comments in that regard. The Finance Committee concluded at paragraph 33 of its report: "The Committee ... recognises that this need not be a precise percentage, but that it should use comparative growth and growth-related indicators as benchmarks for improvement. For example, the target could be an improvement relative to other countries or economic regions on a range of economic indicators over a four year period." We are happy to consider and develop that. That is our approach under our commitment on the OECD comparators. I suggest that Mr Mather, despite what he said earlier—he must have been reading a different report—has convinced neither the Finance Committee nor seasoned and senior economic commentators on the approach to take. Perhaps Mr Mather will rest defeated on that point—although I suspect not.

The context in which we will take forward those matters is that of the OECD comparators. We are happy to look at the Finance Committee's other suggestions and recommendations; I simply do not recognise what Mr Mather is saying in the context of the committee's report, to which he, a committee member, signed up. There is a constant desire to compare in exact terms the financial management of a country's budget and that of a business's budget. They are not the same. Mr Neil mentioned Enron. To make such a simplistic comparison is profoundly misleading. In fairness, I agree with Mr Monteith on one point. For Scottish businesses and businesses located in Scotland, which will grow the economy, it is the Government's job to set the framework so that they can succeed. We recognise the importance of measuring our progress on growing the economy. We have set targets in the current spending review on areas that promote economic growth, for example in the delivery of major transport infrastructure projects,  to improve productivity and to increase business investment in research and development. In "A Smart, Successful Scotland", we made clear our objective to get into the top quartile of OECD countries for GDP per head. I turn to local government issues. I appreciate the points that Des McNulty, Brian Adam and others made in relation to the current settlement. It is a challenging one. However, it builds on the large increases that were provided to councils in previous settlements. By the end of the current settlement period, core funding through AEF will have increased by 55 per cent since 1999-2000, and total funding of around £30 billion over the next three years will allow local authorities to increase spending to record levels. I would point out to Mr McNulty, Mr Adam and other members who may have concerns in this regard that, as Tom McCabe said on 8 December in relation to the local government settlement, we will listen to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local government. The process between 8 December and the passing of the order confirming the settlement in February is one of consultation, and that gives the opportunity for proper discussion on the issues and for representations to be made. I reiterate that ministers will engage with local government on that. I will deal now with the arguments that some members made that we should allocate the £12 billion of pre-budget consequentials to local government. As I am sure members know, we do not automatically allocate in that way, according to the very good principle that such matters are for ministers and the Parliament to scrutinise. Moreover, that figure—which is for just one year—would be enough to bring the average council tax down by just £5.76. I respectfully suggest that the matter needs to be considered in that context. I have not been able to deal with all the other points that were made, but I will write to members whose points I have not dealt with. Growing the economy, which is the Executive's overriding approach, was the key objective in the spending review of 2004. The key areas of Government expenditure benefited most from the spending review, because they are central to that objective. Spending review 2004 made considerable provision for further and higher education, which is to increase by 30 per cent by 2007-08. In transport there will be an average increase of 14 per cent or £1.4 billion by 2007-08. In an overall tight settlement, that meant that all departments received a real-terms increase, but some received less than others. Who is up and who is down is a favourite game in the scrutiny that the Finance Committee carries out, but spending reviews are about priorities. This Government has invested for the long term. We  have a 10-year transport plan, which is set out in our approach, and we will add to it by publishing the capital investment plan in the new year. Those are just a few of the key improvements that our spending plans will deliver in meeting the commitments made in the partnership agreement, using our resources wisely and productively for the long term, getting the best value possible for every pound that we spend, delivering the priorities for the people of Scotland and investing for a better Scotland.

What is the member talking about?

Seweled?

I want to make three brief points about the importance of the fishing industry to my constituency, the realities of the 2004 management regime and the need for change and improvement in the regime following the fisheries council that will take place a week on Monday. Despite the massive economic change in Shetland in recent years, it is still highly dependent on fishing. The islands retain an economic and, importantly, social belief in the industry, and in a diversified economy they need a financially viable inshore, white-fish and pelagic fleet. On the pelagic side, in the past three to four years, £100 million of private capital has been invested locally in the renewal of the pelagic fleet and processing industry, principally at the Shetland Catch factory. That is a sign of confidence and sends the simple message that fishing can be sustainable and financially viable. However, it must be built on a solid and positive relationship between industry and Government—an industry that has the confidence to invest in its renewal and a Government that provides the environment in which it can prosper. That is the approach that I want for all sectors, not just in the Shetland industry but in the industry throughout Scotland.  I need look no further than Norway. The minister mentioned in his opening remarks the EU-Norway negotiations that have just concluded. Scotland's industry-Government relationship must always recognise that the Norwegians' approach is focused totally on the commercial interests of their catching and processing sectors. It is a hard commercial approach that supports the industry. The recent Norwegian prosecution, which the minister mentioned, of the blue whiting species in international waters has not been based on conservation but on the construction of an international track record based on the needs of the Norwegian catching and processing sectors. The proposed 23 per cent cut in the mackerel quota could be extremely serious for the Shetland pelagic industry. I can only speculate as to why the Norwegians proposed even further cuts in the quota for 2005. For pelagic quotas, just as with white-fish quotas, there is an overwhelming case for a longer-term approach to quota management, say over a three-year period. That would be better for boats, processors and fishery managers, and there is surely a role in that for the North sea regional advisory council, which a number of members have mentioned. Therefore I strongly suggest to our ministers that, particularly on the pelagic front, we understand the hard-nosed commercial reality of the Norwegian negotiating position and of everything that the Norwegians do in their approach to the industry.

Norway has to negotiate with all member states and with the European Union on fishing matters. The idea that, as Mr Lochhead and Mr Brocklebank seem to believe, after complete constitutional change, all would be well and everything would naturally fall into our hearts and, more to the point, our fishing nets is a fallacy.

No, I will not give way on that point. The reality is that, in international waters, EU waters or even in the inshore sector, such matters still need to be negotiated. To suggest that those negotiations would just finish is an absolute nonsense, but that is the fallacy that Mr Brocklebank and Mr Lochhead continually try to represent to the fishing industry in Scotland.

No, I will not give way. Mr Lochhead has had his say, and he did not have much to contribute to the debate if his most damning criticism of Ross Finnie today was that  the minister's name was not in the minutes of the Council of Ministers meetings. Shetland is at the heart of the northern North sea's fishing grounds and must have—indeed, needs—the right to prosecute those fisheries. The 2004 regime, which is based on days at sea and the haddock permit scheme, has been all but impossible for the local fleet in the northern isles. Shetland boats are in the bizarre circumstances of achieving higher gross earnings during 2004 but even worse net financial positions than before. Because of the permit scheme, local boats have had to lease in entitlement to fish and entitlement to go to sea. It is therefore important that the permit scheme has no future and will not exist in 2005. Ross Finnie's important role a week on Monday is to secure the best possible outcome in the EU fisheries council, and he has my whole-hearted support in achieving that objective. I know that he understands the Shetland fleet's needs—indeed, he will be in Shetland on Monday—but the important point is that Shetland must not be picked out, however unintentionally, by a botched management regime that hits the local boats' financial viability. Therefore, before Christmas, we need quota levels—particularly on monkfish—that can assist in ensuring financial viability in 2005, a regime that allows Shetland boats to fish without unreasonable and disproportionate regulations and a package that gives the men and those who depend on them a reason to look forward to 2005 with confidence.

The debate has shed some light and not a little heat. Indeed, there has been sufficient heat from the Opposition benches alone to power our green jobs strategy—that would be the embodiment of efficient government. Her Majesty could probably power a whole wing of her palace on Mr Brocklebank's singing earlier this afternoon—a song from an earlier hit parade. Just as "Top of the Pops" disappears, so too do the Tories. As for Mr Monteith, I feel that he should keep his speech for a licensing bill debate. We got binge rhetoric from him rather than anything more useful. Efficient government is central to our programme of modernising and reforming the public sector to make it as efficient, effective and productive as possible. Efficient government is important for our economy, so that our public services are effective in delivering quick, responsive services to support a strong workforce and strong communities. Efficient government will ensure that the valuable time of teachers, doctors and policemen is spent doing what they have been trained to do and not on bureaucracy. Efficient government is important in maintaining the reputation of our public services and the high regard in which the public hold them. That is why we will not get bogged down in anything other than what is right for Scotland to deliver the most efficient public services possible. The Executive's plan does just that. It sets out how we can make our public sector more efficient by improving procurement practices, sharing support services, improving transactional processes, increasing the productive time of our staff and streamlining bureaucracy. It outlines the cash savings that each portfolio will deliver for  reinvestment in front-line services—not the cuts that the Tories have proposed.

I will come to that in just a minute. First, I will answer the points that Susan Deacon and others raised about how we will implement the programme. We will ensure that the efficient government programme is delivered throughout the public service. We will use delivery mechanisms such as technical notes, which will set out detailed project plans; the improvement service, which will work with local government, and measures will be fully integrated into best value; regular reporting to ministers and Parliament; and, above all, transparent monitoring by Audit Scotland. I turn to Mr Fraser's question, which I was not going to ignore—I never ignore Mr Fraser's questions. I will give him an example that he should know about, because we mentioned it in a parliamentary debate in June: the e-procurement system. The Executive introduced the system, which is the model for public sector procurement—that has happened already; it is not an aspiration for the future. E-procurement is at the cutting edge of procurement and is valued by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development to such an extent that it suggests that other countries should follow Scotland's example. Not only did we introduce that system, but we have abolished national health service trusts, implemented a business transformation project in Scottish Enterprise—saving £200 million—and carried out a major programme of reform and modernisation in the Crown Office, to name only another three examples.

As Mr Neil knows, because he is the convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, the £200 million has been reinvested in ensuring that Scottish Enterprise meets the objectives of "A Smart, Successful Scotland", which is the framework that we expect Scottish Enterprise—[ Interruption. ] Mr Neil laughs, but the organisation will be judged against those objectives not just by Government but by committees of the Parliament. We will make a step change in the delivery of efficiency savings. There are many examples of such savings in the efficient government plan, but I will mention two examples that might interest members and I will respond to particular points that have been made. First, classroom assistants will be employed to reduce the unnecessary  burden on professional teachers that is caused by administrative tasks. Secondly, we will deliver a bureaucracy audit that is aimed at reducing the burden of paperwork in the teaching profession so that education alone can be considered.

I want to make progress. We can transform the way in which our public services are administered and lock in savings to deliver a more sustainably efficient public sector. Public bodies will be required to look beyond the boundaries of their own organisations and to explore opportunities to work together to provide support and front-line services. That is why the efficient government plan contains measures for longer-term efficiencies. A number of members mentioned the unions. We invited the unions to join the efficient government working group, but they declined. Obviously that is a matter for the unions, but Mr McCabe and other ministers will meet the Scottish Trades Union Congress on 13 December, so our door is, of course, not closed to the unions. Mr Neil and others asked about fire service control rooms. The position was laid out clearly by Hugh Henry in the stage 1 debate on the Fire (Scotland) Bill. The issue is being consulted on as we pursue issues that were raised during the consultation on the bill, and the efficient government document reflects that. However, the position will be transparent, because not only the committee but Audit Scotland will observe the process, so there will definitely be an opportunity to pursue the matter. It is important to stress that central Government is not immune from the initiative but will lead in making savings. Scottish Executive expenditure on administration is already much less than that of other UK Government departments as a percentage of overall expenditure. During the spending review period, spending on central Government administration will fall in real terms by 6 per cent. Margaret Jamieson asked about public sector pensions. The Scottish Public Pensions Agency in Galashiels is considering the matter and Margaret Jamieson's point will be raised when the agency expands its role to deliver efficient and effective economies of scale. Members raised issues about local government and portfolios. Local government receives a large chunk of Government expenditure and it is right that it should contribute its share of efficiency savings.

In response to Mike Rumbles and other members, I point out that if a local authority achieves its efficiency target, they can redirect to front-line services—[ Interruption. ]

Further progress over and above the target will be retained by local government. The modernising government and efficient government funds will help local government to make further efficiency savings. We have heard a broad spread of ideas from some parties but, not for the first time, the Parliament and, certainly, members of the Executive parties have been unimpressed by the Conservatives. In England, the Tories have embarked on the James review—I understand that James is not Lord James Douglas-Hamilton but someone else—to help Government departments to prepare a list of spending cuts. The latest phase was announced last month. I must admit that the announcement was met with a bit of a whimper in England, but that was better than the reaction in Scotland, where no one noticed it. There was not a whisper from the Scottish Tories about their equivalent proposals. I have had to resort to their new charter, of which we have all helpfully been given a copy—"with no small print" in relation to these matters—to find out the extent of their ambition, which is extremely difficult. Their plans for the 2,800 Scottish schools mean that we would be seeking extra bursars and administrators to ensure that children in our schools get their buses, that their lunches are cooked healthily and that contracts are designed, monitored and enforced so that children with special needs get the expert help that they need. The Tories' plans to wind back the clock on health would mean a massive recruitment drive for senior hospital managers. Members should recall that there were 650 more senior NHS managers under the Conservatives than there are now—that is £35 million more in spending on bureaucracy under the Tories. They have no way of paying that bill. Last weekend, their London colleague Oliver Letwin said that they would cut £35 billion across the UK. It is no wonder that we are all looking for the small print on the Tory books. I hope that I have been able to address the points raised by members, but I would be happy to write to members on the issues to which I have been unable to attend today. I remind the chamber what the plan looks like. It sets out an ambitious agenda for making the Scottish public sector a leader in efficiency, innovation and productivity. It sets out a five-year plan to attack waste, bureaucracy and duplication  in Scotland's public sector, freeing up £745 million of cash and releasing efficiencies for investment in front-line services. It commits us to finding more as we move towards our longer-term goal and sets out an agenda for long-term efficiencies to lock in a sustainably more efficient public sector in Scotland, delivering first-class services. We have a plan for action. People will see that it makes sense. Ministers are determined to see that it makes a difference.

The Executive is encouraging the development of one-stop shops—and, most important, one-stop services—through the modernising government fund, which provides direct financial support to local authorities, and through the community planning process, which encourages councils to work with their partners. All 32 local authorities have benefited from the modernising government fund in the development of their one-stop services. The fund has provided support including direct funding of £17 million from the first round in 2000, £28 million from the second round over 2002-04 and a further commitment of £35 million from the third round until 2006. The Executive, along with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and other representatives from the local authorities, is also encouraging a consortium approach to the development of modern one-stop services with councils. We are working together to share development, experience, costs and good practice.

Mr Barrie raises an important point in relation not only to non-departmental public bodies, but to departments of government in the round. We intend to work with the range of organisations that he describes in order to ensure that one-stop shops and one-stop services link across government. We intend to ensure that citizens receive the best possible service as quickly and efficiently as possible. That is very much part of our efficient government approach.

As the member will have heard in the response to an earlier question, Tom McCabe and I plan to meet the review committee early in the new year to hear of progress in its work.

It is certainly our intention, when we meet the independent review committee, to ask its members about the mechanisms for ensuring that all who wish to put forward their views and give evidence can do so. The information on the committee's approach should be promulgated as widely as possible throughout Scotland.

The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with the UK Government on a wide range of issues, including the proposed new gambling legislation. Scottish ministers would have a wider range of controls under the proposed new system, including power to set licence fees and licence conditions. Scottish ministers will be fully involved in procedures for implementation of the new regime and will be consulted prior to the UK Government deciding when to commence the new arrangements.

I acknowledge Pauline McNeill's strength of feeling on the issue and I very much understand her constituency interest in it. As regards the meeting that she had yesterday with representatives of American trade unions, I can tell Parliament that Scottish Executive officials also met those unions yesterday. Ministers look forward to receiving a note of the specific points that they made, which we will certainly take seriously and examine closely. I also confirm that, as gambling is a reserved matter, powers that are conferred on Scottish ministers—who are, of course, held accountable by this Parliament—will give them additional powers to issue planning guidance to local authorities to set conditions to be attached to any licence that is issued in Scotland. Far from our having no power or, indeed, less power, we will insist not just on the retention of our current strong system, but on its enhancement.

The Scottish Executive's procurement policy has already contributed positively to an environmentally sensitive and sustainable Scotland. The Executive has published a considerable amount of guidance and information for public purchasers and suppliers. The guidance, which is available on the Executive's website, requires purchasers to take full account of relevant sustainable development objectives and policies. Guidance to suppliers who wish to sell to the Executive underlines the point that, if they fail to comply with environmental legislation, they may be excluded from competition and that those who offer environmentally preferable goods and services are likely to have a competitive advantage.

I recognise Sarah Boyack's consistent interest in the issue. She will be interested to know that the greening government policy continues to process environmental improvement. We have adopted a number of specific targets that are to be achieved annually. For the years 2003-06, our key targets included reducing the amount of office waste that goes to landfill by recycling 70 per cent of the total waste that is produced by March 2005; reducing the amount of paper that is purchased annually for general in-house daily use by 10 per cent by March 2004; and further reducing our energy consumption by 1 per cent by March 2004. The Executive's environmental performance annual report, which includes the latest performance figures and many others, will be published shortly.

The Executive believes the ethical considerations that Cathie Craigie has raised to be extremely important. In publishing the guidance on our website and in other ways, we seek to ensure that our processes and our requirements are as transparent as possible, so that organisations and businesses that wish to transact with the Executive are clear about what is required. However, that is something that we always have to do, in the context of legal requirements at the European level and the domestic level.

If ratified, the European Union constitutional treaty will introduce  a number of changes that affect Scotland, which are set out in the United Kingdom Government's "White paper on the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe", which was published on 9 September. The treaty will enable the EU to respond more effectively to the needs of Scotland, while defining the limit of the EU's powers. It will allow better co-ordination between member states in key areas, such as judicial co-operation on criminal matters and police co-operation. Further protection against a shift of decision making towards Brussels is provided by clarification of the competences of the EU and strengthened subsidiarity provisions. The various references in the treaty text to regional and local government represent a helpful recognition at European level of the growing decentralisation of government in many member states. They reflect increased political pressure on the European institutions and member states to involve regional authorities more fully.

I never cease to fail to understand Mr Gallie's logic. Although the Conservative party is implacably opposed to the treaty, he seeks to argue about how the treaty could be made better for the Scottish Parliament and for Scotland. Mr Gallie should be familiar with the reality that the final text contains proposals on subsidiarity and the role of the regions that are advantageous to Scotland, which his party would oppose. He will know that the treaty contains proposals that reflect and support an enhanced role for the regions with legislative powers, to which he, of course, is opposed.

Mr Gallie would also be opposed to the fact that the treaty, if it is ratified, will allow national and sub-national Parliaments to object through the subsidiarity mechanisms. Those are all improvements for Scotland, but Mr Gallie and his party are implacably opposed to them all.

As one who represents a fishing constituency, I find Mr Lochhead's attitude to such matters quite distressing, because the regional advisory council, which will be chaired by my colleague Ross Finnie later this month, will provide active involvement by fishermen in the management of the common fisheries policy for the first time. That must be a step forward, but it is not as far as matters will go; they will go much further, because they are of direct importance to the fishing communities that I and the Executive represent. It would be useful if Mr Lochhead woke up to that fact.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will endeavour to be relevant, as you have asked. The budget sets out our ambitions to build a better Scotland; it is a budget for enterprise, opportunity and fairness. Today marks the start of the budget process, which runs all the way through to January when we introduce the budget bill. As a result, I say to Mr Morgan and other members that there will be plenty of opportunity to debate the details of the budget in the chamber and in committees. Indeed, there will at least 13 full chamber debates on the plans before they come into effect. Some might find that discouraging, but not I. Devolution has brought a fundamental change to the nature of budget setting; Parliament, the committees and the public all have central roles to play. As Mr McNulty pointed out, the Finance Committee recommended in its stage 1 report and in successive exercises that we make capital spending a priority for the budget, so we have done so. Not only have we introduced a new net  investment rule to safeguard levels of investment in the longer term, but we have increased net investment by 40 per cent over the life of this budget alone. The Finance Committee wanted housing and regeneration expenditure to be priorities. In this budget, we have announced plans to invest more than £1 billion to provide more affordable housing and to invest a further £318 million in the next three years in regeneration of our communities. The Finance Committee asked us to look again at our targets and sent us a list of those that it thought should be dropped or improved—Mr Brocklebank is a member of that committee. We have looked at those targets and in the document, which I hope Mr Brocklebank has had the chance to consider, not only have we replaced more than 90 per cent of the targets—the very ones that he, the Finance Committee and other committees felt were inappropriate—but we have met our commitment to the Finance Committee to bring the number of key targets to below 100. I say to members who have this afternoon accused us of clarifying or changing figures, that we have done that because the Finance Committee—and other committees of the Parliament—asked us to respond to their concerns. We have also responded to other parties. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities made a strong case for £60 million for local roads repairs; we have allocated £60 million. I hope that Mr Johnstone accepts that and I hope that COSLA will agree to work with us to make sure that people throughout Scotland will see the outcome of that £60 million of spending on their local roads. Of course, the budget runs the gamut of the Executive's spending and it is only possible to cover part of that spending today. I confirm, as Mr Kerr did, that the budget plans will implement the partnership agreement in full and that ministerial colleagues will announce more details over the coming weeks. Those announcements will relate, for example, to the questions that Sarah Boyack asked about transport. I can give Margo MacDonald the assurance that she sought in relation to the matter that she raised during the debate. We will evaluate the project that she mentioned, but that evaluation will be done when the project is operational and when it would be appropriate so to do. I will respond to some of the points that were made in the debate. First, on the SNP's latest policy on oil—even Mr Morgan would have to accept that we have had this debate many times—I remind the SNP that oil prices go down as well as up. We all remember how the oil price was used by Chantrey Vellacott to give a flavour of the  economic situation of Scotland. Every year the oil price changed, every year the country's economic prospects went up or down as a result and every year the SNP's response changed. The SNP said that it was "Game, set and match" to the independence case one year, but when the oil price dropped the SNP said that it was "back of the envelope economic gibberish" Nicola Sturgeon apparently declared last night, "It's our oil", but apparently only at the right price. Jeremy Purvis, Wendy Alexander and many others were right to highlight the Executive's commitment to growing the Scottish economy. We have set out at the start of our introduction to the document a table—another Finance Committee request—which explains how so many parts of the Executive will work to grow the economy through a robust 30 per cent funding boost for further and higher education; record investment in transport infrastructure; new, affordable homes; support for the timber industry in rural areas; support for tourism and support for new, environmental industries. All those budgets will grow rapidly under our plans and all will help the economy to grow.

Mr Lochhead will be very pleased to learn that I will come to that very point. Before I do so I will finish my point about the economy by responding to Mr Monteith and Mr Mather—those harbingers of doom and gloom on the nature of the economy. I will quote three sets of statistics, which are from independent sources; they are not Government statistics. The Royal Bank of Scotland "PMI Scotland Report" for August 2004 showed that the growth of private sector output in Scotland was maintained for a fourteenth successive month. The Scottish Chambers of Commerce business survey was headlined, "Chambers' survey points to continued growth for Scottish economy", and the latest HBOS Scottish index of leading economic indicators was headlined "Business investment to fuel Scottish economic growth in 2005". It predicted that growth would improve steadily this year and that business investment would replace personal consumption as a key driver of growth in 2005. I am surprised that the Conservatives have come along to the debate. Mr Monteith looked sheepish earlier when he delivered their agenda of  cuts. After all, David McLetchie told the Sunday Express during the summer that he was going to use £540 million of the Executive allocation to cut council tax by nationalising education funding. That would mean £540 million less for the Scottish Executive to tackle the issues that we have identified. It would mean £540 million less for higher education. The Tories can never match us, however much they try to fleece students with commercial rates for their Tory loans. It would mean £540 million less for transport links to Scotland's airports to boost international business. It would mean £540 million less for affordable housing and more misery for people who might be glad of the chance to have a council tax bill of their own in the first place.

Mr Monteith could not square the circle between cutting, cutting and more cutting and the investments that we will make in Scotland's economy and measures that will promote Scotland's economic growth. The Greens should look again at our record. We have transformed recycling for households: the figure was 6 per cent, but we will achieve 25 per cent by 2006 and 30 per cent by 2008. That achievement has not come about by the Executive sitting back. The Executive has given environmental leadership that has been supported by hundreds of millions of pounds. More important, it relies on the efforts of literally millions of people who are prepared to help in their homes. People in Scotland have risen to that challenge; it is time for the Greens to recognise and support that. On the environment, we will not only make dramatic progress on recycling, but we will spend 70 per cent of the transport budget on public transport. Mr Ballard should note that that never happened under the Tories. We will progress our partnership agreement commitment to a new £20 million fund for saving energy in the public sector and we will drive forward our green jobs strategy—Mr Lochhead should take note—in meeting our ambitious target for renewable energy. Finally I turn to the Scottish National Party. I warned the SNP during the finance debate that it secured last December that it would simply have to get a grip and get its spenders and taxers to sit  down together and come up with a coherent plan—the two groups are miles apart. The chief spender seems to be London's Mr Salmond, who wants bullets everywhere on top of all his colleagues' promises. However, the taxers of the party have now decided to cut off the cash that is available for Government to spend. After the SNP conference, the taxers want lower corporation tax, lower business rates, lower water rates and lower national insurance, as well as their existing proposals to decrease fuel duty, whisky duty and income tax on low earners. The SNP has created a credibility gap, with more and more spending pledges, but less and less money to pay for that spending. I found the supreme irony in some old press clippings from days gone by when Alex Salmond was the Scotland-based leader of the SNP and Jim Mather was being hailed as the next member of the Scottish Parliament for Ayr. Alex Salmond had a go at the Tories during the Ayr by-election campaign and said that the Tories could not have it both ways; they simply could not have tax cuts and keep public services going. It is no wonder that one of Mr Salmond's recent claims is that "All that is needed is the imagination". The Executive is promoting enterprise in Scotland's schools and universities, businesses and public services. We are promoting opportunities for young people and families and fairness for the elderly, for communities and for all Scotland's people. Our spending plans take the next steps towards building a better Scotland, and I commend them to the Parliament.

The Scottish Executive accepts the Fraser report and we will implement in full the recommendations that apply to us. I recognise the candour, bluntness and frankness of this afternoon's debate. There has been considerable passion and thoughtfulness from Margo MacDonald, Robin Harper, Wendy Alexander and the local member, Sarah Boyack. Some of us would hesitate to suggest that Andrew Welsh could ever use Anglo-Saxon phrases and, in passing, I urge on Stewart Stevenson scepticism and not paranoia, although I accept that he has a much greater knowledge of both subjects than I have. I contrast the Executive's acceptance of Lord Fraser's recommendations with the approach that has been taken by the SNP and the Tories. Nothing epitomises that approach more than Bill Aitken's winding-up speech. Fraser reported, but neither the Tories nor the SNP will accept the recommendations. Their amendments are based not on Fraser's outcomes and findings but on the political judgments of Messrs Ewing and McLetchie. The SNP and the Tories are, of course, entitled to their views, but Parliament must doubt those who did not receive the smoking gun last Wednesday but have been in the political armoury since then inventing one. Mr Ewing was keen to spot all Lord Fraser's deficiencies: the conclusions missed, the points overlooked and the memos not quoted. Perhaps a future Lord Ewing  will do a better job at some time when he alights to a higher bench. I remain disappointed by how constantly negative the SNP is about recognising that freedom of information is a positive and innovative process and solution for Scotland. We in the Parliament should be proud—

The member should let me make the point. I will take an intervention later on. We should be proud of the freedom of information legislation. On the independent commissioner who is charged with the public interest and the drive for and ethos of openness, I will be blunt. The Tories wanted none of it—they opposed those measures and they did nothing towards them during 18 years in government. I presume that the SNP is familiar with the Scott inquiry and remembers, as we do, the Matrix Churchill managers who were for some time—I say this to Lord James—in danger of going to jail to save Tory ministers. I ask Mr Ewing whether the Tories' opposition does not tell him something about why freedom of information is such an important reform for the Parliament and for the way in which we conduct ourselves. There can be no doubt about our commitment to that reform. Freedom of information goes hand in hand with the concept of the scrutiny of the Parliament. I simply do not accept Dennis Canavan's contention that the ministerial team is not held to account—it certainly does not feel like that from my point of view.

I would like to finish this point first. The Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 will come fully into operation on 1 January 2005. It provides a general right of access to information held by Scottish public authorities, including information about public sector contracts. Such information will be released unless the public interest in disclosure is outweighed by the harm caused by the release of that information. As is the situation under the present non-statutory code, there will be a right of appeal to the Scottish information commissioner when information is not released. Those are important reforms and they should be taken account of. Parliament can be in little doubt as to Mr Dunion's fierce independence—he is certainly Parliament's man in that sense.

I hope that Margo MacDonald will accept that it is not my job or any minister's job to interfere with Mr Dunion. The Scottish Parliament elected him—although the SNP voted against his election—and he will make his decisions based on the interests that Parliament considers to exist. On ministerial accountability, ministers accept their responsibilities in relation to Lord Fraser's conclusions. However, the Tories are choosing to ignore or disagree with Lord Fraser's conclusions. Despite the fact that he conducted 43 days of evidence-taking sessions, dealt with more than 60 witnesses and read more than a million words of evidence, the Tories are now saying that a former Conservative minister is wrong—we live in curious times. Lord Fraser holds all responsible but the Tories have repeatedly tried this afternoon to claim, "It wisnae me." I seem to remember Mr McLetchie using the same phrase in a different context when he thought that it would be appropriate at that time. The Tories have served on the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body since 1999 and Lord Fraser's observations on the SPCB need no repeating. The Tories' defence is unacceptable. In fact, it is no defence at all to claim, imply or brief that John Young was always asleep. Civil service reform has been mentioned by many members, including Susan Deacon, Helen Eadie, Sarah Boyack, Alex Neil and, in a powerful speech, Johann Lamont. Last Wednesday, the First Minister made clear that the report's recommendations would be implemented in full to prevent the systemic failures that were highlighted by Lord Fraser from happening again. Those points were repeated at question time last Thursday. Last Wednesday, the permanent secretary gave a media briefing, answered questions and participated in interviews in response to the report. I suggest that, in itself, that represents a considerable change on the previous situation. Change is under way and will continue. Andy Kerr set out that change in considerable detail earlier. Like every minister and member, I have had to take on the chin this building's cost overruns and the pain of its construction. I presume that most members—with some exceptions—have said to people that they are responsible because, as Wendy Alexander said, the job was done on their watch. Whenever I have faced a group of parents of special needs children, Whalsay fishermen or students at Anderson High School in Lerwick, I have never got away with saying, "It wisnae me." As many members have said, today is about drawing a line under the issue. The Parliament and the members who accept their responsibilities can now move forward, determined that what is said and done should dominate proceedings. No member relishes what has happened or will ignore Lord Fraser's report—all grimace at what has occurred. Last week, the Presiding Officer stated that today's debate should begin the cleansing and cathartic process of closure. In the main, today's debate has achieved that. Fraser has reported, Parliament has deliberated and it is time that we got on with our work.

I will respond to what has been a wide-ranging and intense debate, as shown by the fact that so many members sought to speak in it—indeed, it was oversubscribed. Few colleagues missed the opportunity to make a pitch for their area or constituency. That is fair and entirely as it should be. In some ways, one is reminded of the maiden speeches that are made in the House of Commons. If anything, the debate has illustrated how difficult relocation is and how difficult the decisions about it are. I will pick up on a number of points. We will use the Lyons review of civil service relocation in the United Kingdom as a whole to ensure that Scotland benefits from the process. We will ensure that we secure jobs for East Kilbride and Aberdeen; we have already made initial progress on that. More work will be done to keep the pressure on our colleagues in London to secure more jobs for Scotland. Irene Oldfather mentioned the European perspective. That policy area is of direct interest; it has been raised with us by the Finance Committee and by individual members, and we are pursuing it. It is an area of relocation policy around which the Parliament as a whole can coalesce. In opening for the committee, Des McNulty made a number of detailed points. He talked about the balance of irreconcilable policy options. In many ways, that is exactly the issue in relation to relocation policy; it is difficult to ensure that we strike the right balance between the many concerns that were raised about staff and the socioeconomic requirements of communities throughout Scotland. A number of members asked for better information on relocation criteria for councils, local enterprise companies, other agencies and private sector developers who are interested in attracting relocating bodies. Mr Raffan referred to a one-page letter to local authorities, but that letter has a four-page annex that includes core criteria, a list of potential bodies to be relocated, information on the requirements of those bodies and the number of staff that they have in place. I take the point that we can always examine how best to review current practice, but there is an awful lot more out there than some members gave us credit for this afternoon. We will examine the point about feedback that was made by Mr Raffan and others  in relation to the process. As for SNH, in opening for their respective parties, Fergus Ewing and Ted Brocklebank perhaps missed the point. Susan Deacon reflected on the difficulty of the decisions in a way that I found more persuasive. Mr Ewing also mentioned the Irish example. I will quote his words back at him—in full, rather than selectively, as Mr Brocklebank is prone to do in the chamber. On 4 May, he said in the committee exchanges that we had at that time: "I think that you accept that I am not suggesting that we should replicate the Irish policy here. That would be wrong-headed and impossible".—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 4 May 2004; c 1331.] I think that we all share that view. It is important to reflect on that when we hear that Ireland is the paragon of all virtues in relation to these matters. Mr Mundell also quoted me selectively and just got it wrong—but that is Mr Mundell's requirement these days. He said that I said that the matter was inherently political. I said nothing of the sort. I said that it was ultimately political, just as every decision of Government is. The fact is that a due process has been followed. All Government decisions are made in that way, as they were under the Administration that I presume Mr Mundell supported. Mr Raffan mentioned Mr Mundell's desire to relocate to London. He may want to relocate, but the fact is that he ain't going to—it ain't going to happen. Mr Fraser talked about the Conservative commitment to relocation. I can find no reference pre-1997, in the Scottish Office days, to any Tory policy on relocation. There was no such thing as a relocation policy in the Conservative days, so I do not think that that point carries any weight. However, Mr Fraser raised an important point—as did Colin Fox, Susan Deacon and many others—in relation to staff sensitivity and staff handling as relocation goes on. Maureen Macmillan talked about the transferability of staff from non-departmental public bodies and Government agencies to the civil service. We are aware of a pilot scheme in England involving the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the Countryside Agency. We will look carefully at that and what it means and ensure that we take it into account in coming to our position. Many other issues have been raised. I share Irene Oldfather's concern about the length of time that it took for the decision to be made. I will pursue that. Alasdair Morgan was quite right about the positive impact that the small units initiative can have, which is why I said what I did to George Lyon in response to the issue that he raised in that context.  The arguments that Maureen Macmillan, Paul Martin and Jeremy Purvis made about the benefits of relocation bear some scrutiny. Relocation is right for business efficiency in many cases, in terms of economic benefits and pushing the benefits of devolution around Scotland. That is why we will work with the committee and take forward the policy in that way.

I do not doubt the example that Murdo Fraser has given, but does he accept that he has simply described the kernel of the relocation issue? Mr Fraser may not have made this argument specifically, but the logic of his argument is that we should have a policy of not relocating jobs outwith a certain area.

It would be helpful if Mr Brocklebank had reflected the whole of that exchange. I was at pains to point out on the record that that was in the context of decentralisation. If Mr Brocklebank quoted the whole of the passage instead of quoting selectively, he would see that. I presume that he would concede that introducing the poll tax was a political decision, too.

I thank Mr McNulty for the constructive manner in which he presented his committee's report to Parliament. I will make two introductory points. I had a light lunch today to leave room for the consumption of humble pie. I apologise to Parliament and to the committee for the Executive's failure to respond to the report within the appropriate period. That was a mistake that was in no way deliberate. The Executive did not intend to cause the committee difficulty and we regret it if our late response appeared in any way to signal disrespect for the committee or Parliament. As I have made clear to the committee's convener, I will do everything that I can to ensure that such a mistake is not repeated. As the Minister for Parliamentary Business has told the committee, measures have been put in place to monitor the timing of responses so that the Executive prevents the same situation from arising in the future. The situation was not acceptable and should not happen again. This afternoon, Parliament will discuss relocation policy in this new debating chamber and  on this day of high drama in the Scottish Land Court—I suspect that that cannot be said every day. It was exactly five years ago, on 15 September 1999, that Donald Dewar set out for Parliament the devolved Government's relocation policy. On the policy's fifth anniversary, having been relocated itself, Parliament should use the Finance Committee's invitation to consider what has been achieved and what remains to be done. Devolution was and is about bringing government closer to Scotland's citizens. Ministers have been clear that we are committed to continuing the process of devolution.

I understand that the Department for Work and Pensions has disputed this morning's story. The issues are being examined closely and we will keep a close eye on them. Our relocation policy has played an important part in the devolutionary process. Public sector jobs have been relocated or established in Glasgow, Aberdeen, Falkirk, Dundee, Galashiels, Dunfermline, Inverness, Livingston, Paisley and Ayrshire. As the policy has developed, the list of areas to benefit from relocation has grown, and it will continue to grow. I had the pleasure to visit the Carnegie campus in Scott Barrie's constituency yesterday. Scottish Enterprise Fife and its partners are working to provide high-quality options for public and private sector organisations. Earlier this month, I visited City Park in Paul Martin's constituency, which is an imaginative and bold vision for a former cigarette factory. Like all ministers with responsibility for relocation, I remain committed to the persuasive case that Dumfries and the tireless convener of Dumfries and Galloway Council have made, which complements Elaine Murray's work in Parliament. I thank Finance Committee members for the work that they have put into the report on the relocation of public sector jobs. The report distils clearly the policy's background and development. The scope of the work that was undertaken to prepare the report—not least by members who were appointed as reporters—shows the committee's commitment to work with the  Executive in driving the relocation policy forward. We are grateful for that. The committee has helpfully scrutinised our policy and practice on relocation and I believe that we have responded positively to many of the constructive recommendations in the report; the fundamentals that underpin relocation policy are described in our response. We welcome the report's constructive tone and are happy to respond in that way. Three subjects are of particular interest.

I am sure that Mr Crawford would not want me to start lecturing local authorities on the manner in which they should conduct their business, as I do not believe in central diktats. As former councillors, he and I know that effective government must involve reflection on the need to provide public services to ensure that the public moneys that are available to local authorities are used for front-line public services. The ability to provide such services goes hand in hand with a local authority's running as efficient an organisation as it can. Highland Council has decentralised its structure—for example, it has located its harbour and port division in Lochinver—so there are good examples of best practice in Scotland. Other local authorities might wish to learn from those.

Mr Kerr and I are currently considering whether East Kilbride or Lerwick would be the best location. It is a serious matter, and I assure Mr Lyon that that decision should be with us all within a matter of weeks. The representations that he has made on the matter  have been important in consideration of the relocation. We hope to bring the decision forward quickly. I will deal quickly with the three areas of interest that will be important in considering the Finance Committee's recommendations. Many of the report's recommendations will inform the Government's on-going evaluation of the relocation policy's impact. Our response demonstrates how closely linked are the committee's and the Executive's approaches on future development. To deal with one of Des McNulty's considerable core points, we have already improved the option-appraisal process to take deprivation into account. As the committee knows, 50 per cent of the quantitative weightings for comparing locations now refer to socio-economic benefits. That is an aspect that the committee has stressed repeatedly and to which we have responded. The response sets out specific Executive commitments. They should address matters that the committee suggested as being areas in which improvements are required, such as the transparency of the process and communicating the objectives of the policy—Des McNulty made points on both those. I accept the argument that transparency in the process can be highly beneficial to staff, to staff representatives and to locations that bid for public sector posts. Our response sets out the following detailed commitments, which reflect some of the committee's conclusions and recommendations. We will publish revised guidance about the relocation process on the Executive's website. We will issue a statement that highlights the main reasons for each future relocation decision and we will set out clearer standards for staff consultations on relocation. We will consider how the application of appraisal criteria could be made more consistent through publication of clear guidance on the methodology that is to be used in relocation reviews. We will also continue to evaluate the impact of the relocation policy and provide detailed information on the costs associated with relocations.

I recognise the point that Mr Ewing—and, indeed, the committee—made. We are strongly influenced by the work that has been  done and will consider Mr Ewing's detailed point in the context of the wider objectives about which Mr McNulty spoke. With those issues in mind, we welcome the Finance Committee's report. Having this opportunity to debate the report and our response is important for Parliament. It provides an opportunity for colleagues throughout the chamber to make their case and to inform future policy development. This devolved Government looks forward to working with the Finance Committee on that future policy development.

I thank Brian Adam and all the members who have contributed to the debate this evening, not only for their contributions, but for the tone of their remarks and the reasoned manner in which they have made their case. I take Alex Johnstone's point about Martin Buchan. If I remember rightly, it was Martin Buchan's cross that gave Dalglish the near-post header to make the score 2-0 in 1978, when we qualified for the world cup—but perhaps we will not dwell on the rest. The debate is important and follows on from the announcement on 29 July that the bids submitted under our national and regional facilities strategy were invited to progress to stage 2 of that process, with which Mr Adam and his cross-party colleagues are entirely familiar. The strategy aims to put in place a network of world-class training and competition facilities throughout Scotland. As Brian Adam rightly reflected, and as we did at First Minister's question time today, it is appropriate to congratulate team GB on its excellent performance in the recent Olympics and, in particular, the performances and results of the Scottish athletes involved and their connection with the north-east. We are here tonight and they are at Bute House and I suppose that that is entirely as it should be.  Our top and aspiring athletes will have more of the top-class facilities that they need for training and competition, which will help them to achieve at the highest levels in the coming years. However, it is not just facilities, coaching equipment or the range of back-up services that win medals. As The Herald 's Doug Gillon pointed out last Saturday—and I paraphrase his comments somewhat—without the fundamental will and work ethic, no one succeeds at the highest level. More than £50 million, including the £16 million that was set aside for facilities linked to the Euro 2008 bid, has been allocated from public funds to help to build the new national and regional multisports facilities. Scotland's bid for Euro 2008 has left a positive and lasting legacy—a pledge made and now delivered. That funding, together with investment from partners, will deliver a total investment of up to £230 million in new and refurbished sports facilities. Scotland's communities, and particularly our young people, will be able to enjoy increased opportunities to take part in many different activities, which will help to improve their health and general well-being, as Richard Lochhead and Brian Adam mentioned.

I understand that the initial stage of the two-stage process has been undertaken and that it was extremely transparent. It was understood—if any of the bidding consortia or formulations needed points of clarification, those discussions could have taken place. I take Nora Radcliffe's point that we are where we are in the process; I suspect that the issue is now about taking the matter forward in the most positive manner to achieve the objectives that I am sure members from all parties share. Today's debate has focused on the points that Brian Adam raised in his motion. It is important to recognise that every application that was submitted was assessed using the predetermined criteria that were issued to all potential partners, including local authorities, in September 2003. I hope that, to some extent, that answers Brian Adam's point. The successful applications were  those that met the criteria and the respective allocations were distributed fairly and transparently using a consistent approach based on the type of sports facility that was being built. I understand that sportscotland worked tirelessly with Aberdeen City Council on its bid and that guidance was also provided by the consultants who were involved in the strategy. The application from the city was given a provisional allocation of £5 million, which is in line with the sums that were provided to successful bids for similar facilities. The allocation is provisional because further discussions are required and I understand that those discussions are continuing. The Executive is aware that, as colleagues have said this afternoon, the allocation does not meet the amount that was sought by Aberdeen City Council and its partners. However, part of the stage 2 process will involve sportscotland working with the council to satisfy itself that the council can bridge the funding gap to meet the overall costs of its proposals. There should therefore be no doubt that Aberdeen is most certainly still on the pitch. I have read Mr Adam's comments on central-belt bias and I hear what has been said about that by him and others. It is important to recognise that the aim of the strategy is to put in place a network of regional training facilities throughout Scotland that will serve the geographical areas that are covered by the six area institutes of sport. At this stage, the needs of only four of those areas have been addressed. The Executive and sportscotland will continue to work with partners in the Highlands and Islands, Tayside and Fife to meet the full aims of the strategy. We will also work with partners with a view to filling other geographical gaps in our regional network, including the Borders, Ayrshire and Dumfries and Galloway. In addition to the funding that has been made available by the Executive, it is important to recognise that Aberdeen has done well out of the lottery sports fund since the fund was established. Almost £4.5 million has been invested in 20 projects, including £800,000 towards the Aberdeen curling group project. Nanette Milne—I understand why she can no longer be with us—spoke about the geographic argument and I add the fact that Josie Jamieson from my constituency won the under-20s javelin at the Bank of Scotland junior sporting championships at Grangemouth a fortnight ago. Sporting excellence, achievement and promise for the future are about a combination of many factors and I have no doubt that Brian Adam and many other colleagues recognise that decisions are taken in that context. New national and regional facilities will help Scotland to realise what I am sure is Parliament's ambition of making Scotland a major events  destination. Providing more high-quality training and competition arenas will allow us to build on our recent successes in attracting major sporting events here in the future. I look forward to seeing the proposed bids move quickly to become a reality—our athletes deserve it, our communities deserve it and Scotland deserves it.  Meeting closed at 18:10.

I would like to move a motion without notice to bring forward decision time.

I listened carefully to what Wendy Alexander said. She did not say that there had been no response. There has been a response. There is still some work to do, but I put on record the fact that there has been a response.

The debate has been thoughtful and interesting and there have been many varied speeches. I take the points that have been made by our critical friends and in the slightly more bizarre contributions from other quarters. On the whole, members have been thoughtful about the process. Perhaps David Davidson should attend meetings a little more often because improvement in the process is perhaps a reflection on the Finance Committee members who now grace that particular corridor.

I agree that Des McNulty suffered with David Davidson. I thank Des McNulty and all his colleagues, past and present, for their current work and their work in the process. I also thank the committee clerks, their advisers and my officials in the Finance and Central Services Department. I assure Des McNulty and his colleagues that one of the highlights of a ministerial weekend is knowing that we will appear in front of the Finance Committee on the Tuesday of the following week. I thank the baggage handlers at Sumburgh airport in particular for the amount of paper that they carry on and off the Saab-340 every Friday and Monday prior to such occasions. Other colleagues have mentioned—and it is appropriate to recall—that Scotland has one of the most open and transparent budget processes. Last night, I read the quote on the UK budget from Professor Heald that was given in the committee's report. He said: "one can learn far more about what will be in the budget by reading what has been leaked to the Financial Times than one can from any consultation process."—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 4 May 2004; c 1344.] That was an interesting observation about the differences and the strong manner in which we progress issues. Much has been said today about the transparency of the process. We will approach the committee's recommendations on improving transparency with the determination that we will continue to make improvements where we can. I was glad to see that the committee agrees that the changes to the AER that were introduced this year are helpful in that regard. Sometimes we forget how unusual our budget process is. After all, the basic premise is that the Parliament and its committees should not only hold the Executive to account for how it uses the budget but play an active part in decisions about how the budget should be spent.  The committees' work on stage 1 this year represents a real breakthrough. We have clear recommendations on which areas the Executive should be treating as priorities for additional spending. Some areas are different and some are clearly in line with our own thinking. More will be said about that when my colleague Andy Kerr makes his statement to the Parliament this afternoon. I am glad to see the Parliament and the committees taking up the challenge of playing a fuller role in budget setting. We will take all such recommendations into account in the spending review that is now under way. We have promised a detailed account of how any such spending recommendations have been reflected when we publish the draft budget in the autumn. The committee has also correctly identified the need to reconsider the annual budget cycle if we are to make the process work. It is clear that the spending review is central to that financial process. However, the spending review happens only every other year and it therefore makes sense for our parliamentary budget process to take account of the difference between years with a review and years without a review, and, indeed, of the Parliament's four-year election cycle. I am happy to work further with the Finance Committee to decide how best to do that. Like all ministers, I am aware of the burden that the budget process places on all the committees and would therefore be happy to see a more limited process in non-spending review years, as the Finance Committee's report suggests. The committee has made some trenchant comments about the Executive's use of targets in the budget process, which have been referred to at considerable length this morning. As I said when I discussed that matter with the committee, we accept that there is a long way to go in that respect. However, I am not convinced that there is a wholly workable alternative. Members of the public, as well as the Parliament, have a right to know not only how we will spend their money, but what we will deliver for them. The Parliament and the public need to be able to judge whether we have delivered on our commitments and there needs to be some sort of target framework. When I met the committee, I expressed my disappointment that its research had suggested that there were no obvious models in other countries from which we could learn. However, that is not to say that we cannot do better. For example, I accept that we must do more to show how our targets link to budget allocations, which is a point that was made by Elaine Murray, among others. I agree with the committee that we should aim to reduce the number of the highest-level  targets that are set out in the forthcoming spending review publication. We are looking again at all our targets as part of the current spending review. As we are setting spending plans for a further two years, we also need to set targets for what we will deliver with that spending. I hope that those new targets will go further to meet the objectives that are set out by the committee, but that will not be the end of the process.

Mr Mather will appreciate the fact that we already have contacts, relationships and regular discussions on a range of issues relating to the relationship between the devolved Government and the United Kingdom Government. That will continue and those issues will be considered in due course. Members will note that, during the course of my speech, this is the third time that I have been keen to suggest that we have considered what the Finance Committee has said and that we will respond positively to that. I promise that we will undertake further work with the committee. I will briefly address some of the other issues that the Finance Committee raised in its stage 2 report last December. One of those was an assessment of past performance against targets. Such an assessment is now given in the annual evaluation report at the end of March. We said that we would work with the committee to produce more detailed information on the capital/resource split of our budget, and that can be found in the stage 1 report that we are discussing today. We also said that we would work with the committee on time-series data, and I take the points that Wendy Alexander made on that issue. I turn to what has been said this morning in relation to capital spending. We hope to be able to produce the detail of that in the autumn, as Des McNulty has asked us to do, and to produce the full statement that the committee has been looking for. In the context of transparency, Elaine Murray raised a serious issue about money that is spent by local authorities and health boards. I believe that that is a genuinely difficult issue. Elaine Murray rightly raised the issue of whether central Government should impose a series of what would  be seen as restrictions on the spending or reporting of that money on that tier of government, which sees its job as making local decisions for local service delivery. That is a subject that we wrestle with constantly. Mark Ballard raised the issue of sustainable development. I do not accept his contention that we have in any way downgraded sustainable development; rather, we have mainstreamed sustainable development. That is exactly the kind of holistic approach for which he argued when Fergus Ewing asked him about growth, and I believe that that is the best approach to take. Mr Sheridan raised the interesting idea of the Scottish Socialist Party attaching a financial tag to all its policy announcements. That would be a policy with which I could only heartily agree. Mr Mather raised several issues, most of which arose from the central tenet of the constitutional question. Although I understand the intellectual argument that was behind his approach, I fundamentally disagree with it. I disagree particularly with his suggestion that there is no speculate-to-accumulate approach in the Scottish economy. I ask him to look at the Scottish financial sector, where that is clearly not the case. Mr Brocklebank, who opened the debate for the Conservatives, argued—in what he called a preamble although, as Mr Morgan noted, it became more of a canter around the free-market echelons of Conservative right-wing thinking—that we should abolish targets. He then said that the targets were not tough enough and that he wanted different ones. He went on to say that the Conservatives wish to cut spending on public services, transport, health and education. He said that we were all thinking of the election—well, some of us cannot wait for the election. If that is the Tory manifesto, bring it on.

I echo the tribute that Andy Kerr paid to the Scottish Executive bill team who were involved in the passage of the bill. I also thank Bristow Muldoon and his colleagues on the Local Government and Transport Committee, who have been extremely helpful during the passage of the bill. Today is just the beginning; there is a lot to do before the next local government elections, not only on voter education, which many members have spoken about with considerable care this afternoon, but on the ward boundary review. I say to Tricia Marwick that I do not accept that there is a challenge to the integrity of the Local Government Boundary Commission. There is also much to do in relation to the remuneration committee, on training for returning officers and staff and in the scrutiny of secondary legislation. I hope that Parliament will today back a bill that is about making every vote count. The bill is about ensuring that Scotland's councils are more representative of the communities that they serve. It is about widening access and encouraging more people to consider standing and creating a fair system of remuneration for our colleagues in local government.

Mr Welsh knows, because we discussed the issue at the Local Government and Transport Committee, that once the committees such as the remuneration committee report we will bring forward those measures as quickly as we possibly can. I will deal with the arguments about combined elections and the charm of Ms Marwick's earlier argument when we were discussing the amendments. There are three arguments for retaining combined elections. First, it is simply more efficient to hold combined elections and it avoids voter fatigue. Secondly, although similar concerns were expressed about the introduction of the additional member system, voters adjusted to the system; it is wrong to underestimate voters' capacity to understand new systems. Thirdly, we want above all to make the process as simple as possible for the voter. The Scottish National Party amendment would increase confusion, increase costs, reduce turnout and drive a wedge between Parliament and councils. It was rank hypocrisy of the Conservatives to lecture Parliament on proportional voting and it was a bit much for Mr Mundell to lecture us about respect for the electorate. A number of questions come to mind: was there respect for the electorate when three million people were unemployed, or when the Conservatives introduced the poll tax? We accept no lectures from the Conservatives on respect for the electorate. The bill cannot change politicians and politics in Scotland today, but if we are serious about long-term renewal, we should be serious about how the bill will help. Just over a year into its second term of office, the Executive has driven forward its legislative programme. After tonight's vote we will be able to look back and say that an Executive of two parties and a Parliament of seven parties—and more—has this week and, indeed, last week, passed remarkable legislation, despite our being told by people outside Parliament that the bill would split us apart and fragment us. We should be proud of our achievements and of the benefits that they will bring in the future in Scotland. This is about determined, purposeful government that is serious about delivery, about helping to make Scotland a better place and about changing Scotland for good. I invite all members to support the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill, which is fair and puts their constituents first.

I acknowledge the spirit with which Helen Eadie expresses her views and I understand but do not agree with the passionate words that she uttered a moment ago. Similar amendments were discussed but not moved at stage 2 and I respectfully suggest that the arguments remain the same. There was extensive consultation on the subject even before the partnership agreement was concluded last May. The key measures in the bill have been subject to consultation during recent years and they have attracted considerable interest and debate since they were first aired in the McIntosh report. The responses to the most recent white paper showed a significant majority in favour of the introduction of the single transferable vote—960 responses were in favour whereas only 39 were not. Even if we discount the pro-STV postcard campaign, that still leaves a significant majority in favour of STV. There is no need for a referendum of the kind proposed in amendment 24 and I ask respectfully that Helen Eadie withdraws her amendment.

Amendment 12 is a straightforward amendment that removes a paragraph from the schedule to the bill. The bill as introduced requires that consultation takes place with "such associations of local authorities and such other persons" as ministers think appropriate. Our new approach, however, will ensure that representatives of local government are given an opportunity to be involved in determining the skills and expertise that are needed by members of the committee and that the principles of the public appointments process are not undermined. I move amendment 12.  Amendment 12 agreed to.

In response to the points raised by Mr Morgan and Mr Maxwell, I recognise that, as Mr Maxwell said, civil servants gave evidence that day. However, I point out that they said they would provide further information later, which they did. On 15 June, the Executive sent a letter that I am sure that Mr Maxwell and Mr Morgan have read. For the sake of brevity, I shall quote only one sentence from it. The letter says: "I can now confirm our view that the power in Section 9(1) could not be used to amend the primary legislation in  which the power appears, unless an express provision to that effect had been included." It is important to reflect on that statement and on the words spoken by the convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee a moment ago.  Amendment 13 agreed to.

Executive amendments 13 to 17 are straightforward technical amendments. The bill as introduced makes provision for the establishment of the Scottish local authorities remuneration committee, which will make recommendations about how councillors should be remunerated. Once the committee reports and details of the new system of remuneration are established, it will be necessary to put in place legislation to give effect to the new arrangements. That will involve the use of the regulation-making power under section 17(1). Section 22 provides that any such regulation-making power includes the power to make such incidental, supplemental, consequential, transitory or saving provision as ministers think necessary. The bill also contains a separate stand-alone power to make ancillary provision. We have considered how to make the consequential provisions that will be required following the introduction of a new system of allowances and remuneration for councillors. As we do not know at this stage what the  remuneration committee will recommend—and therefore what provision will be required—we cannot include an appropriate provision in the bill. However, the extent of the regulation-making power under section 17(1) is limited by section 22, which at present may not allow the power to be used to modify an enactment. We consider that the introduction of a new system of remuneration may require modification of primary legislation, which is why we propose an amendment to section 22 to clarify the matter. As a safeguard, where an order under section 21 or regulations under section 17(1) contain provisions that add to, replace or omit any part of the text of an act, the affirmative procedure will apply. Amendments 13 to 17 give effect to the policy that was agreed at stage 1. They will ensure that we can amend or repeal existing legislation on councillors' allowances if it is incompatible with the recommendations of the remuneration committee. The Subordinate Legislation Committee lodged amendments 21 to 23 because of concerns that one of the order-making powers in the bill could be used to modify the bill itself, once enacted. We have closely examined that point. Section 9(1) provides that ministers must make an order relating to the conduct of the election and that the order must cover certain key essentials of an STV system. Although such an order could be used to amend an existing act, section 22(3) provides that any such order would be subject to the affirmative procedure. The Subordinate Legislation Committee is concerned that an order under section 9(1) could be used to amend the bill once enacted and might even be used to abolish STV. Amendments 21 and 22—and amendment 26, in the name of Alasdair Morgan—are intended to prevent such an order from amending the bill, once enacted. I might be able to reassure the committee by explaining that, in our view, the section 9(1) power could not be used in that way. Our legal advice is very clear that subordinate legislation powers must be construed within the realms of the parent legislation and cannot be used to subvert the act in which they appear. As a result, it is simply not possible for section 9(1) to be used to abolish STV. Moreover, we must not forget the additional safeguard of parliamentary scrutiny, which offers us further reassurance that any attempt to abuse the section 9(1) power would be unsuccessful. For those reasons, we believe that amendments 21 to 23 are unnecessary, as strong safeguards already exist.

Mr Canavan raises a different matter that was dealt with earlier this afternoon. However, I will certainly come back to him on that point. We are concerned about the danger that amending the bill to include a restriction of the sort proposed by the Subordinate Legislation Committee could call into question the proper interpretation of all the other pieces of legislation in which similar order-making powers appear without a similar restriction. Moreover, there is a danger that, in consequence, people might argue that such powers are wider than the Parliament actually intended. Although I am sure that that is not the committee's intention, it would be one of the consequences of its amendments. Amendment 23 seeks to provide for a super-affirmative procedure to be adopted for orders made under section 9(1), and amendments 23A and 23B, in the name of Alasdair Morgan, seek to make adjustments to that procedure. Although I understand that additional preliminary requirements have been adopted for some acts, they reflect their particular subject matter. I should also point out that the super-affirmative procedure is not a generally recognised one. The rules governing the conduct of council elections are at present subject to annulment. As the affirmative procedure that we have adopted for orders under section 9(1) already offers Parliament greater scrutiny, we are not convinced that further enhancement of the affirmative procedure is necessary. As a result, I ask Sylvia Jackson not to move amendments 21 to 23 and Alasdair Morgan not to move amendments 23A, 23B and 26. I move amendment 13.

The clock is very unfair. I am aware that Mr Mundell and others commented at stages 1 and 2 on the level of rejected ballot papers at the Northern Ireland Assembly elections last year. The Electoral Commission's review found that there was no accurate record of the reasons why the papers were rejected. The commission considered that such a record was vital to ensure the transparency of the count and to identify any underlying problems. The commission recommended that up-to-date guidelines should be prepared on the processes to be adopted for rejecting ballot papers, and that staff should be trained in their use. It is right that these serious matters be raised. I acknowledge that big challenges lie ahead in  raising voter awareness of the new system. We acknowledge the danger that the introduction of STV might result in an increase in the number of rejected ballot papers. However, as we have discussed at the Local Government and Transport Committee, and in the Parliament, those difficulties are not insurmountable. I believe that we have the capacity and the resources to overcome them.

Once again, Mr Sheridan is siding with the Tories. I rather agreed with Mr Welsh. His arguments illustrated the core Tory belief on this issue and on the bill as a whole. It is curious that Mr Sheridan is once again backing Mr Mundell. We do not want ballot papers to be rejected because people are confused about how to vote. Therefore, we are committed to ensuring that people understand the basics of STV, understand how to mark their preferences on the ballot paper, and understand the broad principles of how the votes are counted. We have to consider a variety of ways of getting the message across. Some are simple and practical such as leaflets; others will involve new systems and the provision of advice and support in polling stations. The STV working group is now considering practical implementation issues such as voter education and publicity. We will address those issues when the group reports to ministers. We will also discuss voter awareness and related issues with returning officers and will work with them to minimise the number of rejected ballot papers. On amendment 8, we will have to specify what constitutes a rejected ballot paper, but that matter is best dealt with in secondary legislation. I invite David Mundell to withdraw amendment 6 and not to move amendment 8.

The Executive has had a consistent position on severance payments. We are proposing a one-off scheme, available only to those councillors who choose to stand down at the next election. Andrew Welsh's amendment 19 would mean that councillors who chose to stand but were not elected would be entitled to a severance payment. We simply do not think that that is the right approach. In fairness to Mr Mundell, the introduction of a new electoral system is, as he rightly recognised, a big change for everyone. We acknowledge that not all councillors will want to take part in the new arrangements. We respect that view, so the scheme will give councillors a choice: they can choose to take a severance payment or not, or they can choose to stand again for election under the new voting system. That will mean that all candidates go into the next election on an equal basis.

I accept that there are different arrangements for MSPs and MPs. We are dealing with the local government elections and the system that will elect local government in the future. The arrangements are just different. It is not right in principle that councillors who stand again should also be eligible for a severance payment if they are defeated. We also need to look at the bigger picture. In line with our widening-access agenda, we want to create opportunities for more people to consider standing for election. The average Scottish councillor is male, white and in his 50s. There is nothing wrong with that, but it is hardly representative.

Yes, we do want to change matters. We need to find ways of encouraging people from a range of different backgrounds to come forward, which I would have thought Mr Sheridan would want. That will work only if posts are available for them to fill. Amendment 19 would restrict the ability of parties to field new candidates. Amendment 19 is wrong in principle and would be detrimental to our widening-access agenda, so I ask members not to agree to it. With amendment 20, Mr Sheridan is trying to be all things to all councillors. I acknowledge that the scheme may appear harsh to some, but we are  not in the business of letting councillors benefit from a severance payment and then stand again. The practical effect of Tommy Sheridan's amendment 20 would be that a councillor could accept a severance payment and stand down at the next election. Then, a few months later, they could win a by-election and benefit from the new salary and pension arrangements that will be in place.

No. That would do nothing to encourage more people to stand, it would do nothing for the age profile of Scotland's councillors, and it would do nothing to address gender inequality, which are all matters that we want to address. Tommy Sheridan also needs to consider how constituents would view a scheme that allows councillors to accept a severance payment and then come back shortly afterwards with a new salary and pension. The reaction would be less than positive. Our severance scheme is fair and lets councillors choose what is right for them. Mr Sheridan's amendment 20 would amount to a golden handshake and a golden hello for some councillors, which we do not think is right. I invite Parliament to reject amendments 19 and 20.

I do not know whether I am allowed to do this, but I would like to welcome back among us my friend and colleague Ross Finnie. [ Applause. ] I knew how much he appreciated being back when I saw the look on his face at the group meeting last night. The debate has been good. I thank the convener of the European and External Relations Committee for that and for the motion that he lodged on behalf of the committee. I agree with  Richard Lochhead's general analysis of the momentous nature of enlargement and what it means for the European Union. Most—indeed, in fairness, all—members welcomed enlargement, but Mr MacAskill's speech was the most persuasive and perceptive on the matter. I agreed with practically every word that he said and hope that he can convince his colleagues to see sense on such issues and to progress such an approach, because the issues will be important over the coming year. Those of us who believe strongly in these matters will have to say such things loudly. Gordon Jackson also made a telling contribution in questioning this country's role. I bring to his attention the late Hugo Young's "This Blessed Plot: Britain and Europe from Churchill to Blair"—I am sure that he has read it—which has an interesting political and historical analysis of Britain's relationship with Europe. Gordon Jackson was absolutely right in what he said about the desire to avoid Europe becoming the political football that it has often been. He will also be aware that the Executive has brought forward a European strategy. Andy Kerr, of course, appeared before the committee to discuss and debate such issues with members. On what Margaret Ewing said about more European debates, I suspect that we will have more of them over the coming year simply because of the nature of the political times in this country. I slightly disagree with what she said about the press. In fairness, the Sunday Herald and others do a reasonable job in presenting the objective arguments about Europe. Perhaps what we on this side of the argument should worry about is the strength of the extreme right-wing press, which does no good at all and does not provide a balanced debate. I will deal briefly with Margo MacDonald's amendment, which I suggest may be unnecessary. I am not convinced that producing a formal impact assessment at one fixed point in time would be the best way in which to move forward, not least because Scottish ministers mainstream European activity across all our portfolios in the Scottish Executive. Indeed, every minister is responsible for a forward look at the incoming European Union presidency. That gives an immense focus for each minister and allows them to concentrate on these matters in his or her portfolio. Therefore, I suggest that one snapshot in time would simply be unnecessary. On the basis of that assurance, I hope that Margo MacDonald will consider withdrawing her amendment.

I hear what Margo MacDonald says, but I simply repeat that the process that she seeks is exactly what we are doing. Given the forward looks that we carry out, the fact that Andy Kerr and other ministers appear before the European and External Relations Committee to give evidence on all those issues and the fact that the Parliament engages with the ambassadors of the incoming European Union presidencies, the issues that Margo MacDonald highlighted are very much being taken forward.

I must make progress, but I will come to Mr Gallie in a minute. Keith Raffan, Richard Lochhead and others highlighted the need to raise awareness. The Executive very much takes the point that ministers can play a role in doing that through trade missions. In some senses, it would be highly desirable if we could be involved in more of those, but Keith Raffan will appreciate that the tightness of parliamentary business at the moment creates some limitations. I agree with Richard Lochhead's comments about the good will in Europe towards Scotland, especially in the accession countries. That is an eminently fair point. We will continue to try to build on that. As Mike Watson rightly pointed out, the European Union is about compromise and building alliances. That is why the Scottish Parliament and devolved Government support and invest in Scotland House and try to use all the advantages that that brings. That is also why Parliament and ministers engage actively with visiting Europeans and pursue a Scottish agenda across Europe. Because British Eurosceptics oppose all that compromise, they have no one with whom they can build alliances. No other major political party in Europe—except Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front—supports the Tory position that Europe should not have any constitution. The Tory policy represents withdrawal from the European Union through the back door. It was very polite of Mr Gallie to pre-release his speech, which I was able to read a couple of hours ago. That was very decent of him. Unfortunately, he is just wrong. For the avoidance of doubt, let me quote my own words from 25 September, which he was so keen to use: "I have no difficulty with holding a referendum on the treaty. However, this is not the place in which to debate such matters, as they will be decided at Westminster."— [ Official Report , 25 September 2003; c 2043.]  That is what I said. Perhaps Mr Gallie should accept that for what it is worth.

No, I want to continue my point. Mr Gallie mentioned Gorbachev, Reagan and Thatcher. Some of us remember Teresa Gorman, Bill Cash and Phil Gallie. Therefore, let us have no lectures from the Tories on that matter. Jamie McGrigor was just wrong on the growth and stability pact. As I am sure he is aware, the French and Germans have made their position on the growth and stability pact abundantly clear. How the pact is reformed and changed will have implications for the accession countries as they move forward. This is an important time for Europe as we move towards enlargement. It is a matter of astonishment to me that right-wing Conservatives and their media backers foam at the mouth at European co-operation on all fronts. When the UK is an engaged partner in Europe, our work in building economic cohesion and civilised, civic and political values is seen as a betrayal of national sovereignty. By contrast, signing up to an American foreign policy into which we have no direct input and that not only lacks popular support among the British electorate but serves an agenda that is at odds with Europe is hailed as an act of patriotism. The Scottish writer Iain Banks summed it up: "Last time I checked I did have an MEP to whom I could complain about any abuses within the European system, and who I could, along with my fellow voters, remove from office: I am yet to be informed of the identity of my Congressional representative."

I met Aberdeen City Council on 18 February 2004, when the council advised me of its funding concerns. I asked the council to write to the Executive to detail its concerns and we received a written submission yesterday, which is being considered.

Given his former life, Mr Adam is acutely aware of how the GAE system operates. He will be reassured to know that the submission that we received yesterday was on the point that he makes about children's services. He will also be interested to know that Executive officials and Aberdeen City Council officials will meet next week to discuss that matter and to consider issues such as the £2 million that has been allocated from the changing children's services fund over and above the council's grant settlement, and the £20.6 million above-inflation increase that the council received in 2003-04. The issues that must be addressed are serious, which is why officials will get down to them next week.

Two of my closest friends work for Médecins Sans Frontières. One of  them is a nurse who is involved in exactly the kind of programmes that Marlyn Glen talked eloquently about a moment or so ago. My admiration for my two friends knows no bounds. Sometimes we wonder what we do in this place, especially when we think of the friends who show such determination and ability in incredibly difficult circumstances. At the moment, my two friends work in Uganda, which is a country that Murdo Fraser mentioned a moment ago. I can only metaphorically take my hat off to people who have such dedication. I have thought carefully about the debate and have been highly influenced by it. A number of thoughts come to mind. I assume that I was not the only member who saw on television this morning a little bit of the intensely moving memorial service in Madrid. International events such as that bring home to us the importance of reflecting now and again on what is happening internationally. On that basis, Des McNulty deserves an immense amount of credit. As Donald Gorrie said, he deserves credit not only for his personal commitment to the issues that we are debating but for giving the other members who have spoken knowledgably this evening the opportunity to debate the issue and, I suspect, give vent to their frustrations. The person who has influenced me more than any other in this regard is the BBC journalist Fergal Keane. He reported from Rwanda at the time of its immense difficulties and, in January last year, he lectured in Edinburgh on the subject of "Justice, war crimes, genocide and the new world order". His book, "Rwanda, the Sorrow and the Pity", is an intensely powerful account of the genocide. I am sure that many members who are interested in and concerned about the subject have read it. Last night, I read a good review of the book, but I will not go into detail on it other than to say that, if members have not read the book, they should do so. It illustrates the power of an account by someone who observed those happenings closely and gives a perspective on the matters that we are discussing. As Des McNulty said, the debate is not just about the 1994 genocide in Rwanda but about progress on achieving the eight United Nations millennium development goals. His motion brings those issues to the Parliament's attention. I will deal first with the issues that concern Rwanda. As he said, commemorative events will take place to remember those terrible events. We must not forget what happened in 1994. Indeed, on the basis of this evening's discussions, I suspect that we will not forget them. This will be a time not only for the people of Rwanda to reflect but, as many colleagues have said, for the international  community to look at the role that it played in 1994. As colleagues also said, we must ensure that we do not let such events to happen again. As members said, since the events of 1994, the people of Rwanda have made progress. The country is fundamentally at peace, which must be progress in itself. That said, sometimes we talk too glibly about peace. Although the economy is stable and growing and the incidence of poverty is declining, I take the points that Dennis Canavan made in relation to statistics and facts. I also acknowledge Murdo Fraser's important observation about the tone, spirit and colour that are to be found among the people. However, the genocide has left a legacy that the people of Rwanda have to deal with on a day-to-day basis. The country has been left with very low human capacity resources at all levels throughout the country. Keith Raffan illustrated that that problem exists not only in Rwanda but in other countries. Many professionals and qualified people were killed or fled the country. I understand that there are only 274 qualified doctors in the entire country, which is one doctor for every 14,599 people. The United Kingdom Government has engaged with Rwanda for the past 10 years and is Rwanda's major bilateral development partner. Its engagement with the Government of Rwanda is based on a memorandum of understanding that was signed in January. The memorandum describes the Government of Rwanda's commitments to its people on poverty reduction, promoting regional stability, creating a democratic and inclusive state, and progressively securing human rights. It also confirms that the UK's engagement depends on political developments. The Government of Rwanda is also supporting survivors of the genocide through a number of organisations representing the widows and survivors. The Department for International Development's current budget for Rwanda is £37 million, and that will rise to £47 million next year. A new Department for International Development office opened in January, signalling the UK's long-term commitment to Rwanda. Many members commented on the UN's millennium development goals. They represent a shared global ambition—that is an important feature—to improve the well-being and life chances of the world's poorest citizens. For the first time there is international agreement on the importance of eliminating poverty and a consensus on a key set of goals. Those goals are highly ambitious and the targets that the international community has set itself will take a considerable amount of work and effort to achieve, but surely that is right. The whole international community has a responsibility for meeting those  goals, which recognise the need for everyone to take action if poverty is to be reduced. As members have mentioned, 190 developed and developing countries have signed up to those goals and associated targets. There is no one way to achieve those goals. The international community must work together to produce a fairer global trading system, to take action on HIV/AIDS and to resolve conflict.

That is an important point, which I am sure is being made—dare I say it—at Westminster, where direct contact can be made. I suspect that in the year of the American presidential election, nothing is fixed without an eye to that election. I imagine that the situation is developing.  I will mention briefly the WTO talks, which Mark Ballard, Murdo Fraser and Keith Raffan talked about, and the importance of reaching an agreement in the Doha round to create a fairer set of rules to govern international trade. That must produce real benefits for developing countries. Many members mentioned the overall development aid budget. I noticed that the subject was raised today at Prime Minister's question time in the House of Commons by, I think, a Labour member in a question to John Prescott, who was standing in for the Prime Minister. That was the entirely appropriate manner in which to pursue the matter. Clearly, considerable attention is being paid to the issue at this time.  Meeting closed at 18:03.

At the top of the piece of paper in front of me are the words "wind up". I will do my best not to do that over the next few minutes. This afternoon's debate has been laced with passion, and rightly so. These matters are important and it is important that they get a good  airing in the Parliament, both at the Local Government and Transport Committee, to which I pay tribute for the role that it has played so far, and here in the debating chamber. As Andy Kerr said, the key measures of the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill have attracted considerable interest and debate since they were first aired in the McIntosh report. Our consultation paper on the issues involved also encouraged debate and showed a majority in favour of change. The bill's measures are an important commitment under the partnership agreement. Our role in the devolved Administration, as well as in Parliament, is about making a difference and that is what the people of Scotland expect of us. However, outside the chamber, people feel that they cannot make a difference and the bill seeks to change that. We recognise that the introduction of the single transferable vote for council elections is not popular with everyone, but it is a key plank of our agenda to renew local democracy. STV is about making every vote count; it is about ensuring that Scotland's councils are more representative of the communities that they serve; and it is about widening access and encouraging more people to consider standing, because they will be able to see that they have more chance of being elected. I very much appreciate the words of such colleagues as Bristow Muldoon, Sarah Boyack and Maureen Macmillan about the thinking that has gone on in their party, the Labour Party. I would say to Maureen Macmillan that I am honestly always happy to see list MSPs in my constituency. That is a subject that I discuss a great deal with Labour colleagues in relation to their constituencies. Maureen Macmillan made a serious point about the Scottish Parliament list system through which we are elected, and it was a point well made. Michael McMahon made a brave speech and Bruce McFee got it very wrong in criticising him for it. Michael McMahon gave a proper speech—the same kind of speech that Robert Brown made for my party, giving an historical and political analysis of the issues that face this country today. Those two members deserve credit for that, and not the cynicism that we heard from Mr McFee. [ Laughter .] And then they all laugh—it is pathetic. Andrew Welsh made a serious speech and I agree with the point that he made at the outset about acknowledging the roles of councillors of all political persuasions and none, which others echoed.

Andy Kerr and I have not given that issue any thought, but we will reflect on the points that Mr Rumbles made and come back to him on them. Andrew Welsh made a point about secondary legislation. He will be aware from the evidence that the committee took that Ireland introduced the principle of STV in a seven-line bill, leaving all the detail to secondary legislation. We have concluded that that is not the right approach. We seek to strike a balance between primary and secondary legislation and we will reflect on the committee's thoughts on that.

We have blood on the walls every day in politics. I am surprised that a real red-meat eater such as Brian Monteith would be worried about that, as it is just the nature of all our political institutions, no matter how people are elected to them. Tricia Marwick, Sarah Boyack and others made points about decombining elections and about voter education. We will listen to what the committee says about that, although we noted from its report that it had not reached a view on the decombining issue. It is our intention to retain the current position of combined elections, but we will certainly reflect on the debate today and the arguments that will be made on the issue. There are important arguments against decombining, particularly in relation to voter fatigue and asking the voter to go to the polls twice in a short period of time, and there are practical issues that have to be dealt with. However, we do not believe that the practical difficulties of holding local government elections using STV on the same day as elections for the Parliament are insurmountable. We share the concerns that have been raised on voter education. We will ensure that people understand the mechanisms of voting under STV and the fact that there will be three ballot papers on which they will express their views and preferences in different ways. It is also important to acknowledge that when the Parliament was established similar concerns were raised about the system that elects us, but voters have responded by showing that they understand the system and know how to use their votes.

As I said a moment ago, we will reflect on that. At the moment, we do not wish to decombine elections, but we will listen carefully to the arguments that are made by the committee and representations that we receive from other areas.

The financial memorandum makes it clear that £1.5 million is allocated to voter education, which includes training and formal voter education. We will consider how to develop that in conjunction with local government, which obviously has an important role to play in that regard. Tricia Marwick made points about voter age, on which she will be aware that the Electoral Commission is consulting and is due to make a recommendation to the UK Government in early course, which we will consider carefully. Sarah Boyack made points about e-voting and other members raised concerns about e-counting, which we will consider carefully. She was right to say that we should not consider only e-voting and how people vote, as the issue is about politicians, policies, political parties and the arguments that determine why people vote, not just how they vote. Paul Martin made an extremely passionate speech, as I would expect him to do on this issue. He made a point about the financial consequences of the proposals. We will deal with that through the financial memorandum and we will work with local authorities in relation to the points that he made. As the McIntosh report said, having a three or four-member ward is undoubtedly the best compromise between proportionality and size of ward, with regard to the councillor-ward link. That is what we have sought to achieve. The direct comparisons with other countries are, in many ways, pointless. STV has been adapted to meet the needs of every country where it is used and I have no doubt that it was called a political fix in those countries as well. We are only doing what has happened in every other country that has introduced STV and has adapted its proposals. There were arguments on both sides of this issue in the chamber and those arguments will continue  to be made. It is our job to get the balance right, which we strongly believe that we have done. A number of members made points about the issue of contact with constituents. Those are serious points, which is why the STV working group will examine that issue in particular to try to ensure that some of the difficulties can be overcome. However, as we see in our work day in, day out, it is impossible to overcome all the difficulties. Nevertheless, we will seek to consult and make progress on that issue as well. A number of members, including Andrew Welsh, Bruce McFee and Bristow Muldoon, raised the issue of the ward boundary review. We will reflect on the committee's recommendation in relation to the criteria that should be set in primary legislation and the points that Bristow Muldoon made on that matter. I share the view of others that we should take no lectures from Mr Aitken or anyone else in the Conservative party on gerrymandering local government, which is what the Tories did when they were last in power. Giving every voter a choice of candidate is an important principle of a lively and dynamic democracy. The bill is not only about a proportional voting system, which has dominated our thoughts today; it is about encouraging more people to stand, especially women, people in full-time jobs who can manage council activities in combination with their work, self-employed people and so on, to ensure that councils more accurately represent all strands of local life. The Tories advocate a first-past-the-post system and then ask us to vote for amendments on proportionality. In his single transferable speech, which he used to attack my party—not that I mind that—David "two jobs" Mundell displayed a cynical disregard for the fact that there is no party advantage for either Labour or the Liberal Democrats in the proposals. That serious point was made by Robert Brown and Michael McMahon. The proposals are, in many ways, against Labour's short-term interests. That should demand some respect in this chamber, not the cynical attitude that we got from the Tories earlier on. This is a challenging bill. Some members find it difficult but creating a modern Scotland means introducing modern processes. The bill is about strengthening democracy, increasing fairness and providing choice. As a chamber elected using a PR system, we should vote in favour of a PR system for local government. We should vote in favour of renewing local democracy and strengthening our councils. I invite the Scottish Parliament to support the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill.

The Executive will watch with interest the development of policy in Ireland and, indeed, in Whitehall following the Chancellor of the Exchequer's announcement yesterday on the implementation of the Lyons review.

I am never clear whether Mr Ewing backs the Executive's decision to relocate Scottish Natural Heritage to Inverness. He should not suggest that the Irish example is directly comparable with Scotland because there are many differences between the approach in Scotland and the Irish model, as I understand it. The Irish system is not without its controversies. I understand that there is controversy over the fact  that relocation costs are not paid to staff, who are being asked to relocate to different parts of Ireland in a short time order. However, such costs are being met as part of the relocation of Scottish Natural Heritage. I wonder whether Fergus Ewing agrees with that Irish policy.

I appreciate Elaine Murray's concerns and I sympathise with her for having to go to Dublin with Fergus Ewing. She raises important issues. I have said that we will consider the Irish model with interest. We will develop, through discussion, any aspect from which we can learn. However, as I said, there are differences between the Irish model and the approach that we take in Scotland. That is not to say that Dumfries and Galloway, like every other part of Scotland, should not benefit from our policy.

I am afraid that I can give no such assurance. I am sure that Mr Pringle understands the Scottish Executive's relocation policy and knows about the role that the triggers play in ensuring that particular decisions are consistent with the overall policy. Decisions must be consistent with the need to balance the different needs of the economy, the different aspects of the trigger levels and the frequently raised issues about the Edinburgh economy and the economies around it.

rose—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. As with many other things, I seek to be held to that. In Scotland's new Parliament and evolving democratic system, it is important that the fundamental issues of local government finance are given the proper airing, considerable scrutiny and a lot of time in the chamber and the Parliament's committee rooms. In that sense, I welcome any opportunity to debate these matters in the chamber, because they are fundamental to many aspects of public service delivery. We will establish the review as part of the partnership agreement. It will be comprehensive and represent the most serious examination of local taxation that has ever been undertaken in Scotland.

I want to make some progress, if I may. All taxation alternatives, including the various forms of local income tax and reforms to the existing council tax system, will be compared against the agreed tests of fairness, economic impact, ability to pay and the cost of collection and implementation. As such considerations are important, I trust that members of parties and other organisations that are not formally represented in Parliament will take the opportunity to play their role in the review.

I have no difficulty at all in saying that I very much hope that Mr Ballard will submit his proposed bill to the inquiry. We have discussed previously in Parliament the Green's proposals for site value taxation, which are an important contribution to the debate. I hope that the Greens accept that their proposals will receive the same scrutiny in the inquiry as those of other parties. I very much agreed with Mr Monteith's remark about the totality of tax. I hope that he accepts that consideration of issues in their totality should also apply to business taxation. Not so long ago, an important international comparative study of business taxation illustrated clearly that Scotland's businesses are at the same level—if not at a better one—as many other competitor nations. I am sure that Mr Monteith would accept that, if he wants to make a point about the totality of taxation, he must do the same for business taxation.

I would not use such emotive terms, but I will come on to the important point that Mr Monteith has raised. I know that Mr Mundell is fighting a campaign for a Westminster seat, so I accept the political knock-about of what he said earlier. I also accept his love-in with Christine Grahame and how much they enjoy attacking the Liberal Democrats. All I can say about Christine Grahame is that she lost in 1999 and 2003 and will lose at the next election as well.

A loss is a loss. I know that it is tough to take and that it really hurts her. I hope that her phone is okay today. Mr Monteith encouraged me to look at the SNP's proposals on business tax. It was interesting that Mr Ewing did not raise that matter in his opening speech. I expected that he would, given that Mr Swinney made much of the issue at the weekend and has done so since. Irrespective of those issues, the important point is the one that Bristow Muldoon made, which is that the SNP tries to have it both ways. It cannot argue, on the one hand, that it will reduce business taxation in a particular local government area and, on the other hand, that that would have no effect on the delivery of public services. However, I suspect that the SNP will continue to try to argue both. I turn now to the SNP amendment. It is deeply curious that the SNP attacks others in relation to the council tax rebate system while it argues for a local income tax. It is not possible to argue that the council tax rebate system is an outrage and a disaster and that it is simply unacceptable to give in on the issue while arguing for a local income tax. The council tax rebate system exists because of the council tax. It is bizarre to argue for both sides of the coin at the same time, but that is what the SNP does. However, the SNP really gave the game away when Mr Ewing finished up with a constitutional point about the Scotland Act 1998. That is the game that the SNP is playing. Indeed, I noticed that Ms Cunningham said at the weekend that the debate was about powers being passed back from Westminster. The debate is not about that but about local determination of decisions. I ask members to support the Executive's amendment to that effect.

I take Mr Stevenson's point, but that is exactly why we support so strongly the work of the department in London—the one whose name I could not pronounce earlier—that is specifically taking forward the take-up campaign in relation to council tax benefit.

Why, if the issue has been so important in the past five years, did the 1999 SNP manifesto not mention local income tax?

I cannot be the only member here with a strong feeling of déjà vu, particularly after listening to Mr Ewing. We have debated local government finance time and again. It is rather like the line, "Everything has been said, but not everyone has said it." I feel the same sense today. We debated a similar motion last week during Mr Sheridan's time. The facts have not changed since then, but, heck, this is a chance to repeat them. Mr Ewing has made much of the matter. He has made some interesting contributions today, in particular his criticism of my party—indeed, of both partnership parties—over the matter of a review. Mr Ewing's motion says that the SNP wants a review, but we would not have known that from the last couple of minutes of his speech. He also demanded that we announce such things immediately. I note that Mr Ewing's motion contains the word "forthwith". If a minister stands up and says that something will be done "forthwith", then Mr Ewing and his colleagues howl and scream at us, saying "soon", "shortly" or "at any time in the near future".

I accept that the review was promised as part of the partnership agreement. Apparently, Mr Sheridan is going to give me a torrid time again today, so I look forward to that. We will do these things as we do them: in the appropriate way. [ Laughter. ] Well, there we go: members want to have it both ways. Just a couple of minutes ago, Mr Ewing was saying that we were rushing things; his motion says "forthwith"; then he does not want to rush them. Opposition members need to decide what they want.

I can absolutely, categorically confirm that the remit of the review is being considered, and that we will announce how the remit will be taken forward, and the precise nature of the remit, as quickly as we can after the Easter recess. I give that absolute commitment. It will be as soon after the Easter recess as possible.

Yes—it will be announced after the Easter recess. As with every aspect of government, it would always be nice to be able to stand up in Parliament and say that we have immediately solved all the problems and, in this case, that we have sorted out all the issues around that remit. There are a number of matters that are still under active discussion, but we will bring the remit forward in the appropriate time. The SNP is calling for the council tax to be abolished and replaced with a system based on ability to pay. The SNP would presumably accept that nobody likes paying tax, that there is no perfect taxation system and that anyone who suggests that there is one is living in cloud-cuckoo-land. I would dearly love, as any minister would, to have the perfect taxation system, which is why we are considering the matter through a review. It is important to reflect, as Mr Ewing did not, that people on low incomes already get help to pay their council tax. No system is perfect, but low-income households receive assistance. Around a quarter of households in Scotland—

I want to finish the point; I have given way a lot to the front-bench SNP members. Around a quarter of households in Scotland—more than 500,000 households—receive council tax benefit. More than a sixth of households—around 400,000 households—receive full council tax benefit and pay nothing whatever in council tax. Almost 40 per cent of pensioner households receive council tax benefit and we are working with the Department for Work and Pensions to ensure that more of those entitled to benefit apply. It is worrying that four in 10 pensioner households that are entitled to council tax benefit do not apply. That is why the WT, WD—excuse me—the DWP campaign to encourage more pensioners to take up what is theirs by right is appropriate. I hope that Christine Grahame and other colleagues throughout the chamber will encourage and be part of that WB—I cannot say it—DWP campaign.

The council tax benefit system that I have described has been conveniently forgotten in the examples that Mr Ewing has given today. Local government and the agencies that it supports through its funding system must have a mechanism to ensure that that funding continues. That is why a review is the right way to proceed. I commend the Executive's amendment to the Parliament. I move amendment S2M-1050.4, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert: "agrees that the forthcoming independent review of local government finance should be asked to conduct a thorough examination of a range of local taxation systems, including the various proposals for an income-based system and reforms to the present council tax system, and encourages all those who wish to make a meaningful contribution to the review to submit their proposals when called upon to do so."

rose—

rose—

Mr Sheridan should know the answer to that question because it has been answered earlier. We will announce the review when we are ready to do so.

No, Mr Sheridan should sit down and I will answer his question.

The Parliament is aware that we are discussing this with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. If Mr Sheridan does not like that and does not like local government, he should make that clear.

I will deal with the main arguments that have been presented today. I listened carefully to what Mr Sheridan said: he argued that we should scrap the council tax today. In the real world, we cannot scrap the council tax today; we could not scrap any taxation system that we have today. Local government and the agencies that it supports through its funding  system must have a mechanism to ensure that the funding continues. That is why a review is the right way in which to proceed and why the Executive has lodged the amendment in my name. It is wholly untrue that we can today make the changes that Tommy Sheridan suggests.

No. I am going to deal with the member's wider points. The SSP has had five debates on the Scottish service tax, but the main point that we have learned about it is that it has been rejected by five of the seven parties that are represented in Parliament. Curiously, Mr Sheridan has found a tax that is even more unpopular than he would have us believe the council tax is. He keeps telling us that his option is the favoured one, but the Local Government Committee in the previous session of Parliament was robust in its destruction of the Scottish service tax. It is important to consider closely what that committee said. I quote directly from that committee's report on the issue: "having examined in detail the proposals for a Scottish Service Tax, the Committee sees no merit in this option because the proposal as outlined in ... written evidence to the Committee would replace Scotland's only local tax with a new, national tax; leave councils in Scotland wholly dependent on central government for their funding; and would, in the Committee's view, destroy local accountability for councils' spending decisions." I rather suspect that that is why five out of the seven parties in the Parliament reject Mr Sheridan's proposals. Mr Sheridan has been comprehensively defeated every time he exposes his tax, but today he seeks to portray himself as a bringer of consensus to local government, which is a curious concept indeed. Unless Mr Sheridan has abandoned his proposals and converted to either a local income tax or the council tax, he is not part of any growing consensus about a solution. By telling people to run up long-term debts through not paying their council tax, he seeks only to add to the sum of human misery. Mr Ewing made an interesting speech, although I would find anything interesting after reading his profile in Holyrood magazine. I am sure that many colleagues would like to reflect on the content of that article. The SNP runs hot and cold on the subject. To be fair, the SNP's 1997 manifesto contained a proposal for a local income tax, but it had gone off the idea by 1999—the proposal was not in the party's manifesto in that year, although the party called for a wide-ranging review of local government finance. The SNP was completely silent on the subject in 2001.

Let me complete the litany, if I may. In 2003, the SNP was a little vague. The manifesto commitment was to an independent review of local government finance and a fairer system based on the ability to pay. It would be helpful if the SNP was clear on the issue. The SNP has now produced proposals, but Mr Ewing must be careful about how he articulates them. In the article in Holyrood he appeared to me, in supporting George W Bush on a number of issues, to be close to supporting a flat tax. Indeed, he nearly supports Mr Monteith on the reintroduction of the poll tax.

I am in my last minute and we have heard Mr Ewing already—we all enjoyed what he said, but we have heard it. Iain Smith, Christine May and others will have the chance to develop their proposals and alternatives and to discuss the structure of the council tax as part of the forthcoming review. The Executive is committed to establishing the review as part of the partnership agreement. The review will be extensive and will represent the most serious examination of local taxation ever undertaken in Scotland. All taxation alternatives will have to be compared against agreed tests of fairness, economic impact, ability to pay, collection and cost of implementation. Mr Sheridan has a short time today to decide whether to stick with his isolated position of banging on about a tax that has been rejected by five of the seven parties or to shift his ground to try to be part of our consensus.

I move amendment S2M-984.2, to leave out from "council tax" to end and insert: "forthcoming independent review of local government finance should be asked to conduct a thorough examination of a range of local taxation systems, including the various proposals for an income-based system and reforms to the present council tax system and encourages all those who wish to make meaningful contribution to the review to submit proposals when called upon to do so."

It is a delight to speak in a debate in which so many members have spoken with eloquence, care and passion about not only the Commonwealth but the world around us. Across the parties is a deep longing for a better world, which has been reflected in so much of what we have heard this evening. I join other colleagues in thanking Sylvia Jackson for introducing the subject for debate and I share her sentiments in welcoming the Commonwealth secretary-general and the high commissioners who are present with us this evening and who will be present later on as well, courtesy of our Presiding Officer. This is a useful occasion on which to consider the arguments surrounding the work of the Commonwealth and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the Scottish branch of which is here in Edinburgh. I had the pleasure of going on a CPA visit to Quebec a couple of years ago with Rhona Brankin, John Young and Mike Russell—Mike and John no longer grace this Parliament, but Rhona still does. The visit was a special occasion and was about learning not only from Quebec but from all the Canadian provinces about their ways of doing things, their governance and their style of relationships. That answers Richard Lochhead's last point to some extent, because just as he and Cathy Jamieson were in Australia a couple of years ago—I rather suspect that Cathy might have a slightly different perspective on that visit compared to Richard Lochhead's—it is important that our parliamentarians take opportunities to learn from colleagues throughout the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth is a symbol of positive, constructive and peaceful international interaction. It is founded on the principles of liberty, democracy, international peace, the rule of law and equal rights for all. This nation's contribution to the Commonwealth in the past in building communities and in development is undeniable. Scotland is a land of pioneers; history records the role of Scottish explorers, engineers, doctors and missionaries in the countries of the Commonwealth. Sir David Steel gave me a particularly good example of that missionary work yesterday. He argued that the Scottish influence  on the Commonwealth is that there was no conscious separation of the spiritual from the temporal in its development. Sir David also recalled this splendid tale. In the then Rhodesia, the development of a strong Christian consciousness of the worth and dignity of the individual was fostered by the spread of education. Amid some tension at a school, a list of grievances was presented to the principal by one of the senior boys. He paused at the end of his speech, bowed and concluded by saying to the principal: "Sir, we thought it right and proper that this matter should be brought before you in this fashion, so that government of the students, by the students and for the students shall not perish from this mission station." In passing, I take Mrs Ewing's point about modern-day Zimbabwe, as we all do. Scotland has many growing links and contacts with countries in the Commonwealth. Last year, Scotland hosted the 15 th conference of Commonwealth education ministers—as my colleague Peter Peacock, the Minister for Education and Young People, pointed out to me a moment or so ago. I understand that Don McKinnon was present at the conference, which had the largest turnout of any such conference to date and was recorded by all as a considerable success. Scotland also held the first ever education youth summit of the Commonwealth. Young people from every country, overseas territory and Crown dependency in the Commonwealth participated in discussions on subjects that covered a substantial agenda for the future. Their conclusions and recommendations were part of the final Edinburgh communiqué. In that way, their impact on education across the Commonwealth will be both valuable and far reaching. Learning and the pursuit of knowledge—issues that Sylvia Jackson very properly raised—are Scottish traits and are a Scottish theme in the development of the Commonwealth that continues to this day. For the past two years, Kelvin School in Glasgow has enjoyed links with a school in Nigeria that teaches deaf-blind children. Kelvin School has been involved in sending Braille material and equipment to Nigeria. Earlier this year, two teachers from Nigeria visited Kelvin School as part of exchange programmes. Recently there was a study visit to Nova Scotia involving teachers from throughout Scotland. The visit was based on the cultural and heritage links between the two areas, including Gaelic language teaching. Anderson High School in my constituency is part of the global classroom project and has links with two South African schools. One, Langa High School, is in the heart of Cape Town's  oldest township community. The other is the South Peninsula High School. Anderson High School students were at Langa High School in February—just a month or so ago. At the first conference, a Langa student said: "We live daily with the consequences of a past your country left us with." A Shetland student responded: "We have to understand each other and this certainly is helping us to do that." Anderson High School is an island school with an international outlook. That is an objective that all our schools should aspire to meet. Scottish universities are reaching out to provide the high-quality education that they can offer to students around the world. The University of Dundee's faculty of education and social work and the Department of Education are building capacity at the Botswana College of Distance and Open Learning. The team is training staff to deliver distance learning to rural Botswana from six outreach centres and is delivering staff development to strengthen basic education and training in Botswana. The issue of the role of the Scottish Executive has been raised. Government can play a more direct role. Following a proposal made by the Lord Advocate at last April's Commonwealth law ministers conference, the Scottish Executive is offering a series of placement opportunities for lawyers from other Commonwealth countries in the office of the Scottish parliamentary counsel. The trawl, which was co-ordinated by the Commonwealth Secretariat, resulted in a positive response from the countries concerned. A senior state attorney from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in Uganda will take up the first placement in September this year. As a global citizen, Scotland has a role in ensuring that the knowledge that we are privileged to have is transferred as widely as possible. Teaching is fundamental to ensuring that that knowledge transfer takes place.  In closing this important debate for our young, evolving, new Parliament and in illustrating how important Commonwealth Day is, I can do no better than to quote Jordan Smith, a young, visually impaired lad from Anderson High School in my constituency. When visiting Cape Town High School earlier this year, he said: "I'm never going to see the world ... but I want to know as much about it as I can."  Meeting closed at 17:54.

In March 2003, the Executive identified approximately 80 posts for relocation from Edinburgh to rural Scotland under the small units initiative. Since then, progress has been made in identifying locations for those posts.

Presiding Officer, the Parliament's Gaelic service might be a matter for you, rather than for me, but I am sure that you heard Mr Farquhar Munro's comments on the subject. I agree with the member's initial point about the benefits that the small units initiative can bring to rural, island and peripheral areas of Scotland and their local economies. Three, four or five jobs in such localities can make a significant difference.

Mr Mather will know that the Scottish Executive has recently announced further work on refining and proceeding with the relocation policy. The Finance Committee on  which the member serves is also conducting an inquiry, so there is a considerable focus on this area of policy. The enabling technology that the member mentioned is one of the central and considerable benefits that can be brought to bear, as it can assist in the process of the relocations that we want to happen.

We will take the decision as quickly as we can, consistent with good decision making. I am sure that my colleague Allan Wilson will have considered carefully Mr Lyon's points about Tiree.

I have a good deal of sympathy with Mr Canavan's point about school term times—as would any of us who have children and the responsibility of sorting out their holidays. I am happy to inform Dennis Canavan that the revised dates for the summer recess are indeed designed to accommodate the migration to the new Holyrood site over the summer. The suggestion has been considered by the bureau  over the past two weeks; this week, it was agreed that the bureau would seek Parliament's consent to change the previously agreed dates. We acknowledge the difficulties that the change in dates may cause some members, but we were persuaded that a critical period for the migration would come towards the end of the summer. I stress that no additional time is proposed for what might be construed as holidays. The motion will simply move the previously agreed dates back by one week. It might be worth mentioning that the date in the motion for the beginning of the summer recess takes account of school holidays throughout Scotland—including even Shetland.

I take the point, Presiding Officer. I begin by thanking my officials, Richard Dennis and Richard Wilkins, who put in a huge amount of work on this side of the equation in respect of the Budget (Scotland) Bill. I thank Des McNulty and all his colleagues on the Finance Committee for the constructive assistance that they brought to the process. I also thank my colleague Peter Peacock for pointing out that whatever I say this afternoon will get no coverage whatsoever. With that assurance, I might depart from my written text. I want to pick up on the points that were made this afternoon about the Budget (Scotland) Bill. To Elaine Murray and Stewart Stevenson—and to Alasdair Morgan in relation to time-series data—I reiterate what I said in my earlier remarks and in front of the Finance Committee on a number of occasions. We will work strongly on that area, as we will on the clarity of the annual expenditure  report and the introduction of a form of reporting that we hope will be more easily read and understood. That is an important piece of work. I say to Stewart Stevenson in particular that the subject of the prisons estate was raised at the Finance Committee on Tuesday. He might wish to reflect on the Official Report of that meeting. Mr Ted Brocklebank has returned to the chamber. He made an allegation about the GDP figures that were announced yesterday; I think that the word he used was "hogwash". I hope that he can substantiate that allegation in relation to the points that he raised.

In a minute. One could quote from any number of publications, but I will quote from The Herald . Does Mr Brocklebank not accept that "Scotland beat the UK quarterly growth rate in 10 of the last 23 quarters", or that "The Scottish economy also punched above its weight in 16 of the last 23 quarters, producing more goods and services than would be expected for a country of its size"? The figures are in line with accepted European Union and UK standards. If Mr Brocklebank does not accept them, he should say very clearly why he does not.

I reiterate my point. I am sure that Mr Brocklebank would like to put that on the record. He can write to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning or, indeed, to any other minister and state the exact nature of his allegation. Brian Adam made a point about local authority funding. He will accept that local authority funding in the coming year will rise by 6.5 per cent. Indeed, we debated the subject last week. I do not accept the argument that there is nothing that the Parliament can do to scrutinise local authority spending. I am sure that Brian Adam would not accept that argument either, given that he sat on the Finance Committee for some time. There is nothing to stop any parliamentary committee, particularly the subject-based committees and the Finance Committee, from looking at local authority funding. I congratulate Chancellor Ballard on the honesty of his position on renationalising all the public  utilities. I give him 10 out of 10 for honesty. I hope, however, that he and his party accept that the fact that there is a Cabinet sub-committee on sustainable Scotland, which is chaired by the First Minister, illustrates the seriousness with which the Administration takes the subject and its commitment to strategic environmental assessment.

No. I have answered the point and I want to deal with other points that were raised in the debate. I agree absolutely with what Des McNulty said in his response to John Swinburne's intervention on older people in our communities. I do not accept Mr Swinburne's constant protestations that the Administration does nothing for older people. The one issue that I would add to Des McNulty's list is the central heating investment. I believe that that is an important theme of the Scottish Executive expenditure and one that is widely welcomed in many of our communities throughout Scotland. I do not accept what Mr Mather said in his speech. I hope that I quote him accurately when I say that he talked about "shortcomings and omissions" in reporting procedures. Given that Mr Mather has sat on the Finance Committee since he entered the Parliament, I hope that he can clarify that. It is helpful for us to be precise about the language that we use. In my view, Mr Mather was very loose in his usage of language. He also talked about celebrating "spending for spending's sake". He should try that line on Mr MacAskill or on some of his other colleagues on the SNP benches. Mr Monteith and Mr Fraser made points about the council tax. Uncharacteristically, Mr Fraser missed out Scottish Borders Council. He did not mention that council's 5.4 per cent increase when he talked about Tory influence—I wonder why. The Conservatives do not appear to want to accept that the Administration has frozen business rates and introduced an increase in water rates that is below the rate of the retail price index and a new low-user water tariff for 20 per cent of Scottish firms. I presume that those are all things that the Conservatives—given the Reaganomic trickle-down nature of their modern approach under Mr Howard—would oppose. Of course, the Conservatives have a clear policy to cut Scottish Enterprise, they would cut transport and they would cut higher education. However, they would introduce something—health vouchers. I am sure that that would be tremendously welcomed by many people. The only point on which I agree with Mr Fraser is the need to avoid complacency, which is exactly what the Deputy First Minister did yesterday when  he responded to the GDP figures. We accept that point. At today's First Minister's question time, the SNP leader quoted local authority council tax rates, yet funding the SNP's spending commitments would increase the requirement for taxation. What will be cut? Will there be cuts in other areas of the Scottish Executive budget? Some SNP members are nodding away furiously. The SNP never identifies the cuts. Does Mr Mather speak for the SNP on taxation, or is it Mr MacAskill? Is it cuts or is it spending? We never get a straight answer to that question. Does the SNP want Irish taxation levels or Finnish spending levels? We deserve an answer. Which one will it be—free by 93, more by 2004 or heaven by 2007? This Administration's financial plans for 2004-05 are responsible and will deliver an ambitious programme. The budget delivers value for money for Scotland and helps to ensure that the people's money is allocated to the people's priorities. This partnership Government is investing in the long term, investing to grow business and investing for the future of Scotland. I commend the Budget Bill to Parliament.

Mr Mather talks about accessibility. Does he not accept that, since devolution, ministers with responsibility for finance have purposely, as part of the budget process,  taken the budget to all the airts and pairts of Scotland? That opening up of the budget process has allowed real people—dare I say that?—to be involved in the process and has now been built into our budget deliberations.

Today, Parliament reaches the end of a long road that started right back in September 2002 when the Minister for Finance and Public Services announced in the chamber the results of the previous spending review. That was the first time that we discussed outline spending plans for 2004-05 in the Parliament. More detailed consideration started last September, with the publication of the draft budget for next year. All the subject committees discussed the plans relevant to their interests through the autumn. Parliament then debated the Finance Committee's stage 2 report before Christmas. Last month, we debated stage 1 of the bill and I was disappointed that I missed the debate due to snow in Shetland. Some colleagues have been fortunate enough to discuss the bill further with me at stage 2 in the Finance Committee, under Mr McNulty's convenership, earlier this week. I can understand it if members greet the end of the process with relief. However, I must tell them that, within the Executive, work has begun on the next spending review. The process for the 2005 Budget Bill will start as early as next month with the publication of the new-look annual expenditure report. Having reached the end of one long road, we must start off down another. None of that is to play down the importance of the budget cycle. During the stage 1 debate, members of all parties underlined the fact that it is perhaps the most important part of parliamentary business. The key to the devolution settlement is the Parliament's power to determine how to spend our resources in line with our priorities. However, the importance lies with the whole budget process throughout the year, not just with today's debate, which brings it to a formal conclusion. Andy Kerr's opening speech in the stage 1 debate indicated the major changes to the plans in the bill compared with those that the committees considered when examining the draft budget. The most significant of those arise from the introduction of the prudential regime and an accounting adjustment to change the way we reflect pension liabilities. I certainly recognise  Stewart Stevenson's considerable knowledge of financial reporting standard 17—a tome with which not all are as familiar as is he. The work on the next spending review that is already under way within the Executive will come to a head in September, when we announce spending plans for 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08. The great strength of our budget process is that the Parliament and the committees have such a central part to play in it. Given that the annual budget process largely seeks parliamentary approval for plans agreed in the spending review, it is important that the Parliament and the committees are taken into account as much in the spending review as in the budget process itself.

I am sure that Mr Adam has heard the First Minister, the Deputy First Minister and a number of other ministers refer to the spending review and what the process that is under way south of the border might mean for Scotland. I certainly assure him that the higher education sector, which is crucial to the future of the Scottish economy and Scotland in general, is very much central to that process and that those matters will most certainly be considered over the coming months. We have been discussing with the Finance Committee changes to the budget process to make sure that there is parliamentary approval for the plans. However, the current process is not perfect. I am most grateful to the Finance Committee for keeping ministers on their toes and for the constructive way in which members continue to suggest further improvements. I am also grateful to the committee for the recognition in its stage 2 report that the Executive has a good track record in responding positively to its recommendations. I hope that, in the coming months, we will be able to offer the committee and the Parliament news of further progress on both capital spending and 10-year trend data, which are subjects that are particularly dear to committee members such as Wendy Alexander and Jim Mather. I look forward to discussing those matters again. Improving the budget process needs commitment not only from the Executive but from the Parliament and the committees. I hope that each of the committees will take the spending  review fully into account during stage 1 of the budget process, which will happen after Easter. I look forward to hearing the results of their deliberations in the Finance Committee's stage 1 debate in June. Members will know that in the partnership agreement we have already set out a programme for the lifetime of this Parliament. That will be central to determining the spending proposals for the next three years that we will bring forward in September. Our priorities will remain delivering excellent public services; supporting stronger, safer communities; developing a confident, democratic Scotland; and, above all, growing Scotland's economy. In that light, I will set out some of the many initiatives that we are taking to help the growth of the Scottish economy. This Government is addressing fundamentals such as lifelong learning, skills, innovation and entrepreneurship. We will invest in Scotland's physical and electronic infrastructure, because those components of economic viability must be fit for the 21 st century. The Government will work with Scottish businesses large and small, from start-up to world leader, from Lerwick to East Kilbride to ensure that our focus never wavers from assisting business and company growth. That approach is paying off. The most recent business surveys from the Royal Bank of Scotland, Lloyds TSB and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce for the fourth quarter of 2003 all confirm encouraging increases in business activity. Moreover, the Ernst and Young ITEM Club most recently concluded that manufacturing growth in the UK will match growth in gross domestic product for the first time in a decade. A specific example of how we are taking this matter forward is the new innovation-related initiative that Jim Wallace recently announced. The initiative is designed to encourage many more small and medium-sized enterprises to link up with universities and other institutions to help them to innovate. Another example is the Executive's support for the new intermediary technology institutes. Backed by a long-term Government commitment of up to £450 million over the next 10 years, all three ITIs—covering energy, life sciences and technical media—are now up and running. As members will see, that commitment is over a considerable period of time and is an important illustration of this Administration's concentration on the long term and the importance of such an approach to investment. The Budget (Scotland) Bill takes forward our work on ensuring that the infrastructure to support economic growth is fully in place. Of course, transport is central to growing the Scottish  economy and our annual spending in that area will rise to more than £1 billion a year by 2005-06. Our investment in broadband and digital technology is vital to increasing economic productivity. The Government's target of 70 per cent broadband coverage—principally ADSL—for Scotland has already been met. That target was met well ahead of schedule.

I would be happy to look into that, if what Mr Stevenson suggests proves to be the case. The figures illustrate that the work that the Executive is doing on broadband with the private sector is making considerable progress. We will continue to work in that area with what I believe is considerable success. In speaking to the motion, I have demonstrated that growing the Scottish economy is central to the bill in front of us. I commend the Budget (Scotland) Bill to the chamber. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The policy of the Scottish Executive is that when staff are travelling on official business the most efficient and economic means of travel available must be used.

I am afraid that Mr Ballance is just wrong. The Executive travels in the most sustainable manner possible. He may be interested to know that during 2002-03, 40,519 rail journeys were undertaken, compared with 10,166 journeys by air within the United Kingdom. By my maths, that is a pretty sustainable level—eight out of 10 journeys are undertaken by rail. I hope that the member accepts that the Executive maintains its own travel plan: it has set up a green travel website, bicycle user and car-sharing forums and taxi-sharing schemes and has taken other practical measures to encourage and simplify the use of sustainable transport. I encourage the member to note the exemplary behaviour of my colleague Mr Kerr, who this week travelled to London on ministerial business by train, a form of travel that he commends to all of us—although thankfully not to me when I am going home.

I am sure that Mr Brown will be familiar with the Executive's partnership commitment on green transport plans, which involves the production of packages specific to individual sites that aim to promote more sustainable transport and travel behaviour. We aim to increase the number of green transport plans that are developed and implemented in Scotland by local authorities, national health service boards and businesses and other organisations.

The Executive has no plans to remove tolls from the Erskine bridge, but the matter will be considered as part of the review of existing bridge tolls in Scotland.

Jackie Baillie will be familiar with the terms of the partnership agreement, which states: "We will improve access for our ... communities by ... Reviewing existing bridge tolls in Scotland". It is important that, in the review that will shortly be under way, we consider the issues that Jackie Baillie raises and all the issues that will be raised in relation both to the specific issues of bridges and to the Executive's plans for the new transport authority and regional partnerships. It is too early to determine when that review will be finished, but the Minister for Transport will make an announcement—

—in due course.

Mr McNulty raises a number of important issues that I will be happy to bring to the attention of my officials and of the Minister for Transport. Such issues and the detailed  socioeconomic arguments that he has put forward will certainly be part of the review, when it takes place.

In many ways, this  debate has been utterly extraordinary. The fact is that the level of resources that are available to Scottish local authorities has never been higher. However, anyone listening to the speeches from the Opposition benches would never have known that. Some £2.5 billion more will go into local government coffers in 2004-05 than was the case in 1995-96. The Scottish Executive and the members on the partnership benches are proud of that extra investment in our local government services and local authorities. I find it extraordinary that so much whingeing has come from Opposition benches, given that we have introduced three-year budgeting and real increases in resources and have worked constructively with COSLA for the right length of time to agree where the burdens are and where the extra resources need to be allocated. To attack what we have done in that context is, as I said, extraordinary.

In a moment. It says a lot about the Opposition—and this was epitomised by Mr Adam's speech—that no Opposition member spoke about the level of resources that are available to local authorities, the allocations that have been made to individual councils or the way in which local government and central Government work together; on the whole, they chose instead to talk about the council tax. However, when Mr Kerr asked Mr Ewing—and, by extension, the other members of the SNP front bench—what his position was in terms of an alternative policy rather than a principle, there was no answer. I am advised that the SNP manifesto for the 2003 election said, of the subject that Mr Ewing described as the burning issue, that the SNP would "replace the council tax with a fairer system based on the ability to pay". There is a big difference between a broad principle and a policy, especially when the SNP has made such an important point of the council tax during the past year and in this debate. The fact is that the level of resources that are available to Scottish local authorities has never been higher. All councils have been given a real-terms increase in their revenue grant allocation in 2004-05 and all new initiatives—I stress this point, as many members touched on it—have been fully funded. I hope that Mr Adam will accept that.

Where burdens have been agreed with COSLA, we have fully funded those commitments. Mr Adam should accept that point or not, as the case may be.

As Mr Rumbles knows, there have been a number of reviews on distribution. COSLA and the Scottish Executive are actively considering all those matters in relation to the forthcoming review of local government finance. The order will support a better quality of life for people throughout Scotland, no matter whether they live on the mainland or on the islands or in urban or rural areas. I want to pick up some specific points that members have raised in the debate. For example, on Sylvia Jackson's point about economies of scale, I assure her that COSLA is actively considering the issue. We accept that it is important and will do further work on it. Michael McMahon gave a practical illustration of what the moneys can do. His speech was a welcome change from many of the speeches from Opposition members, who had nothing to say about the real differences that the resources are making for local government and—more important—for citizens across Scotland. Given Andrew Welsh's experience at Westminster, when he sat through many years of Tory cuts, I would have expected him to acknowledge the changes that the Executive has made, such as moving from a one-year to a three-year settlement and working very much in the long term. The only point that he might wish to consider further is his party's opposition to PPP, which is one of the mechanisms that allows for long-term investment in, for example, schools.

Margaret Curran has direct ministerial responsibility for that matter. However, we will ensure that Mr Welsh receives a reply to his question.  Mr Brocklebank raised the issue of ring fencing. I trust that he accepts that 8.5 per cent of the total revenue support grant is accorded to ring fencing. I should also point out that 75 per cent of that figure is for the police, which I thought was a matter in which his party usually took some interest. Moreover, I could not quite square Mr Brocklebank's speech with the points that were made by Mary Scanlon, who seemed to be arguing for more centralisation and ring fencing as far as burdens are concerned.

No. Mary Scanlon should let me answer her point. After all, I am trying to answer the points that members have raised in the debate. I hope that Mary Scanlon has taken up with the appropriate minister the detailed cases that she highlighted in her speech, because I am sure that she will receive a full reply. However, I repeat that the burdens on local government in relation to some of the issues that she raised are subject to an agreement with COSLA. I hope that she will examine that funding issue. I also remind Mary Scanlon and others on the Conservative benches—

No. I remind them that it was the Tories in the Highlands who ensured that the revenue budget for road maintenance—which was another issue that Mr Brocklebank raised—was cut from £28 million to £14 million in the past year. As a result, we will not take too many lectures from those members on the subject of those particular burdens.

I was just about to mention the party in question, because it is important that I deal with Mr Monteith's amendment. As I take his point that he has at least lodged an amendment to the motion, I should set out the reasons why the Executive does not accept it. Given the figures that the Conservatives bandy about, we should acknowledge that—as Iain Smith pointed out—the average council tax was £556 when it was introduced in Scotland by the Conservatives. By the time that they left national office four years later—a day that many of us still celebrate—the tax had increased by more than 40  per cent. In contrast, because the Scottish Executive has provided more support to local government, the tax has increased by only 18.9 per cent over the comparable period. That illustrates a very clear difference between the Executive and the Conservatives.

No, I am just about to conclude. The other reason why Mr Monteith's amendment should not command any support today is the inconsistency of his position. In the issue strategy paper that he brought out last summer—a document that we all hold on to with great interest—he declared that announcing additional funding for local authorities, instead of allocating money to cut council tax, is a high-risk strategy. He said: "It is my view that offering piecemeal relief to the council tax will not be politically beneficial to us." Quite what he is on about today is beyond me. The Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2004 asks Parliament to confirm the revenue grant support for each council for the coming year. It will enable councils to confirm their budgets and council tax figures. I believe that the allocations in the order should allow councils to stick at, or below, the indicative council tax increases that they have already published. The order will deliver a fair deal to council tax payers and I commend it to the Parliament.

It is important to identify what some would regard as a cynical exercise by Opposition members, who suggest that achieving technical change and looking closely at the technical regulations are the same as achieving a renegotiation of the entire package. Mr Lochhead should think carefully about the language that he uses, but I suspect that he does not do that. To suggest that the entire package should be renegotiated, rather than concentrate on the specific issues of the white-fish industry is to do a disservice to the business and economic prosperity of the entire fishing industry in Scotland. This devolved Government is determined to fight for both the short-term and the long-term future of  fishing. It is in Scotland's economic interests to have a financially viable fishing industry. As Allan Wilson said, Parliament should not accept the contention that the entire Scottish fishing industry wants the outcome of the December fisheries council to be completely renegotiated. I would not want to tell the pelagic and prawn sectors that we have no agreement on quotas for 2004. I suspect that if Mr Swinney listened to Mr Stevenson's constituents, who are pelagic skippers, they would tell him the same thing. Ministers understand that the technical regulations as they stand create difficulties in some areas and will cause some white-fish boats financial problems, and that the increase in the haddock quota will be difficult for some parts of the fleet to access, but the devolved Government is addressing those issues in the current talks between the EU and Norway, as Mr Wilson said. Those talks continue as we speak. Members made some technical points. Ted Brocklebank, Jamie McGrigor and George Lyon talked about the area west of 4° west and the tamper-proof satellite system. Allan Wilson is happy to examine closely those issues, in particular George Lyon's point about the availability of gear. Richard Lochhead intervened on Robin Harper to talk about juvenile haddock and the fishing of areas of the sea that have been known traditionally as spawning areas. That argument is being used in relation to the geographical boundaries of the cod-sensitive area and the point is significant.

I want to make progress on the technical points. In discussions and before and during the council, Ross Finnie pressed for an increase for west-coast prawns, and Allan Wilson was part of those discussions. I do not accept Mr Ewing's attack on Ross Finnie's integrity on that point. Mr Ewing should raise his game when talking about how hard Ross Finnie fights for west-coast fishermen and others. Alasdair Morrison was right about that. Alasdair Morrison was also right to say that it is important for science to underpin decisions about that fishery. The Executive will seek to ensure that.

Mr Brocklebank can go on and on about that matter, but I will deal with the issues that I was asked in the debate to address. I am happy to debate those other issues with him any time.  Some problems that relate to the technical measures are likely to remain and ministers will address those issues in the assessment of the socioeconomic impact on ports, fishing communities and fishermen. I give that assurance to George Lyon, Maureen Macmillan, Robin Harper and other members. I say to Mr Swinney that fishermen do not want to break the law. They want the unintended consequences—those were Iain Smith's words—to be dealt with. From speaking regularly—not just on one Friday, but every week—to fishermen in my constituency, I know that their arguments are based not on politics, but on finance and business viability. The Administration understands those arguments, which apply as much to the processing and shore-side sectors as they do to fishermen and the fish-catching sector. All fishermen and fishing communities—not just those in Shetland—understand the difference between political posturing and the reality of business decision making. They want to have a viable fishing business, not to be used as a political football. Last Saturday in Lerwick, I was asked whether the Government wants a fishing industry. Yes was my answer, and yes is the answer of the entire Administration. We will fight for a healthy, financially viable white-fish sector in every port from Shetland to Ayrshire on the west and Eyemouth on the east. As Allan Wilson said, we want an industry in which Scotland's fishermen can genuinely access the increased quota. That is our commitment, on which we will not back down.

The Scottish Executive meets ScotRail regularly to discuss a wide range of issues. Officials last met ScotRail on 14 January.

We are disappointed to hear of the problems that Mr Barrie's constituents and other rail travellers are encountering. Investment was made in 22 new trains on key Scottish rail routes, which include the Fife circle, primarily to tackle overcrowding. That investment was a direct response to rail passengers' requirements. I cannot give Mr Barrie today the information that he seeks about that commitment, but I will ensure that officials respond to him as quickly as possible.

The fact that Mr MacAskill is imploring me to make representations to Network Rail on a United Kingdom basis is interesting. We will certainly consider the matter. We always seek to ensure that a range of public service options is available for rail passengers travelling to and from rail stations and we will continue to do so.

There are a couple of strands to what Mrs Eadie says, including about relocation. I would be happy to talk to Lewis Macdonald about the points that she has raised. On rail services, I can only repeat what I said to Mr Barrie about the investment that has been made and our intention to ensure that the commitments that have been made by ScotRail are adhered to as quickly as possible.

The Executive is aware of the problems that people with disabilities will face as a result of the closure of Waverley station this weekend, as disabled access is possible only from platform 1 at Haymarket. We have sought assurances from Network Rail that all that can be done to ease the difficulties that are caused to passengers has been done. People who require assistance should contact the train operating company in advance so that necessary arrangements can be put in place. Passengers with disabilities who are travelling on ScotRail services should contact ScotRail in advance for information. Passengers travelling on Virgin services who are unable to access trains at Haymarket or the special coaches at Haymarket or Waverley will be taken by taxi to or from the nearest suitable station. Great North Eastern Railway will make use of platform 1 at Haymarket for its Inverness and Aberdeen services, which will start and terminate at Haymarket.

The Scottish Executive very much takes on board the points that Sarah Boyack has made. It strikes us all that it is unacceptable for the matter to take 25 years to be resolved. With regard to clarity about who is responsible for the matter, that issue is currently being assessed. She is right to express concern on behalf of all rail users. We are giving urgent consideration to the matter and are seeking to make progress on it.

I do not think that I can confirm the nature of all the arrangements that have been made without going on for a considerable length of time, which I am sure members would not wish me to do. All the train operating companies have made clear statements about the matter. ScotRail issued a further statement today that intimated the details of how rail passengers could contact it for information. The especially important point that Sarah Boyack raised related to people with disabilities. That point has been particularly taken into account by the train operating companies.

A number of important themes have run through this morning's debate, which has ranged widely, covering not just the  work plan but the spectrum of European affairs and politics. We should recognise the system that operates in Europe at this time, and the tiers within it. The Commission is the bureaucracy that supports the Council and the presidency of the day—the Irish at the moment. We have to recognise the different roles played by the different elements of the European system and the constraints within which those elements operate. Many members, including as Pauline McNeill, have mentioned the need for transparency and democracy. It is important to recognise that codecision between the European Parliament and the European Council has extended in recent years. That is a welcome development. It is important to recognise why the work plan deals with governance issues that were discussed at the outset of this morning's debate, especially in relation to impact assessment and the minimum standards of consultation. The discussion dealt to some extent with the points that Michael Matheson has just made on the need for improved processes and early-warning processes. Pauline McNeill spoke about the need for lawyers in Brussels. The Executive has a successful scheme of sending Executive lawyers to the Commission. Currently, four Scottish lawyers are in the directorate-general for the environment. Ironically, they are involved in infraction proceedings. However, once they are there, it is not for us to dictate which area they operate in. However, we take Pauline's point. The Scottish Executive intends to continue with secondments of lawyers and other staff. A consistency of approach has been mentioned. I found Mr Gallie's remarks on the growth and stability pact somewhat ironic. For him to rail against Germany and France for defending their national interest, as he said that they had done in relation to the growth and stability pact, and then for Murdo Fraser to say just a moment ago that defending national interests is a good thing to do, shows the mixed thinking on the Conservative benches. Mr Fraser created a scare story about sporrans; I thought that he would go on to talk about straight bananas. The Conservatives do not change their tune, and I recognise Mr Fraser's impeccably dry European credentials.

I have not read Mr MacShane's comments. However, one comment that I agreed with was Mr Brocklebank's when he spoke about John Farnell's contributions to the debate last night and this morning. Mr Farnell said that we had  to deal flexibly with the unintended consequences of the outcome of the fisheries council. Mr Brocklebank agreed with that and so do I. I want to deal with some of the points raised on the work plan and the European strategy. Nicola Sturgeon, Michael Matheson and many others wanted to hear an Executive response on those issues. We have already produced a forward look document, which Linda Fabiani mentioned. Scotland Europa's document is also helpful, as indeed are this debate and the proceedings of EMILE—the European members information and liaison exchange network. We will reflect on the request that members on all sides of the chamber have made for an annual formal debate on the work plan and for a published document on the Executive's position. I suggest that we produce a lot of that information already, but we are prepared to consider pulling it all together.

As Mr Lochhead knows, we made strenuous representations on this during the work that led to the Hain paper. That important work continues. However, given that there is currently what I might describe as a period of flux over the future of the convention, we will take that work forward through the appropriate channels. Keith Raffan and others spoke eloquently on the historical background to enlargement. The Executive believes strongly in enlargement. The Scottish Council for Development and Industry's leadership in trade missions is very encouraging. We are very prepared to consider the possibility of ministers leading trade delegations, and that work will proceed. I endorse John Home Robertson's comments about this not being an end to the expansion of the European Union. At a seminar on freedom of information yesterday, it was observed that Turkey now has an FOI regime. That is a sign of a maturing and developing democracy. Helen Eadie spoke about new agencies and the relocation strategy. The Finance Committee dealt with that issue at some length on Tuesday. We use Scottish Trade International, in the UK and external to the UK, to take forward the need for representation in Europe. I will certainly pass on Helen Eadie's comments on the centre for disease to other ministerial colleagues. Nora Radcliffe and Mark Ballard spoke about  toxic chemicals. We are looking closely at that matter, trying to ensure that the system that is eventually put in place is streamlined and efficient. However, I share Alasdair Morrison's disappointment at the Greens' position on salmon farming. The Government created the Food Standards Agency so that we could have independent advice on food safety. That was demanded of us after the terrible event of BSE. To imply, as the Greens did, that that is not worth anything, is contemptible. Let me finish by supporting Margaret Ewing's comments on the need for more time for European debates. We will take that point seriously. Of course, we also heard representation from SSP members who did not want any time for European debates, but I am with Margaret Ewing in agreeing that such debates are needed. The pursuit of stability and peace, the avoidance of conflict and making Europe a safer place are important to the Executive. After all, we had armed conflict within the boundaries of Europe less than a decade ago. I say to the SSP, the Greens and the Tories—those joint forces of Euroscepticism in the chamber—that those goals of peace, stability and a greater understanding of each other's country's needs are important. We will strive to deliver on them.

I was rather looking forward to Mr Gallie continuing that frame of analysis. I thank Richard Lochhead and the European and External Relations Committee for introducing this debate on the European Commission's work programme. I also welcome Keith Raffan back to the chamber—a colleague who we have all missed over recent weeks. George Lyon, the Liberal Democrat whip, is particularly glad to see the return of Keith Raffan. I will deal briefly with the amendments and  return later to the points that were made by Richard Lochhead and Nicola Sturgeon. It will come as no surprise to Nicola Sturgeon that the Executive will not encourage Parliament to vote for the Scottish National Party amendment, because we oppose amendments that relate to independence. I will say no more about it—I am sure that many others will. Mr Gallie was unable to be present for Denis MacShane's evidence to the European and External Relations Committee last week, when the Minister for Europe made it clear that, even had the new constitution been agreed by the IGC in December, it would not have come into effect before 2009. As Mr Gallie mentioned, the new European Commission will be appointed in 2004 and will take office in November. The Commission's work programme for 2004 was not predicated on the basis of the enactment of the convention of the future of Europe's proposals. The programme was, after all, published on 29 October 2003. Mr Gallie might also wish to consider annex 3 on page 18 of the Commission's work plan, which states: "The Commission ... also believes that the draft text can be improved in the Inter-Governmental Conference." That hardly suggests that the work plan was constructed on the basis of precise knowledge of the final outcome of the discussions on the European constitution in the IGC. I therefore politely suggest that Mr Gallie's amendment is inappropriate. Mr Gallie may wish to reflect on that.

Those observations do not hang together with the reality of the Commission's work plan. As Mr Gallie said, the constitution might be considered to be too ambitious in the context of the Commission's extensive work programme. I welcome the point that is made in the introduction to the 2004 work plan, that "the Legislative and Work Programme for 2004 is deliberately much more tightly focussed than in previous years. The Commission intends its programme to be as realistic as possible, both in terms of what it can deliver and the other EU institutions can absorb." That is a theme that we would all recognise and encourage. I hope that Mr Gallie would accept that, given the fact that the Commission will change, given the forthcoming European  elections—which he and Nicola Sturgeon have mentioned—and given the length of time over which the constitution was to have been considered had it been passed, it is difficult to imagine that the constitution would be the Commission's main driving force. The Executive has already organised a meeting to discuss the Commission's 2004 work programme. Mr Gallie mentioned the EMILE meeting on 8 December. I hope that a parliamentary debate and an EMILE meeting on the European Commission work programme can become a regular fixture in future, as Mr Lochhead requested earlier. I will concentrate briefly on what is contained in the work programme, what it means to Scotland, and how the Executive plans to deal with those matters. The programme is shorter than those in previous years, which is understandable due to the fact that this is the final year of the current Commission; a new Commission will be sworn in later this year. Notwithstanding those events and, of course, the enlargement of the Council to 25 member states, the Commission's work programme is still ambitious, with several significant legislative and non-legislative proposals that are of importance to Scotland. We welcome the programme as a useful planning document. The Commission's top priority for 2004 is the accession of the 10 new member states. The Commission is determined to ensure that the new member states are successfully and quickly integrated into the European Union. As I have said previously in the chamber—and as the Executive has said during debates in the chamber in the past six months—the Executive welcomes the accession and believes that enlargement will have many benefits for Scotland. The Commission's second main priority is stability. The justice and home affairs agenda is one of the fastest growing areas of EU policy so, with its distinctive legal system, Scotland must keep fully abreast of EU developments in that field. The third priority is sustainable growth, on which the programme proposes a review of the EU's sustainable development strategy and implementation of the EU water and energy initiatives, which were announced at the 2001 Johannesburg world summit. That agenda is important to the Executive, given its commitments in "A Partnership for a Better Scotland" on growing the economy and sustainable development. The Commission's work programme is of real importance and we are determined to work positively and proactively to ensure that Scotland's interests are understood and are an active part of the considerations. We intend to draw on the  Commission's work programme to help us to focus and prioritise our efforts on the key short and medium-term issues that are likely to have a significant impact on people's lives in Scotland. We also intend to increase our direct engagement with the European Commission—I hope that that deals with some of the concerns that were expressed earlier. We will do that by meeting directly with Commission officials and Commissioners in Brussels. We will invite them to Scotland and we will provide them with information and details about Scotland's circumstances. We will ramp up our interaction with Scotland's MEPs through increased ministerial contacts, greater use of briefing sessions in Edinburgh and even more contact with MEPs and their staff in Brussels and Strasbourg. Such face-to-face interaction with key MEPs and officials is extremely effective, given the café-and-corridor culture of Brussels—a point that was made by Nicola Sturgeon.

I hope that Mrs Ewing will accept that that is rather more a matter for Parliament than for me. I visited the Scottish Parliament office the last time I was in Scotland House in my former life as—dare I say it—a humble back bencher. The office plays an important role, but Parliament should progress the issue; indeed, I am sure that the Presiding Officer has strong views on it. It may not be appropriate for me to suggest how that matter would be dealt with.

There is analysis going on of that, rightly, across all departments of the Executive, not just in finance and public services. Enterprise plays a particularly important role in that regard, and analysis in the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department is on-going. Indeed, ministers are engaged in a number of activities—including seminars, workshops and practical engagement with the business community—on the needs of business and on spotting the priorities and opportunities that Keith Raffan commented on earlier. That work will certainly continue, and we shall provide a more detailed analysis of it in due course.  The Executive is committed to effective engagement on those and other issues. I should mention at this time the importance of the joint ministerial committee on Europe as a forum for formal discussion of strategic EU issues by UK and devolved Administration ministers. The JMCE, as it is known, is the major vehicle by which Scotland can maximise its influence on the UK line on strategic EU issues that are of importance to us. Malcolm Chisholm, the Minister for Health and Community Care, is at the JMCE in the Cabinet Office at this very moment, discussing the implications of the working time directive on the UK and particularly on the national health service. I hope that members will recognise that as an illustration of the engagement of the Scottish Executive and Scottish ministers in ensuring that we achieve the best possible outcomes from those continuing discussions, which are of considerable importance in the context of the national health service. The EU agenda that affects devolved matters is, as Nicola Sturgeon said, enormous, and the scrutiny of EU documents is a vital way of ensuring that proposals that come from Europe and in which there is a Scottish interest are picked up early. I want to encourage a team Scotland approach to that, involving the Executive, public and private sector organisations and the Scottish Parliament. As Richard Lochhead and other members said, that must include not just the European and External Relations Committee but all committees of the Parliament. That team Scotland approach can be beneficial to all avenues in Scotland in taking forward and assessing the work programme and in ensuring that we in Scotland get the best out of it. I congratulate the Environment and Rural Development Committee, the Health Committee and the Justice 1 and Justice 2 Committees on the work that they are doing on European matters. They are giving an example of how to mainstream European issues across the work of Parliament. Governance is mentioned in the work plan. It is an important matter that several members have mentioned this morning. The impact assessment procedure, the minimum standards for consultation and the Commission's major programme to simplify EU legislation are all important, and those themes were key elements of the Scottish Executive's response to the Commission's white paper on governance. We are pleased that that is now being formally developed in the work plan that is being debated this morning. The Executive is committed to being proactive on those issues. I congratulate Parliament on the moves that it has made to mainstream EU issues  into subject committees and I reiterate my call for a team Scotland approach to working together on those issues.

The initial business case was received on 4 November 2003. Following an initial analysis, further information was requested from the Waverley railway partnership. That information was received on 2 December 2003 and is now being considered.

I always happy to reflect on Mr Stephen's comments and certainly will do so in relation to the member's particular point. I am sure that the member will be aware that determination of the funding requirements and the preparation of a funding package are matters for the Waverley railway partnership. The Scottish Executive is considering that business case and any announcement on funding will be made once that consideration is complete. I very much welcome Mr Mundell's belated interest in this matter.

Rhona Brankin is quite right about the expected time scale for the project. She also makes an entirely sensible point about the importance of the line in securing improved transport links for her constituents. Those matters are being taken care of and thought through carefully during consideration of the business case.

I would not profess to be an expert on procurement models in relation to major capital projects, but during the next month I will bring the matter to the attention of the Minister for Transport and his officials.

As I indicated in earlier responses to other members, the funding package is being considered in the context of the business case. That is how the matter will be progressed. I am sure that Christine Grahame will make representations to the Tory-controlled Scottish Borders Council on the argument about the local authority contribution. However, I suspect that even if we announced today that we would lay the railway between Edinburgh and Carlisle and make it out of gold, she would still find something to girn about.

This debate has been much more lively than was the equivalent debate last year. Mr Brocklebank mentioned Wendy Alexander. I sat next to her during last year's debate on the budget, which was a more cogent occasion. However, because of a number of political and other observations that have been made, this afternoon's debate has been revealing of the different parties' perspectives on the budget process. It is important to start by reflecting on the fact that, rightly or wrongly, the subject of the debate is the process, rather than the contents of the budget. I say to Mr Brocklebank that there are plenty of opportunities across the range of parliamentary activity for genuine scrutiny of the Executive. That work continues. I begin by thanking Des McNulty and his colleagues for their considerable work, and members from all parties for their contributions to this afternoon's proceedings. I have read the Finance Committee's report with considerable interest—certainly with more interest than Mr Davidson. I am not sure whether Mr Davidson has read the report—he may have written his speech long before it appeared. [ Interruption. ] The member is holding up a copy of the report, but in my book that is rather different from reading it. It might help Mr Davidson if I say that a minute or two ago I found last year's stage 2 report on the budget by the Finance Committee, which states, before going on to make some other points: "The Committee finds that the Draft Budget document marks a significant improvement in financial information", I do not accept Mr Davidson's suggestion that nothing has been achieved.

Well, there we go. Because of our determination to have a transparent budget process that ensures that money is allocated in a way that meets the needs of the Scottish people, we are determined to work with the Finance Committee to secure continual improvement in the budget process. Both the constructive tone of the report and today's proceedings indicate clearly that there is common ground. The Executive will respond positively and favourably to many of the conclusions and  recommendations that the report contains and we will do so in writing before the stage 1 debate in late January next year. I will not rattle through all 17 of the report's conclusions, but I will focus on three of the most important recommendations and give an early indication of the Executive's thinking about them. Those issues—all of which have been raised this afternoon by members from all parties—are time-series data, capital spending and targets and priorities. Before I do that, I will touch on some of the general comments that have been made. In particular, I want to pick up the point that Mike Watson made about where we are now and how we scrutinise the Executive's budget in the post-devolution era. Clearly, the member has the background to understand what happened before devolution, but I recollect what did not happen when I was a mere researcher at Westminster. What we do now is a demonstrable improvement in scrutiny. Some may not like it for political reasons that relate to their philosophical choice of solutions for Scotland's future, but it represents a huge step change and a move forward in the budget process. It is important to reflect on and to respect that. Many good speeches were made today. There were some sprightly contributions from the new boys and new girls, especially Christine May. As the former leader of a major local authority in Scotland, she will welcome what we have done in the context of local government by ending compulsory competitive tendering, introducing best value, ending capping guidelines and introducing the first three-year settlements for revenue and capital. In my view and in the Executive's view those are all strong steps forward in the development of our relationship and partnership arrangement with local government. I found it intriguing that Alex Neil gave such a spirited speech. It is unfortunate that it was in front of only three of his colleagues, but we all enjoyed it. He mentioned GERS—how one pronounces that depends on one's political and football persuasion—and I always find it curious that the SNP goes back to GERS. I will not quote Oscar Wilde, but I will for Alex Neil's benefit refer to something that Andrew Wilson said. There is always juxtaposition in the SNP's approach—its analysis has always gone one way or the other. In looking at the 2000 figures, Andrew Wilson said that it was game, set and match to the independence case. A year later he said that the GERS report was back-of-an-envelope economic gibberish. The SNP's contributions on this matter change according to what day of the month it is or, indeed, what day of the year it is. I will deal with a couple of the more important  contributions in terms of particular recommendations. Des McNulty and Jeremy Purvis talked about block allocations in relation to local government and health spending. Those are significant issues; we have discussed them in committee and I am sure that we will continue to do so. We will certainly work with the Finance Committee to provide better information, not necessarily—if I may say—in the draft budget, but possibly in separate documents or on Executive websites. I am aware, for example, that the Minister for Health and Community Care will meet the Health Committee early next year to discuss scrutiny of the health budget in the way that Des McNulty talked about this afternoon. I hope that we can make progress on that. On gender proofing the Scottish budget, I agree with much of what Elaine Smith said. The ability to gender proof the budget is linked intrinsically with the Executive's work on mainstreaming equality into policy. I accept that that process will take some time, but we have made progress in recent years and we are glad that both the women's budget advisory group and the Parliament's Equal Opportunities Committee have acknowledged that in their reports. We will continue to work with them and with others—as we have done in previous years—to make further improvements in the area. The Finance Committee's report includes a request for time-series data so that the committee can examine budgetary trends over a 10-year period. We will work with the committee on that; indeed, I understand that my officials and the Finance Committee's special adviser are looking into the subject at this time. We will undertake scoping work on it at the beginning of 2004. At the same time, we will continue our discussions with the committee's officials on how best we can meet the committee's requirements. We hope that that work will allow us to give the committee a clear indication at an early stage of what information we will be able to provide and the time scale in which we can provide it. We have also noted the committee's desire—a number of members raised this today—to obtain additional information about capital expenditure. We intend to make progress on that issue in relation to the supporting documentation for the Budget Bill 2004-05. We will publish that next month: its introduction will, in addition to the capital table that was used in this year's draft budget, provide tables of expenditure, such as capital grants, which are not currently classified as capital expenditure. Once those tables have been published, we will discuss with the committee what further capital spending information on present plans we can provide in order to assist scrutiny of expenditure in the run up to the 2004 spending review. I therefore accept the points that members have made on the capital-revenue split, especially  Des McNulty's point on lead-in times. We recognise the importance of that and, indeed, possibly share the frustration about the lead-in times across ministerial departments and we are seeking ways to minimise them. The report comments on the Executive's strategic approach to budgeting in its sections on spending priorities and targets. We agree with many of the comments that the report makes: we accept the need for strategic and portfolio priorities and we accept the need to ensure that targets help to improve public services. Our approach of setting clear priorities and targets to ensure that portfolios achieve clear outcomes with the money that is allocated to them is still reasonably new. We believe that the budgetary processes have improved substantially in recent years, in terms of both the external scrutiny to which they are subjected and the internal rigour that we now apply to spending decisions. We look forward to refining further our current systems for the 2004 spending review. It is important to recognise that the House of Commons's Public Administration Select Committee's report, which Mr McNulty also mentioned, calls for the improvement, rather than the abolition, of the measurement culture. It states clearly that the measurement culture cannot, and should not, be abolished. There is much that we can learn from that report. On transparency, we believe that it is vital that we give the public a clear idea of what we will achieve when we spend their money. Although we will always strive to improve our processes, we think that it is important to bear in mind the progress that has already been made. As next year is a spending review year, it is even more vital that we get our spending decisions right. We will allocate funding until 2008 in a way that advances the priorities in the partnership agreement, including that of growing the economy and therefore meeting people's needs. To do that, we will work to further improve our targets and our setting of priorities and will continue to work with the Finance Committee to create an increasingly transparent and effective budget process.

We have established an independent working group to consider the implementation of the single transferable vote in Scotland. That group is considering the experience of STV in other countries, including Northern Ireland.

Although I agree with Mr Gallie, there is a lot of simplicity about making a direct correlation between Northern Ireland politics and Scottish politics. It is important to reflect on why STV was introduced in Northern Ireland: the political situation there is different and the desire is to reflect the balance of the community in any outcome. Mr Gallie might also be aware that the turnout in Northern Ireland was 63 per cent, which was higher than the turnout in the Scottish elections in May. That shows more interest—perhaps worryingly—in the Northern Irish elections that have just taken place. The STV working group will consider these matters; that is why ministers have established it. Perhaps Mr Gallie will reflect on the fact that he is here because of proportional representation and if he wishes to be a convert to that cause we will welcome him.

I understand the member's point and the points that have been made in evidence to the Local Government and Transport Committee in recent weeks. Ministers are aware of the issues but, at this moment, we have no plans to change the proposals to have the elections on the same day.

Mr Muldoon raises an important point. I advise the chamber that the STV working group has been asked to report to ministers on issues relating to the practical implementation of STV by—as Mr Muldoon says—September next year. However, the group's chairman, David Green, will make an interim report to ministers in January, before ministers give evidence to Mr Muldoon's committee later in the year. That will be  done to deal with the very point that Mr Muldoon raises.

Mr Smith makes important points about electronic voting and about considering the experience of other countries. That is why we have the STV working group, which is considering and taking advice on these matters. Executive officials working on local government issues are considering these matters closely and will be studying practical examples so as to inform our considerations.

Right at the outset, I say to Christine May, Irene Oldfather and others that the Executive—across the ministerial benches—will work closely with colleagues to ensure that representations continue to be made on the matter. I will not take sniping from Ms Sturgeon or anyone else on the sidelines about what we do or do not do.

No, I will not. [ Interruption. ]

I have two minutes in which to try to deal with the points and SNP members just scream and shout like a bunch of wee bairns. My ministerial colleagues and I will continue to work hard on the issue. As Mr Gallie requested, we will continue to make the appropriate representations in our discussions. I take on board the serious points that Christine May and Irene Oldfather made on rurality, geography and peripherality. All the parties are agreed on the desirability of enlargement. The only debate that we have had this morning—including the one that started at 9.30 am—has been about independence. Stewart Stevenson said last week that the issue for the SNP is not about seven or eight members but about 14 members. I respect that position, although I disagree fundamentally with it. It is important to separate the debate on the serious arguments in favour of Scotland making appropriate representations about the number of MEPs from the debate on independence. That is what our amendment seeks to do.

It is important to reflect on Nicola Sturgeon's opening point about principle. The principle that she is engaged with concerns not the number of MEPs, but the matter that she went on about in three of the four minutes of her speech, which was an argument about independence. That is fair enough—I do not agree with what she said about that, but at least her position is clear. However, she should not use a large chunk of her speech suggesting that we are discussing a great matter of principle and then relate that to the number of MEPs. The Scottish Executive is disappointed that the number of MEPs in Scotland will be reduced. All member states—

I have only three minutes. All member states have agreed to reduce their quota of MEPs to enable the accession states to be represented in the European Parliament on a similar and equitable footing. I accept the points made by Irene Oldfather, Christine May and others in the debate last Wednesday, particularly those that relate to rurality, peripherality and geography. Those arguments are entirely legitimate. I have read Bill Miller MEP's contribution to the European and External Relations Committee. The minutes of the meeting that he attended state: "Members agreed also to write to the UK Secretary of State for Constitutional Affairs to reiterate the Committee's views in respect of the number of MEPs". As I said, the views on rurality and geography are important. However, we must start from the fact that Scotland is part of the UK. The UK is the member state and it has agreed to reduce its quota of MEPs for the 2004 European elections from 87 to 78 because of European Union enlargement. That point is agreed—at least I think that it is agreed—by all the parties in the chamber. We hear the concerns that Scotland is different from other electoral regions. It is true that Scotland is different. We have the Parliament and we have a unique and separate legal system, but we also have specific advantages over other regions of the UK in relation to representation in the EU, through our direct links to the EU Government, to the UK  Government, to Brussels and to the Executive's EU office. Those are advantages that other European Parliament UK electoral regions do not have. As a result, rather than having less influence, we have enhanced influence. Although Scotland's representation in the European Parliament will be reduced, our effective representation and influence in the other main EU decision-making body, the Council, is increasing in relation to the Nice provisions. Those points are important if we are to consider the matter in the round. We have a strong group of MEPs, of all parties, who have worked persuasively and helpfully together on a range of important Scottish issues. However, in the context of a Parliament of 700 and of European enlargement, members of the Executive accept, in relation to the UK position, that the reduction will happen. The point is that Scotland enjoys the best of both worlds. We have the direct influence that we seek—and seek to enlarge on in relation to the intergovernmental conference—and we have an excellent and effective group of influential MEPs. I am sure that that will continue. I move amendment S2M-694.1, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "welcomes the accession of the 10 new member states of the European Union on 1 May 2004; notes that the elections to the European Parliament are a reserved matter; recognises that all 15 existing member states have agreed to reduce their quota of MEPs to enable the new member states to be represented on an equitable basis; notes the consequent reduction of United Kingdom seats in the European Parliament from 87 to 78, and considers that this is appropriate given the enlargement of the European Union."

Fiscal autonomy is a topic for which some members of the Opposition seem to have extraordinary fascination. They make it out to be their silver bullet for solving all Scotland's problems, short of independence—which Mr Swinney mentioned—when we will all live in eternal bliss. Unfortunately, despite all their fascination—obsession, even—Parliament today is no clearer about whether fiscal autonomy is a silver bullet, because Opposition members never tell Parliament or the people of Scotland how they will fire it. They talk about all the new taxes that they would excitedly get their hands on, but they do not tell us what they would do with those taxes. The questions that they need to answer—which Mr Swinney did not answer this morning—are what changes, how much and who pays. Fiscal autonomy—or fiscal independence—would mean that the Executive had full power over all taxes that currently are levied by the UK. The main aim is to set up a different tax structure, as  Mr Swinney alluded to, from that in the rest of the UK in order to spur economic growth. At least, that is what is promised. The Executive fully agrees that we should do everything possible to foster economic growth, but there is no reason to believe that fiscal autonomy can deliver the goods that the Opposition promises it will. First, we already have full autonomy in our spending decisions. That is a fact that the Opposition conveniently forgets to mention. We can allocate funds according to the needs and wishes of the Scottish people. In the partnership agreement we committed ourselves to increase economic growth in Scotland. That is our primary aim, and our policies reflect that. Secondly, we receive more funds through the block grant than we would be able to raise ourselves. Those spending levels hugely benefit our citizens and enterprises. We can have a debate about how we spend the resources, but that is the position. As we all know, Scotland's circumstances make higher spending levels necessary. We support the present funding arrangement to deliver the stability that is needed for this new Parliament. Stability has delivered, but not for the SNP. Its official policy—agreed by the party in 2000—is to gain independence by the incremental accumulation of powers, which is stealth independence, if you will. However, the SNP needs to answer key questions about that policy-what changes, who pays and how much.

Let me finish this point, because I know that Mr Mather will be interested in it. In his recent lecture in Edinburgh, the eminent economist Paul Krugman advised against a tax-cutting policy to encourage growth. He believes that the costs outweigh the benefits. Evidence suggests that tax cuts work in such a cyclical way that they destabilise the economy. His advice is to build on our Scottish advantages and embrace Scotland's attractiveness as a place to invest and innovate in by capitalising on our universities, our cultural heritage and our infrastructure.

It strikes me that Mr Swinney was near to advocating a tax increase to cover the situation. However, as we do not know yet what the proposals are—obviously, we are in contact with the relevant departments in London—we will monitor the effects closely and—[ Interruption. ] I will tell members about the other side to the issue. Why is it that Alex Salmond is today launching a bill at Westminster to stop Scottish MPs voting on the very measures that Mr Swinney is so concerned about? MPs from parties on the Executive benches will do something about the measures, unlike MPs from Mr Swinney's party.

Christine May will forgive me for saying, as I did to Mr Swinney, that we do not know what the exact outcome will be, but there may or may not be Barnett consequentials—[ Interruption. ] Members may not like it, but neither I nor the Executive will prejudge the outcome—although I see that Mr Swinney is happy to do so. Given those warnings from Professor Krugman, I am surprised that the SNP has embraced tax cuts with such enthusiasm. Apparently, the SNP will cut tax for almost everyone. Business rates will be cut. Corporation tax will be cut. Fuel duty will be cut. Whisky duty will be cut. Income tax for low earners will be cut. Indeed, the SNP even proposes a tax cut on do-it-yourself. I see SNP backbenchers behind Mr Swinney nodding in agreement with those tax cuts. All of us would like to live in a world without taxes and still receive the benefits of excellent public services, but even the SNP used to recognise that cutting tax and cutting public services go hand in hand. John Scott might remember the Ayr by-election when Alex Salmond had a go at the Tories: "They can't have it both ways. You simply can't have tax cuts and keep public services going."

I will not mention any state in the United States' union. Instead, I will quote from some of Mr Mather's fans. The SNP should re-read SNP Saltire paper 1 by the party's favourite economists, Jim and Margaret Cuthbert. According to that paper, fiscal independence "poses an essential discipline on SNP policy ... SNP policy must avoid simply being a wish list of all the desirable things money could buy." How the Cuthberts must be squirming now. Yet in the elections, we heard nothing but spending pledges from the SNP. The wish list keeps growing. In the past couple of months we have had north-east nationalists wanting affordable housing, a Fife nationalist demanding more money to recruit more police officers and a Highland nationalist demanding a Dornoch rail crossing, but my personal favourite—and he is here today—is Mr Crawford's wish. Bruce Crawford wrote in the Stirling Observer on 20 August: "The national park ... litter bins are not being emptied on a regular enough basis." He continued: "I would like to see a very small percentage of the Executive underspend being given to Stirling Council." The bit I liked best, however, says a lot about the SNP's budgeting: "Last year the Scottish Executive was left with an underspend of £500,000 million." He claims—and it is here in black and white—that there was £500,000 million spare. That is £500 billion—nearly the half the gross domestic product for the entire United Kingdom. We get many confused messages from the SNP. It wants to cut tax and increase spending, even though its advisers say that it cannot promise either.

I want to make progress. Even SNP members have been begging their leadership for answers. In Snapshot , another well-thumbed periodical that I am sure we all take to bed with us every night, is a picture of Andrew Wilson with an abacus—that makes a difference from the calculator that was used before—and I see that there is a picture of Mr Mather with an abacus on the next page. The magazine asks: "Would financial independence mean taxes would go up or down?" The answer is:  "Financial independence doesn't automatically mean an increase or decrease in taxes". So that is clear. However, SNP members did not like that answer, so they asked a more precise question in Talking Independence : "Will my taxes go up?" The answer was: "An independent Scotland ... will be more than able to maintain ... the current level of services within the overall level of taxation." That is as clear as mud as well. At the start of my speech, I mentioned how the SNP verges on getting overexcited about fiscal independence. For a moment earlier this week, we shared that excitement. On Monday, when Mr Swinney announced the start of his winter campaign, he said that he would tell us what powers we need and how he would use them. Today is one of the warmest winter days for a long time and Mr Swinney's is one of the shortest winter campaigns, even for serial relaunchers such as the SNP. His winter campaign has melted away already because he has not spelled out how he would use any new powers. He has failed to answer any of the questions posed. What change, how much and who pays? Despite having asked all the questions and having read all the pamphlets, we are left with John Swinney as the Howard—from the HBOS advertisements—of Scottish politics, telling us that taxes might go up as well as down under fiscal independence. That is not good enough. This partnership Administration is determined to build on the stability that we have and to invest in public services, in growing the Scottish economy and in real solutions for the people of Scotland. I invite Parliament to contrast the approach of the partnership with that of the Opposition. I move amendment S2M-697.3, to leave out from second "that" to end and insert: "the significant benefit that Scotland gains from being part of the United Kingdom and notes that public expenditure in Scotland is at record levels and that this is helping to deliver the commitments in the Partnership Agreement to growing Scotland's economy; delivering excellent public services; supporting stronger, safer communities; and developing a confident, democratic Scotland."

Before I begin, I welcome to the public gallery Ian Jenkins, a former colleague of ours. It is nice to see him here. I understand that he is giving Jeremy Purvis his three-monthly road check to see how he is performing. The debate has been interesting and informative. However, I share Irene Oldfather's view. The SNP has a considerable amount of Opposition time next week and, given the tenor of the SNP's line in the debate, including in Nicola Sturgeon's opening remarks, the subject would have lent itself better to that kind of occasion than to a members' business debate. As an MSP, I believe that members' business debates should reflect constituency and area concerns. I hope that all members will reflect on that matter.

No, I am just going to finish this point. I am not in any way decrying Nicola Sturgeon's desire to bring the matter to the attention of the Parliament—that is entirely her and her party's prerogative. However, it is important to reflect on the ways in which we do such things. As for her general contention that these are non-politicised events, well, we will take that with a pinch of salt.

No, it would not and I shall explain why. Nicola Sturgeon's general approach—and that of her SNP colleagues—has been to urge independence. Stewart Stevenson is nodding his head. I respect their right to articulate that viewpoint, although I do not agree with it. Similarly, the people of Scotland do not agree with it, which is something on which SNP members may wish to reflect. The debate is about a reserved matter. The issue of elections to the European Parliament is reserved, under the Scotland Act 1998, and it is for the UK Government to formulate policy and make decisions on the matter. That is why we have members of Parliament representing Scotland in London. I presume that some of the Scottish nationalist MPs will take the opportunity to raise these matters there, as will other members.

It is curious that Mr Gallie is now supporting a nationalist line.

Oh, it is. That is what it is about. It is important to remember that, as some members have rightly said, Scotland's MEPs do a good job on behalf of Scotland. I believe that that is true of MEPs right across the political spectrum. The Executive works closely with all Scotland's MEPs and when ministers are in Brussels, as they have been this week, they meet MEPs. Ministers will continue to do that to ensure that issues ranging from the quality of bathing water in the European Union to the future of the European convention are properly raised in the European Parliament. There is close co-operation in that sense. The fact that the number of MEPs who represent Scotland will be reduced is disappointing. However, I believe that the decision is right, given the reasons behind it and the fact that all member states face reductions in the number of their MEPs. Under the terms of the Treaty of Nice, the total number of MEPs who are elected by each existing state of the European Union is to be reduced to accommodate the new member states. As some members have argued, that appears to be right in principle and, at this time, it is the right approach. SNP members seem to be arguing that the Treaty of Nice should be ignored. If all EU states retained their current levels of MEPs, MEPs from the enlargement countries would add to the total and the European Parliament would grow from the current 626 MEPs to in excess of 800 MEPs. That would mean that new parliamentary buildings would have to be built—a subject on which, I suspect, we should not lecture.

The Electoral Commission has conducted its work. The matter is reserved and the commission fulfilled its role in that context. These are matters that we will always want to reflect on and look at again—there is no doubt of that. The contribution of SNP members to the debate has focused on independence. If one believes in independence, perhaps it is appropriate to argue for higher numerical representation. I accept but  do not agree with that point. However, if one believes—as I do—that we should be part of the UK, one should accept that it is necessary to have a fair and equitable distribution of MEPs. Some would argue that—as Nicola Sturgeon and Richard Lochhead implied—England and Wales should lose some MEPs, because overall the UK would be no smaller. However, inevitably, some areas of England and Wales would argue on economic and other grounds that they should be special cases as well. We must be aware that all those arguments can always be presented. The fact is that the 15 existing member states have agreed to reduce their quota of MEPs to enable the new accession states to be represented on a similar and equitable footing in the new European Parliament. That is surely a small price to pay for the enormous benefits that EU enlargement will bring. I share the view of members who supported the concept of enlargement and who now support its reality next year. Enlargement will produce benefits such as peace, prosperity and stability. Those benefits cannot be overestimated. We in Scotland take them for granted, but many in the world cannot do that. It is important to reflect on the advantages that an enlarged EU will offer new member states. New states will benefit from their membership as they adopt European standards and as a higher standard of living spreads to the east of the existing EU. Enlargement will also have benefits for business. The new member states' economies are growing faster than those elsewhere in the EU and will continue to grow after enlargement, which will make those countries exciting and attractive investment destinations. Investment will be easier and safer when the new members join the EU. The new member states will bring a well-educated and skilled work force into the EU's labour pool. Levels of English are good, which is especially beneficial for the UK and Scotland. I contend strongly that the number of MEPs is not all that important. What they do and achieve is the important aspect—that is the old quantity-versus-quality issue. The calibre and quality of MEPs are more important than their number. I echo the point that several members made about that. Scotland will lose one MEP at the next European Parliament election and the UK will lose nine MEPs, but the reality is that, under the new EU constitutional arrangements following the Treaty of Nice, the votes of smaller member states such as Denmark and Finland in the Council of Ministers will go from being a third of the UK's equivalent vote to being a quarter of the UK's equivalent vote. As Scotland is part of the UK and  can call on the UK's vote, we have a huge advantage. I hope that those points will be considered in the overall context of the debate. The European Parliament (Representation) Act 2003 aims at equality of representation as far as possible among each of the 12 UK electoral regions, of which Scotland is one. We must bear that in mind.  Meeting closed at 17:57.

I understand that those issues were discussed at the Parliamentary Bureau this week. I understand that the Minister for Parliamentary Business intimated to Mr Crawford that, as Mr Crawford said, some of the issues are reserved and the implications of the  other aspects of the debate are being actively considered. The specific points that Mr Crawford has raised are the subject of advice that is being sought. He will be furnished with that advice as soon as it is available. I hope that, on that basis and on the basis of the assurances that Patricia Ferguson has given, Mr Crawford will withdraw his opposition to the business motion, as we seek to come forward with the very advice that he is looking for.

The partnership agreement commits us to the reform of voting arrangements in order to increase participation, including the further investigation of postal and electronic voting. Local authorities can already put forward proposals for pilots. We are working closely with the Electoral Commission, given its experience of pilots elsewhere, to encourage and assist local authorities to do that.

Mr Rumbles will be aware that the Electoral Commission's decision on the matter is expected on 8 December. If the decision is that Scotland will be a pilot area, the points that he raises will be brought to the attention of the Electoral Commission and, because the matters are reserved, the UK Government. The responsibility for a media campaign in the context that Mr Rumbles describes belongs to the Electoral Commission. I will ensure that the points that he makes are brought to its attention.

Mr Johnstone makes a fair point about fraud. That is part of the Electoral Commission's on-going work. It held a seminar on the matter the other week at which those points were raised. I am sure that those matters will be taken forward actively.

I begin by supporting one point that Mr MacAskill made, which was about the international competitiveness of the city market, particularly in tourism terms. However, I recall going to Copenhagen last year with the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee to examine that issue and I tell Mr MacAskill that Edinburgh is not losing out internationally. Edinburgh is very much seen by Copenhagen, Vancouver and other leading tourist destinations round the world as an equal player. We should support the good work that goes on in that field, rather than always drawing a negative.  The Government's review of Scotland's cities, including its analysis and promotion of solutions, is an approach built on partnership. Far from being top-down, as the Conservatives suggested, city visions are local authority and local partner led. In many questions, motions and debates, including today's, Parliament has expressed concern about Scotland's cities in relation to transport, health, jobs and the built environment. The devolved Government's response has been to work with cities and city-region partners to develop the "Building Better Cities" review. City visions are part of a continuing process. They provide an overarching context for the development of each city region. It is important that they are driven by local authorities and their partners. That is why I cannot accept the point that Brian Monteith made about Stirling. If I understood him correctly, he suggested that the Government should dictate that Dundee be part of the Stirling city vision and that there should be a top-down approach. Rather, our approach is very much for Stirling and its surrounding partners to build their own plan for their area.

It would have been helpful if Shona Robison had been here for the debate. In his opening remarks, Mr Monteith argued that Dundee should be driven by the Government to be part of the Stirling city region. Our approach is to allow the development of Stirling in the right way.

I accept that clarification, but I was suggesting that our approach is to let the bottom drive the process, if I may put it that way, rather than have Government at the top level driving it. That approach is right in principle and is not the one that the Conservatives suggested that we are taking. The example of Copenhagen and Malmö is important, because it illustrates in spectacular style the approach of developing city regions—and there was some criticism of our approach to city regions. Those two cities prosper, innovate and grow. That is the approach that we seek in Scotland's city regions—the partnerships should prosper, innovate and grow in a positive way.  Jeremy Purvis asked a question on market towns and I say to him that the Government will reflect on his suggestion. There are other areas and towns, including market towns, which seek solutions; that is an issue to which we will want to come back. The Government's vision is to help councils to deliver local solutions to fit local circumstances—only thus can we ensure true consistency with our partnership's ambitions for the whole country. I will deal briefly with some other points that were raised in the debate. I recognise that Mr Monteith's approach was thoughtful and I trust that he will accept the assurances that I have given, particularly on the fact that areas will not miss out. It is not the devolved Administration's intention to allow that to happen—we will not do so and I hope that he will accept that. I cannot consider Mr Ewing's contribution to be "ruthlessly constructive"; "toothlessly destructive" might be a better description. I commend to him Andrew Welsh's speech, which was intelligent and thoughtful. I might take issue with some of Mr Welsh's economic statistics, but I certainly do not disagree with his central point, which was that cities are drivers of economic growth. Cities drive economic growth for the whole of Scotland, not just for the city regions. Mr Welsh delivered the right speech in the right debate and I commend it to Mr Ewing for that reason. Pauline McNeill, Robert Brown and Paul Martin raised issues about local taxation. The devolved Administration is taking forward a review of local government finance with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which will provide the opportunity to make the case that has been advocated. I think that those members would expect me to say that the Government should take a long-term perspective, so that its view does not change from day to day and so that changes that are essential for companies and businesses do not happen in a way that does not allow them to plan for the long term. The Opposition amendments—

Let me finish my point. The Opposition amendments make three core criticisms of the Government, relating to a lack of transport infrastructure, the need for better public services and the need to put sustainability at the heart of urban policy. I have concerns about the Conservatives' criticism of us, not least because Mr Brocklebank spent some minutes telling us that he would like to cut the percentage of GDP that is spent on public services. I do not understand how he can on one hand argue for increased investment in transport infrastructure—as the Conservative motion does—and on the other hand  suggest such a cut. He does not say where the cut should be made—

Ah, the Tory manifesto. Shall we remember the Tory manifesto? What did it say? I seem to remember that Scottish Enterprise was the main area that the Tories wanted to cut hard. We reject that position absolutely. The Administration is investing £3 billion in transport infrastructure, 70 per cent of which will go towards public transport. I presume that the Conservatives reject that position. On public services and sustainability, city authorities must develop their waste management plans and practices within the national waste plan. In that context, I say to Mr Ballard that that is core to what is going on and that the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, Mr Finnie, is taking the matter forward. It is for city authorities, just as it is for other local authorities, to develop those plans appropriately. I pick up, in particular, the points that Susan Deacon, Margaret Smith and Sarah Boyack made about affordable housing. The Administration recognises that that is a serious issue. Edinburgh has received £3 million from the cities review, which it has chosen to allocate to key worker housing. Local authorities and registered social landlords can include key worker status among the factors that are used to decide priority for housing allocations and the City of Edinburgh Council has included those arguments in its local housing strategy, which it is discussing with Communities Scotland. I take members' points about those matters and Mr Kerr and I will certainly bring them to the attention of colleagues in the relevant departments. I take Pauline McNeill's point about housing mix in Glasgow. The Clyde waterfront working group is seeking to find solutions that consider the housing need across the city. Susan Deacon rightly raised the problem of skills shortages—an overall theme that we seek to take forward through the work of the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department, the Executive's lifelong learning strategy and "A Smart, Successful Scotland". It strikes me as slightly ironic that an islander should sum up a debate on Scotland's great cities. However, let me reflect a little on Scottish history. In his tome "The Scottish Nation: 1700-2000", Tom Devine writes beautifully of the architectural legacy in Scotland's cities. He notes how, on visiting Scotland in 1826, the great European architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel described the "purity and splendour" of Glasgow's architecture and he recalls the poet Hugh William Williams's recognition of Edinburgh as the Athens of the north. Devine then notes that the last major  architectural project of the period was Playfair's remodelling of the Mound in the 1840s and 1850s. Indeed, that was the last major project until the Miralles project, as the Parliament might note or, indeed, pray about. My connection is slight. The neo-Gothic might of Edinburgh's St Mary's Cathedral and the splendour of the University of Glasgow were the architectural product of Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, who was my great-great-great-uncle. I commend the Executive's motion to the chamber.

We will shortly go out to tender on a £500,000 structural maintenance scheme over 2.9km at Berriedale, which is programmed for completion by spring 2004.

I will be happy to take the points that Mr Stone has made back to Mr Stephen's officials and to ensure that they are fully briefed on this issue. We recognise the member's concerns. From my experience of driving on the road, I know the serious problems that exist. However, Mr Stone was right to mention the £10 million that the Executive is spending on the major upgrade between Helmsdale and the Ord of Caithness. We hope to build on that work.

The Executive is committed to the dispersal of public sector jobs, and wants all areas of Scotland to benefit from the policy, including areas of most need. Devolution should apply not only to Scotland, but within Scotland. Since 1999, the devolved Government has relocated, or announced plans to relocate, more than 1,200 posts around Scotland. A further 2,000 posts are being considered under reviews that have been announced to date. The Executive will announce further relocation opportunities later in the year.

It depends upon the definition of quangos. I am sure that Mr Brown means non-departmental public bodies, which have to have regard to the Scottish Executive's relocation policy. We expect them to pay close attention to it and follow its terms. I am not aware of the particular circumstances of the Scottish Water laboratory to which Mr Brown refers. Members should, however, reflect on the extremely tough cost reduction targets that that organisation has to meet. I presume that those have implications for the issues that Mr Brown raised.

The initiative on small units within the Executive will deal with the point that Roseanna Cunningham makes. The Executive intends that the small-units initiative, announced by the First Minister late in 2002, will ensure that such units are relocated to areas around the periphery of Scotland, if I may use that terminology.  As for the member's wider point, socioeconomic factors account for some 50 per cent of the analysis in relation to a decision on a particular relocation. That will continue to be the case; indeed, we will put more stress on that approach.

Irene Oldfather makes an extremely good point about feedback. We think that that area needs to be strengthened to ensure that we are very clear and transparent about why a particular area has benefited from the relocation policy and why other areas have not been successful in particular cases. In that context, it is important that local authorities, local enterprise companies and other partners who work together in pursuit of relocation options are clear about why they have or have not achieved something.

Will the member give way?

In my intervention on Mr McLetchie, I made clear my position and the position of my party. Will the member confirm that, in the autumn of 2002, he signed the Bruges group paper, "Top down is the wrong way up!"? He is a signatory to that paper with Lord Tebbit, John Redwood and Christopher Gill, who are all well-known Eurosceptics. If he is proud of that, perhaps he will explain that honestly to the people of Scotland.

I really know that the Tories are wrong on this issue when I recall the times that, like most members, I have spoken to and debated with modern studies classes around our constituencies and regions of Scotland. Time and again, issues are raised about how Europe and the world have changed. As politicians of our day, we are asked about enlargement, about the great wars that this nation has fought and about the carnage of the two world wars that so disfigured Europe. That was the overwhelming motive of those behind the fledgling European Coal and Steel Community—

No. Let me finish. Enlargement is of enormous political significance as it comes only 14 years after the collapse of the Berlin wall and the subsequent collapse of the Warsaw pact. All those immense issues have confronted us in our short political time. Even in the lifetime of this Parliament, some important issues have emerged and, time and again, we are asked about Scotland's relationship with those issues. As Linda Fabiani said, the European role in all that is important and significant. The Conservatives are wrong because they simply do not understand how strongly many of the coming generations feel about those things and how they realise that Europe is an important part of that process. There is a huge difference between having an informed debate on the future of Europe and having a referendum. That is why I have no truck with the Conservative position. Let us be completely honest—

Let me finish this point. In a referendum, the debate would be polarised and the issues would be narrowed and squeezed so that they could be projected in black and white. What we need in Europe—

No. I will finish this point, then I will give way. The point was made in different ways by Alex Neil, Jeremy Purvis, Helen Eadie and Des McNulty and I agree with the theme of what they said. What we need in Europe is real engagement with the people's agenda—I see Mr Sheridan nodding his head—and with the citizens of Europe. We need real engagement on Europe across a period of time so that those of us who believe in it strongly—and, in fairness, those who do not—can demonstrate and articulate that. We  need to be able to do that properly over a period of time. In a short, concentrated three-week period, we will never achieve a real debate about the matters that will confront us not just over the next year but over the next 10, 50 or 100 years. That is the process that we need.

I just despair at times in this chamber. We need to consider how we take forward a debate across the range of those issues. Yes, we will have a referendum on particular matters, but it is more important in the longer term that we build a consensus—not even a consensus but a debate—about what must happen in Europe, how we must develop Europe and why Europe is so important.

No. I will not give way to Mark Ballard, because I will come back to the points that he made. I hope that I have reflected where the Executive stands on those wider issues. Irene Oldfather asked about the European convention. I assure her that we will continue to press her points and the points that were made by the European and External Relations Committee. I have two observations to make about the Conservatives. If anything defines the Conservatives' position on Europe, it is the fact that two of their MEPs, Daniel Hannan and Roger Helmer, campaigned for a no vote in the Estonian referendum on membership of the EU. Roger Helmer MEP is, apparently, classic; he visited Malta, Slovakia and Estonia to campaign for a no vote and he has a 100 per cent failure rate. I presume that that is the Tory definition of a strategic success these days. I understand that Murdo Fraser has to sum up for the Tories, but I have a final observation. I was able to find out that Mr Fraser is still a member of the Bruges group.

I must give Mr Fraser the website address, because I found his name on it. It will be interesting to reflect on Mr Fraser's membership of the Bruges group along with those well-known Europeans Norman Tebbit, John Redwood, and Christopher Gill. That sums up the Conservative party's approach to Europe.

It is a dozen sitting days since we last debated Europe in Parliament, and in this Tory-initiated debate, we have heard that the Tories are now the self-appointed naive party. They said that the people were conned. Of course, the Tories were the Government when the people were conned. This debate on a Conservative motion, is not about the principle of referendums. It is not about whether the convention on the future of Europe proposals are good or bad for Scotland. The debate is not even about Scotland's constitutional position. It is about the Tories' abhorrence of all things European, which Mr Gallie demonstrated in abundance. The Eurosceptics—the extreme right wing of British and Scottish politics—have taken over the Conservatives, and I accept Mr Gallie's leading role as an extreme right-wing Eurosceptic.

No, I will give way to Mr Gallie's Euroscepticism in a few moments. It might be possible to have some regard for the Tory position were it not for the lessons of recent political history. I know that Mr Gallie was a disciple of Mrs Thatcher. She did not provide the people of Britain with a referendum on the Single European Act—which was not, as Mr Gallie tried to suggest, a matter that had no implications for domestic British law; it had profound implications for the economy of this country. That was well understood at the time, and the act was fully debated in the House of Commons. I advise Mr Gallie to revisit Hansard to check the speeches that were made at the time. To suggest—as he has done this morning—that the act had no implications is bizarre. It had profound implications and the Tory Government of the day did not put the matter to the people of this country. Nor did it give people a vote on the Maastricht treaty or the Treaty of Amsterdam. Today's motion has nothing to do with the principle of giving the people of this country a vote. Today's Tory motion is a mechanism to display the naked anti-Europeanism that is modern Conservatism.

I did listen to Mr Gallie's speech, and that is what I have just reflected on. His naked anti-Europeanism came through in bile, fury and all the old words such as sovereignty and federalism—all the feelings that the Tories trot out.

I have read it. Let me deal with the substantive issues on which the Executive is taking action. I have no difficulty with holding a referendum on the treaty. However, this is not the place in which to debate such matters, as they will be decided at Westminster. Mr Gallie was once an MP there. If he was so concerned about the matter, he have joined the rest of his Eurosceptic friends at Westminster to argue for a referendum—which the Tories previously opposed.

I would have much more regard for the position of Mr McLetchie and the Conservatives if their motion addressed those issues—which are serious issues facing the Executive and Scotland. However, today's motion addresses the issue of a referendum that the Tories do not seem to have any views on. They do not have any views on the intergovernmental conference, as Mr Gallie just said—I presume that that is the Conservative position. They have no thoughts on how to make progress on the issue. The Conservatives' position has nothing to do with the issues that we need to discuss in this chamber, such as the IGC and its importance for Scotland, but has everything to do with getting across their naked anti-Europeanism in all matters. Yes, the EU needs reform. The "Draft Treaty Establishing a Constitution for Europe", which has been produced by the convention on the future of Europe, should be welcomed by all members. The text is positive. That is not just my opinion, but the opinion expressed by Neil MacCormack when he spoke at a recent meeting of the European members information liaison exchange network, which was chaired by Andy Kerr, the Minister for Finance and Public Services. The draft treaty forms the basis for a discussion at the forthcoming IGC, which will take the final decisions. The test of the IGC's progress will be whether the EU institutions become more transparent, more accountable, more effective and more efficient. In the few moments that I have left, I will address the amendment in the name of Mr Stevenson, which Mrs Ewing will move. A different approach is advocated by those who argue that the convention's proposals on fisheries give the EU exclusive competence over fisheries. The Executive's legal advice is that the text does not change the position. Nevertheless, I understand and share the broader concern. That is why I repeat what I said in Parliament on 11 June: "If a proposal emerged for any extension to EU competence, the Executive and the UK would oppose it vigorously."— [ Official Report , 12 June 2003; c 653.]  I also reiterate the assurances that were given by the First Minister on 28 May. He said that both the Scottish Executive and the UK Government remain firmly opposed to any further extension of European competence in the area of fisheries. I accept the principle of Mr Stevenson's amendment—that if any proposed change to the constitution of the EU were to reserve power over fishing to the sole competence of the EU, that would be incompatible with Scotland's interests.  Hugo Young died of cancer on Monday. He was a distinguished journalist of immense abilities. He was also, in the beginning, a Euro-agnostic. He wrote a seminal tome entitled "This Blessed Plot: Britain and Europe from Churchill to Blair". I conclude with one of Hugo Young's observations on Europe, which he delivered on 2 January 1999: "What is so strange about Britain - so particular, so fearful, so other-worldly - that she should decide to withhold her unique wisdom from the [European] enterprise?" He concluded: "In the 21st century, it will be exciting to escape from history into geography: from the prison of the past into a future that permits us at last the luxury of having it both ways: British and European." I commend that sentiment to Parliament and ask members to reject the Tory motion and to support the Executive's positive approach to European engagement. I move amendment S2M-381.3, to leave out from first "believes" to end and insert: "recognises the many benefits that the European Union has delivered for Europe and Scotland; welcomes the draft constitutional treaty presented to the European Council by the Convention on the Future of Europe as an important step towards making the EU more effective, efficient, easier to understand, democratic, transparent and accountable; welcomes the reference in the draft treaty to subsidiarity and to the role of devolved parliaments in nations and regions, and welcomes the role that the Scottish Executive, in conjunction with Her Majesty's Government, has had in securing these references." 09: 47

It would be helpful to Parliament if Alasdair Morgan would clarify the size of the underspend.

I do not always learn something new in debates in the chamber, but I have been genuinely interested by Roseanna Cunningham's persuasive case and the cases that other members have made. Even the debate on defence policy that Jackie Baillie initiated was interesting; however, Roseanna Cunningham will probably forgive me for not going into defence policy on this occasion. I pay tribute to Roseanna Cunningham for bringing the matter to the Parliament. Defence  matters are reserved to Westminster, but it is important that the Parliament understands the facts. Roseanna Cunningham has rightly described the serious issues that confront her constituency. Jackie Baillie referred to the fact that Scotland makes a real contribution to the defence of the United Kingdom—in people, resources and commitment. Scotland also benefits from defence financially—through employment and in less tangible ways. Although defence is reserved, the MOD recognises that the Scottish Parliament, the Executive and local authorities, such as the local authority to which Roseanna Cunningham referred, have a vital role to play. The Scottish Parliament and the Executive have a role in helping to ensure that Scottish interests are taken into account when UK defence policy is framed and implemented and when the MOD carries out its reserved responsibilities, particularly when the decisions directly affect both the MOD and the many thousands of MOD personnel who live and work in Scotland. Almondbank has been the subject of widespread speculation as a result of the MOD's end-to-end review. The review has examined the provision of UK-wide—as Roseanna Cunningham rightly said—logistic support across defence. I want to say at the outset that this devolved government is doing all it can to safeguard any Scottish jobs that may be under threat as a result of the review. As I understand it, the review aims to deliver more effective and efficient support to the front line. I am sure that members will support that objective. The review addresses the full scope of logistic support to land and air forces, from industry to the battlefield. As such, it looks much wider than Almondbank—and, indeed, wider than DARA.

I take Mr Raffan's point. I will address that issue shortly. The Executive has been assured by the MOD that there is no secret agenda in the end-to-end review about the future of DARA Almondbank. We fully understand that the MOD will want to achieve solutions that provide best value for money while  preserving operational effectiveness. Executive ministers have been reassured that, in accordance with the MOD's commitment to the trade unions, there will be a level playing field in considering in-house and external solutions. I can report to Parliament that the Scottish ministers and officials have, as Keith Raffan and Roseanna Cunningham mentioned, been keeping in close touch with the MOD about the developments. The Scottish Executive understands the importance of DARA to the local economy in Ms Cunningham's constituency and in the surrounding constituencies that Mr Swinney and others have mentioned. The Executive has been reassured that the end-to-end review recommendations that have significant investment implications or which might impact on civilian jobs will be subject to full investment appraisal to establish the costs and benefits, and to full trade union consultation in the usual way. The Executive and, I am sure, Parliament would expect nothing less from the MOD. Murdo Fraser, who has now left the chamber, Roseanna Cunningham and other members have mentioned that Adam Ingram, the Minister of State for the Armed Force, visited DARA Almondbank on 22 August. I am told that, as some members have mentioned, he gave assurances that there are no plans to close DARA Almondbank. Indeed, the recently opened £5 million hydraulic facility should put Almondbank at the forefront of mechanical component repair for the new Tornado and Typhoon work. The Executive understands that defence ministers have felt able to refute the Transport and General Workers Union assertion that the review entails considerable job losses for Almondbank. It is important to point out that the TGWU has had full access to management and to ministers in Whitehall. I understand that it has been consistently reassured by management that there is no secret agenda as regards DARA. Recent investments such as the new test facility at Almondbank put it in a good position to secure new work. The Scottish Executive has every reason to believe that the skills and competitiveness of the work force and management at Almondbank will ensure its long-term future. I recognise those points, which other members have also made.

I take Roseanna Cunningham's points. We seek to do things in different ways. Sometimes the public presentation may not be as formidable as some would like. It is important to recognise that there are different mechanisms for getting points across. At times we have to work through existing systems in order to make our case. However, I assure Roseanna Cunningham that the case that we are making, and continue to make, will be very strong. The agency carries out work not only for the MOD but, increasingly, for private companies, including a number of companies in the civil aviation sector. That work is important. The MOD is aware of the local authority assessment that Roseanna Cunningham mentioned and it is considering the economic impact. As Ms Cunningham would expect, officials from the Scottish Executive Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department are also involved. I will conclude by dealing with Roseanna Cunningham's two challenges. The Scottish Executive understands local concern about Almondbank and is doing all it can to safeguard any Scottish jobs that may be under threat. We acknowledge the critical role that Almondbank plays—in terms of its professional capabilities and in terms of its wider social and economic impact. I know that Ms Cunningham has asked for a meeting with the Deputy First Minister. I have spoken to the Deputy First Minister and he is minded to arrange that meeting as soon as is practically possible. I therefore hope that the two points that Ms Cunningham raised in her final remarks have been dealt with.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

Mr Crawford said that there was a good cross-party consensus on the Health Committee—presumably a good consensus in favour of the Executive, given that the motion was defeated by five votes to four. It is unfortunate that the SNP opposes the business motion and calls for a debate simply because the decision that was taken in committee did not go its way. The Health Committee has considered the matter fully. I understand that there was a three-hour meeting this morning and that Mr McCabe answered questions on the instrument for between an hour and a half and two hours. It is extraordinary to say that there has been no scrutiny of the instrument. If members of the Health Committee—or any member—had concerns about the food supplements directive, the committee was the most appropriate forum in which to raise those. It is usually most appropriate for subordinate legislation to be considered in committee. When that happens, it does not make sense to duplicate in the chamber work that has been done elsewhere. If that is not the position of the SNP, it is setting a new policy precedent—that all matters debated in committee should be referred to the full Parliament for further consideration. The Executive does not support that position, and I suggest that Parliament will not support it. In my view, it would imply criticism of the committee system and we would be seen openly to question the ability of the Health Committee to scrutinise subordinate legislation. On that basis, I ask members to support the business motion.

Mr Ewing is wrong for three reasons. In fact, he is wrong for many more reasons, but three will suffice for today. First, the accounting change on capital charges is important. Mr Ewing is correct on one point because the change could wait until the autumn or until next year. Indeed, the change could be made at any time before April 2004. Two measures have been put together in one revision, as they were in the motion that the Finance Committee debated, because that is the most efficient mechanism for taking matters forward. The Finance Committee agreed the process on 11 February. At that meeting, Mr Ewing's colleagues Mr Morgan and Mr Adam were content with the process. Mr Ewing shakes his head, but I suggest that he check the Official Report . The process was agreed on 11 February as a method of dealing with the Holyrood budget increase that we knew about at that time, which was £58 million. Secondly, the budget revision provides authority for additional spending on the Holyrood building of up to £94.377 million. That figure includes the final increase in costs of £37 million. Through its scrutiny role, the Finance Committee can play a major part in ensuring that the full amount provided for is used only if that is necessary. I would have thought that that was a compelling argument, but it is clear that Mr Ewing rejects it. The Executive's job is to amend the Scottish  budget in the light of the most accurate figures that are available to us to ensure that the Holyrood project can continue. That is the purpose of the budget revision. The Executive would be delighted if it turned out that it had provided for more funding than was necessary. We hope that that will be the case. Nevertheless, the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has asked us for an additional £94 million and we do not intend to amend the SPCB's estimate. Thirdly, Mr Reid, the Presiding Officer, has stated repeatedly that any further delay, in terms of the budget revision and costs, would simply delay the opening of the Holyrood building. Mr Ewing and his party are taking an astonishing position that could delay further the completion of the building. It is evident that that is the case. I suggest that Mr Ewing listen to Mr Reid's protestations on the matter. I urge members to accept the budget revision order.

If I may, I shall start with two of Parliament's committed ladies on the subject of Europe: Helen Eadie and Margaret Ewing. I shall do so because I believe that they both made a similar and extremely important point: that the current social, political and economic realities mean that we have to engage with and use Europe as effectively as we can. Both Mrs Ewing and Mrs Eadie said that, as did a number of other members, unlike the Eurosceptics from whom we also heard during this morning's proceedings. That fundamentally important point often gets overlooked in the context of debates on Europe. It  illustrates a reflective approach to those issues that is particularly important at this time, given the future of Europe convention. A number of members picked up on the importance of the future of the European convention, either agreeing or disagreeing with it. I observe, however, that few looked at it in detail. Irene Oldfather did so, illustrating to Parliament the benefits that positive engagement in the convention can bring to the Scottish Executive and, more important, to the people of Scotland in delivering legislation and powers that are within our competence. The convention deserves our support. It is an innovative and open way of addressing the increasingly big issues in Europe that need to be sorted out. I agree with Carolyn Leckie on her point about needing to make Europe more understandable—it was a fair point that was made by many members. We need to ensure that Europe regulates only when it must. That would be a profoundly important advance in European policy. We must also ensure that the European Union carries out its business more efficiently and, as Michael Matheson put it, more transparently and accountably. I hope to ensure that Parliament reflects all principal points of approach to those matters. The convention will and must tackle the democratic deficit, as Keith Raffan rightly put it. That is why the Executive has been active in pushing for a means of enforcing the subsidiarity principle, with which most members would agree. It has also been pushing for recognition of the role of the regions in Europe, more efficient policy-making and greater involvement with those on whom European policy impacts.

I was going to come on to that issue, and Mr Lochhead has given me the opportunity to do so now. The Executive believes strongly that breaches of the principle of subsidiarity are political rather than judicial matters and would be most effectively dealt with at an early stage in the legislative process. The Executive set out in the paper that it submitted to the convention a number of practical and workable proposals to ensure that early, pre-legislative consultation negates the need to risk over-burdening what I am sure Mr Lochhead would accept is an already busy court.  The convention is moving in the right direction—one in which Parliament should have confidence. However, the convention has not concluded its work and it is on that point that I disagree fundamentally with the Conservatives. There remain important issues to resolve. As Christine May said, there also remain a number of bogeymen that, hitherto, one could read about only in the pages of the Daily Mail . Mr Gallie mentioned them, which is at best disappointing but it is not of any great surprise. The proposals will be discussed at the IGC later this year and into next year, and the big issues remain up for grabs. The Executive will work extremely hard with our partners on those issues to ensure that the convention delivers firmly on the agenda that we have set for it.

Mr Gallie needs to accept my point that the process is fluid at the moment. We have worked hard through our representatives, who are involved in different aspects of the convention's work and who represent different parties in Scotland. We have done that over the past 16 to 18 months and will continue to do so throughout the IGC process. At no time will we take our eyes off the ball on the issues that Mr Gallie or other members raised.

Mr Raffan makes a fair point. I add to that by illustrating the work that the Scottish Executive is doing on linkages with other areas of Europe. It is important that the Executive has developed formal co-operation agreements with European partners. During 2002, agreements were signed with Catalonia and Tuscany, and more will follow shortly. Those are important commitments, and not only for some of our partners. The core point is that we must work with other parts of Europe to find common cause on issues of considerable economic, social and cultural interest and to ensure that we achieve shared objectives.

I want first to deal with enlargement. A number of members raised enlargement in relation to economic activity in Scotland. Alex Johnstone made some important points about agriculture. He will be aware that the National Farmers Union and other representative bodies have been closely involved in discussions with partner organisations in some of the accession countries, especially Poland, about the benefits that both sides can gain from enlargement. There is much to be said for such engagement. As Keith Raffan rightly said, last weekend 77 per cent of Poles voted in favour of accession to the European Union—on a 59 per cent turnout. That drives a coach and horses through the complaints of some. Poland has followed Malta, Slovenia, Hungary, Lithuania and Slovakia in supporting accession to the EU. The issue of the euro has been raised to the considerable excitement of many members. The Scottish Executive will work closely with Scottish business organisations and people throughout Scotland to prepare for the time when decisions about the euro are taken. I want to deal with two points that were made about fisheries. The first relates to the ridiculous speech that Mr Brocklebank made. Yesterday Jörgen Holmquist, the director general of the fisheries directorate-general, confirmed in Brussels to Highlands and Islands Enterprise that the competition directorate-general ruling on the Shetland and Orkney quota purchase scheme did not ban the practice in its entirety, only the discriminatory elements of the system. The member should get his facts rights before he makes such speeches. Nicola Sturgeon claimed that fisheries are not mentioned in the current treaties of the EU, but she should read the treaties. Article 32 of the treaty establishing the European Community requires a common fisheries policy, and annex 1 of that treaty lists fish among the products that are covered by article 32. A little homework would not do the member any harm. Important issues face Scotland at this time. It is important that Parliament and the European and External Relations Committee engage with the issues that we have debated. However, it is the partnership parties in the Executive that will take those issues forward. From what we have observed today, only the partnership parties have a positive engagement with the future of Europe.

I apologise profusely. I went to the loo. [ Laughter. ]

Mr Brocklebank should get his facts right before he makes the sort of assertion that he has just made. What he said about the European Union judgment is absolutely untrue. It allows the councils to consider mechanisms to achieve the same outcome in being able to purchase fish quotas; it does not ban them from doing so in the way that Mr Brocklebank described.

Did Mr Gallie agree with Mrs Thatcher when she signed the UK up to the Single European Act?

I welcome this debate on Europe, particularly on the morning that Ana Palacio, the Spanish foreign minister, has made an interesting contribution in The Scotsman to the increasingly important debate on the future of Europe. This morning's debate comes at an important stage in the debate on the future of Europe. The  105 members of the convention are about to produce a new constitution for the European Union after 16 months of work. The outcome should either help EU enlargement to work, and that is the Executive's wish, or dictate whether the creaking institutions of the European Union come grinding to a halt. The convention has the potential to have a great impact on the future of Europe and the future of countries in Europe including Scotland. When they gathered at Laeken back in December 2001, EU leaders were clear that a number of issues faced the developing Europe of the 21 st century. Perhaps the most important issue was a growing perception among citizens that Europe was becoming more and more distant. It was clear that Europe had to be reformed, to be more open and transparent in the way it conducts its business, to involve the people affected by its policies and laws and, most important, to be a Europe that people actually understand. The convention has produced some good, sensible proposals. It is true that they are not necessarily the stuff of tabloid headlines, but they should make a real difference to how the EU conducts its business and the extent to which it involves all those with an interest. The Scottish Executive has involved itself fully in the work of the convention. Last summer, the First Minister acted as rapporteur for a Committee of the Regions opinion on more democracy, more transparency and more efficiency in the EU. That opinion was adopted unanimously and formed a crucial plank of the committee's formal submission to the convention. Our work with other influential regional Governments led to the adoption in November in Florence of a declaration by 43 governments. In addition to our active involvement and leadership at the regional level, we have been able to fight for our interests with the full weight of a major member state behind us. We led the drafting of a joint submission on the role of the regions in Europe that was submitted to the convention in February on behalf of the Scottish Executive, the National Assembly for Wales Government and the UK Government. That submission contained a package of proposals to reflect the important role that the legislative regions have in implementing EU legislation. Our submission called for greater flexibility to be given to the implementing authorities so that they can reflect local circumstances and for greater use to be made of framework legislation, which sets the broad objectives to be achieved but leaves the detail up to those who deal with the implementation.

The Scottish National Party is eternally obsessed with who sits in what chair, rather than what gets done. The important point is what we achieve for Scotland. The SNP constantly forgets that and is never interested in what we achieve—it is interested in who is on the plane. I will tell members what has been achieved at the convention by the Scottish Executive working with the member state—the Scottish National Party could not care less about this, but people in Scotland do because it affects the legislation that governs this country. Our submission called for the Commission to consult us on new policies at an early stage in the planning process—presumably, the Scottish National Party opposes that, as Nicola Sturgeon is grinning away furiously. Our submission also called for a new mechanism to ensure subsidiarity—another thing that the SNP will, presumably, oppose. We do not want the EU to start making Europe-wide policy when we could do the job as well at member-state or regional level. That is something that the partnership parties are committed to but which the Scottish National Party clearly opposes. If Richard Lochhead will define his party's position, I will be grateful for his intervention.

The importance of the European Court of Justice is considerable and I will address it later. In areas of fundamental importance to the good government of Scotland, the Executive has worked hard and with considerable effect—although the SNP does not believe in doing that. Parliament will wish to be aware that the convention text takes good account of the role of regional Administrations, which is a first in European treaty terms. We consider that to be important, and its significance should not be underestimated and is not underestimated by partnership parties. The convention proposes a new protocol on subsidiarity. It includes the monitoring mechanism that we demanded. National and regional Parliaments will have the chance to cry foul if they believe that particular proposals breach the principle. Those are important victories as a result of the work that we have done and they should be  regarded as such. Under the convention's proposals, the Commission will be obliged to consult widely before making legislative proposals, and it will be compelled to take into account the regional and local dimension of the action envisaged. That is a good result. We know that there is still work to be done with our partners to ensure that those proposals make it through the inter-governmental conference that will kick off later this year to negotiate the final constitutional treaty, but we have excellent foundations for that discussion now. I will tackle some of the misinformation spouted by Nicola Sturgeon. The SNP claims that the convention proposes additional competence for the EU in the fisheries field. That is untrue. Nothing in the draft proposals under consideration in the convention at the moment would bring about any change to the current position on competence. If a proposal emerged for any extension to EU competence, the Executive and the UK would oppose it vigorously. Are we giving up any responsibility for fishing? The answer is an unambiguous no.

I would have more respect for that position had SNP members not made U-turns on fisheries throughout the recent election. They said—we all remember this—that the transitional relief package was wrong, and then they said that it was right. They said that decommissioning was wrong, and then they said that it was right. I have here Mr Lochhead's press release, which I will read to him, if he likes. The SNP's position on fishing is a complete sell-out of everything that it ever says in the chamber. It is one of the rich ironies of Scottish nationalism—into the European Union but out of the common fisheries policy. The SNP never explains, particularly in fishing constituencies how that would happen. It never explains how it would negotiate entry into the EU in an independent Scotland and at the same time withdraw from the CFP. Its position is not credible. The Executive has taken forward and will take  forward genuine management changes to the CFP. Those changes will build on the progress made in December in securing relative stability and the retention of the 6 and 12-mile fishing limits and the Shetland box. Those were important victories for the Scottish fishing industry. All those policies were secured at that time, despite the scepticism of many.

There are persuasive arguments for fishermen being involved in local decision making, a point that I know Stewart Stevenson agrees with. Both partnership parties not only agree with those arguments but are implementing policies on that through regional management initiatives. That is the future—working with the fishing industry to build a sustainable future.

So how would Mr Stevenson negotiate with Denmark, Norway and the other member states that have competence in the North sea? The SNP never provides answers to those questions because it does not have any. Fishing, and the SNP's duplicity on that issue, is one aspect of its motion, but there are further nationalist inconsistencies on Europe that must be exposed. Is it independence in Europe or independence out of Europe? Is it yes or no to the convention? Yes or no to the euro? Nicola Sturgeon proposes a Scottish test. Is that the John Swinney test or the Alex Neil test? Is it the Roseanna Cunningham test or the Kenny MacAskill test? John Swinney regards the convention proposals as "generally a positive step". I quote Andrew Wilson in his paper for national assembly discussion on "Economic policy and positioning": "Scotland's best interests would be served through membership of the European single currency area as soon as is practically possible". Then we turn to Mr Neil. I have re-read the text of an interesting lecture that he gave in September and it makes fascinating reading. As usual from Mr Neil, it is entertaining, but not, I suspect, for Mr Swinney:  "My purpose is to initiate a debate in Scotland and particularly within the SNP on whether a yes or no vote is in Scotland's interest. I will argue that the SNP, when the time comes, should campaign for a no vote in the UK Euro referendum. I will argue that the SNP in the run up to the referendum should revisit our support in principle for membership of the Euro." It is rich for the SNP to attack the Scottish Executive for the constructive work that we are doing to strengthen Scotland's role in the European convention and in the wider debate about Europe, at the same time as the SNP is having a sordid internal debate. On that basis, Parliament should reject the SNP motion today. The convention proposals set out clearly for the first time where the EU has exclusive competence; where it shares competence with member states and their regions; and where it can act only in support of member-state action. That is a good step forward for two reasons. First, it enables people to see at a glance the division of competence between the EU and member states. Secondly, it allows a clear definition of competence, which should protect us against creeping encroachment by the European Union into areas that were previously our responsibility. The Executive welcomes the opportunity to make the positive case for Europe and will play a full role in the debate on Europe. Inevitably, that will include the euro. It is for Westminster to determine the future on that matter, but the Executive believes that entry into the single currency is in principle desirable. The principal role of the Scottish Executive is to work with business, organisations and people throughout the country to prepare for the time when the UK joins the single currency. The First Minister and the Deputy First Minister will be members of the Scottish committee on euro preparations. As the representatives of the people of Scotland, we should seek to promote the benefits that our nation can gain from Europe and the euro. Every member of the Parliament who understands those benefits should join us in that campaign. I turn to the other amendments. The very phrase "the Tories and Europe" brings back so many happy memories: Teresa Gorman, Bill Cash, even Lord Lamont of Lerwick and Phil Gallie—a history of catastrophic economic mismanagement. I will quote two Conservatives who spoke following Monday's statement by the chancellor in the House of Commons. Mr David Curry asked: "Given that there will be a natural gravitational pull toward countries that have espoused the policies that are considered to be central to the European Union, is it not important that the Chancellor bears those facts in mind and gets on with his further assessment at the earliest sensible  opportunity?"—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 9 June 2003; Vol 406, c 434.]

Let me read out the second quote. Murdo Fraser will enjoy this one, as it comes from Kenneth Clarke, whom I know he particularly admires. Mr Clarke said: "I look forward to Budget day next year, when he"— the chancellor— "and I might at last begin to campaign together in support of the views that we hold in common".— [ Official Report , House of Commons , 9 June 2003; Vol 406, c 424.]  I am sure that Conservative members of the Scottish Parliament share those views. Mr Gallie's amendment is presumably a response to the cries from certain hysterical sections of the press and to a deep-seated desire to question, under cover of a referendum, the UK's continued membership of the European Union. I invite Parliament to reject the Tory and SSP amendments, as well as the SNP motion. The debate about Europe's future is about a vision, within an ever more interdependent world. It is about whether this country is frightened, isolationist and living in the past or—as the partnership parties believe—optimistic, internationalist and willing to embrace change. I move amendment S2M-124.4, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "welcomes the many benefits that the European Union (EU) has delivered for Europe and for Scotland; continues to believe that the EU should seek to become more effective, efficient, democratic, transparent, accountable and easier to understand; notes the work of the Convention on the Future of Europe towards these objectives; further welcomes the submission to the convention of the proposals on Europe and the regions drawn up by the Scottish Executive in conjunction with Her Majesty's Government and the Welsh Assembly Government; further notes with approval the references in the draft Constitutional Treaty under consideration in the convention to the role of the regions, and to mechanisms for consulting them; welcomes the intention of Her Majesty's Government to involve the devolved administrations in the operation of the subsidiarity mechanism proposed by the convention, and calls on the Scottish Executive to continue to work with other sub-member state administrations and Her Majesty's Government to ensure that Scottish interests are fully taken into account during the forthcoming Inter-Governmental Conference."

Would Nicola Sturgeon care to state at this stage what the referendum would be about? At this moment, the convention has not concluded its discussions, there is no agreement on its final proposals and we do not know whether the final proposal will include a single president of the European Council. It is ludicrous to suggest that we should have a referendum today until we know what the final outcome is.

Will Nicola Sturgeon give way?

Fiona Hyslop and Bill Aitken took a positive approach to resolving the issues in what I think is a fair manner, particularly for the minor parties. Members can imagine the howls of righteous indignation had the major parties done what they could have done under the d'Hondt system and ensured that only on the 15 th pick did one Green get the place on one committee, and that was it. However, we did not do that. The four main parties worked together to give places to the minor parties. [ Applause. ] I agree with Bill Aitken's point that any member is able to attend any committee, which firmly deals with Carolyn Leckie's point. In Patricia Ferguson's motion, the name of Dr Jean Turner appears under the membership of the Health Committee. She will be on the Health Committee—let there be no doubt about that. It is curious that the SSP has made a song and dance about the issue—irrespective of its need to make a song and dance about everything—although I can well envisage  what the SSP might have done had we not made places available in the way that we have. I take Bill Aitken's point about the justice committees, because the preferred solution would have been to have one justice committee. However, even a passing reference to the partnership agreement shows the weight of legislation that will come through, which Mr Aitken would acknowledge. That legislation necessitates having two justice committees. It will be essential to have them. On the rural and environment areas, there is no perfect model. I inform Mr Ballard that there was no stand-alone environment committee in the last session. I think that he made the relevant point himself, which is that nature conservation, water services and strategic environmental assessment are three significant areas for environmental legislation. I am sure that he and members of his party—including Eleanor Scott, who, if the motion is passed, will be deputy convener of the Environment and Rural Development Committee, a position which Patricia Ferguson gave up to allow the Greens that role—will have the opportunity to play a full role in such legislation. Further, the committee will have in Sarah Boyack a member and a convener—if that is confirmed—who is committed to the environment. The suggestion that the Executive is not taking the environment seriously is wide of the mark. On conveners and deputy conveners, it is important to recognise that the result that we have before us today was arrived at using the d'Hondt system in the same way as it was used four years ago on the basis that that was the fairest way to proceed at the time. Those who complain about the system should bear in mind the fact that Patricia Ferguson gave up two deputy convenerships that would otherwise have been given to Labour. I notice that the SSP has not chosen to take up the one that it was offered—I wonder why. Further, they might wish to observe that having the 15 th pick out of 16 convenerships might have been rather worse for the minor parties than the situation that we have before us. The motion is fair and reflects the considerable efforts that have been made to accommodate the minor parties. I commend it to the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the agricultural industry and what issues were discussed. (S1O-6711)

Does the minister accept that environmentally sensitive area status is extremely important for those parts of Scotland that have such designations? Does he accept that the consultation being undertaken by his department gives an opportunity to review not only the three options outlined in the consultation paper but a fourth option, namely the rolling-on of ESAs to ensure that, in a smooth transition, land management contracts can be introduced while the benefits of the ESAs are not lost to those farmers and crofters who have them?

I take the minister's point about the commitment equivalent to £30 per passenger, but does he accept that if the full fare from Shetland to Inverness, for example, is £350, we are not achieving an awful lot through that mechanism?

Will Jamie McGrigor say which new boats the Tories brought into service during their 18 years in power?

I mean boats for the northern isles.

I have a desperate desire not to be the most expensive MSP on our annual list. Thankfully, the Daily Mail is read by few people in Shetland—

Indeed. When that newspaper prints rough articles with me at the top of the list, I accept that as part of politics. However, the cost of flying to and from the islands of Scotland is painful for my constituents in Shetland and, indeed, for constituents in other islands. I lodged my motion for consideration by Parliament on that basis. There can be no doubt that, without regular, affordable and reliable air services, the islands of Scotland suffer. The current lifeline services do not meet the affordability test. Furthermore, they have shortcomings in terms of regularity and reliability. The cost of travel to my constituency is high. An investigation of British Airways ticketing prices shows that fares range between £138 and £299, without taxes, for a return between Sumburgh and Aberdeen. That is a cost on business. For example, a seafood business that wanted to export or to make contacts at the Brussels seafood exposition every year would face exorbitant travel costs. Travel adds to the cost of doing business in the islands.

I have had that holiday on a Greek island in self-catering accommodation—with my wife, I may add—for the cost of flying to  Shetland. As Margaret Ewing said, such high costs are faced by residents of the island and by business. However, they are also faced by the public sector, at public expense. NHS Shetland's bill for travel by patients and staff to the Scottish mainland is some £1.5 million every year. For all the islands together, the national health service bill is some £4 million. If councils, enterprise companies and the rest of the public sector are included, the take from the public purse rises to some £6 million. Mrs Ewing's example of a holiday is relevant. However, I feel as strongly, if not more so, about the people who have to travel—at short notice—to a family funeral. That is particularly distressing. The cost, when added to the inevitable difficulties of those circumstances, is significant. Tourism is also constrained by the cost of flying to and from the islands. At a time when I see economic change in my constituency—as across the Highlands and Islands—it is particularly important that tourism be grown and energised. That involves reducing the cost of flying and enabling people to travel more easily and more affordably to the islands. Public service obligations, which have been part of the debate for some time, can and do address the issues of reliability, regularity and affordability. The case has been made, extremely well, in my view, by HITRANS, the Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership—many members were at its recent presentation in Edinburgh. HITRANS found that the existing services are "marginally profitable", but only at the expense of fares that are "holding back the social and economic development of Scotland's peripheral regions." For me, that alone is reason enough for us to consider carefully the HITRANS proposals, specifically on the use of public service obligations. HITRANS set out in its proposals a plan to use PSOs to specify increased services, providing better links right across the Highlands and Islands. It calculates that, to reduce the average fare by 33 per cent and to improve the service, the Scottish Executive would have to provide an annual subsidy of just under £10 million. However, I suggest to Parliament and to the Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning that, if one deducts the cost of existing PSOs on west coast services and takes into account the savings on the public sector travel bill and the extra passenger revenue, the net extra cost to the public purse would be considerably less. I have long argued that, if fares come down and services improve, more people will use those services, which will increase the revenue and therefore the amount of money available within the services.

That is a different issue and concerns the use of PSOs to guarantee slots. Mr Ewing and other members have made that argument, which is a fair one. My belief has always been that we should have a link with Heathrow, but that is probably an argument for another day. The other advantage of the HITRANS proposals is that they provide a fare structure that would be open and transparent. That is palpably not the case at present. We could therefore remove the anomaly whereby Loganair, to its eternal credit, offers half-price fares for children, whereas British Airways currently does not. In addition, the timetable could be specified to suit the needs of passengers. A day return to many of the islands could be created for people who have to travel at short notice, whether for a hospital appointment or for business. Through that mechanism, Government could provide the service that islands need. HITRANS has shown that, with a comparatively modest annual subsidy, a reduction in the burden on island life could be achieved. That logic has convinced me and my party—I certainly plan to fight the forthcoming election on the basis of those proposals, which are firm, solid and well worked out. I have two final points, the first of which relates to shipping and livestock transport. I am sure that I have made this case to the minister until he is fed up to the back teeth of my making it, but I hope that, in winding up, he will say something about livestock shipping to the northern isles, particularly with reference to stock boats. I hope that he will talk about the proposals that I know the shipping companies have made to the Executive, as that could allay the concerns of crofters and farmers in the northern isles about the availability of those boats. Secondly, the stock movement system for the northern isles could be brought forward without great delay on the basis of a specification that considers issues such as affordability, welfare standards and routes. Measures could be taken forward with local crofters and farmers in the northern isles. I commend the motion on the basis that we should all support an integrated approach to transport.

The member is talking about matters of detail, so will he tell me specifically what his party's policy is with regard to Highlands and Islands Enterprise?

I am afraid that Mr Ewing is just wrong. The North Atlantic Fisheries College in Scalloway carries out work on halibut, cod, monkfish and any number of other species.

If Andrew Wilson is Harry Potter, Annabel Goldie did a passable imitation of Hermione Granger—complete with blue stockings. I will share two thoughts on Mr Wilson's speech. It is a bit rich of him to lecture other parties on positive campaigning, when his party's idea of what that means is to put up a picture of the First Minister being stubbed into an ashtray. Let us have some standards from Mr Wilson's party as well. Also, I am sure that we will all hold Mr Wilson to his commitment that he will now take economic statistics over a 30-year time line. I applaud that long-term view and I look forward to hearing his comments when the next quarter's gross domestic product figures are published. We will then see how consistent he is on that point. I begin by making one or two brief points about the international situation. It is interesting that neither of the Opposition parties touched on that in their opening speeches. Indeed, it seems extraordinary that they should not be at least conscious of the difficulties that are being caused to economies worldwide by what is happening internationally. No one should underestimate the long-term economic impact of US unilateralism and the Bush Administration's approach to old Europe. The schisms within Europe create significant economic uncertainties in Scotland's major export market for manufacturing. Last Friday's EU summit was meant to be about economic reform within the EU but, for understandable reasons,  that was forgotten. Instead, Europe's leaders spent more time postponing for another year discussion on how to make Europe the most competitive economy in the world. That is very important because the European Union has the legitimate right to impose £2.5 billion of trade sanctions against the United States because of American exporters' use of offshore financial means to circumvent the trading system. There are economic difficulties brewing internationally. We should also consider tourism against the international background. Present estimates forecast potential losses to tourism of 3 per cent if the war is geographically and time limited—which must be pretty doubtful. Business tourism is uncertain given the present economic position. Another important industrial sector that should be borne in mind in the overall international context is oil and gas, which is a mature Scottish industry. Recent job cuts by BP and Shell in Aberdeen and in my own part of the world have caused few ripples, but the North sea is now a mature and declining field. The oil majors have considered their international investment criteria and want to invest in fields that are growing rather than ones that are declining. Last year, only 14 wells were drilled in the North sea. In the northern North sea there was despondency about the failure to strike any new fields in the Faroese sector. However, there are still 55 companies that are extracting oil and gas from 300 fields and the Clare field, west of Shetland, is still to come on stream. Those 300 fields raise some £4.5 billion in taxes for the Government. Smaller companies are now purchasing assets from the BPs of this world—witness last week's sale of the Forties field to Apache. The Scottish Executive must be aware that last year's budget will cost the industry some £8 billion by 2010. Energy companies like stability. Even if the Government tells them plainly that they should plan for bad financial news, they still want financial stability. They need to know what is coming. What caused the fiscal difficulties last year was the bolt out of the blue. That needs to be recognised. In the spirit of the growing businesses theme in "A Smart, Successful Scotland", I want to mention renewable energy, which the minister referred to in his opening remarks. That must be an area where we can build on Scotland's strengths, natural resources and manufacturing excellence. Yesterday, my colleague Ross Finnie stated the Executive's intention to work towards a target of 40 per cent of energy being produced from green resources by 2020. The Executive's commitment allied to the expertise and enterprise in the Scottish renewables sector will enable Scotland to succeed in that area.  If I agreed with anything that Annabel Goldie said, it was that it is not the job of the Executive or any Government to develop renewables projects. That is for the industry. It is the Government's role to develop a policy, economic and planning framework that supports the development of our renewables potential in new business start-ups.

Mr Crawford should look closely at what the Executive announced yesterday because such a strategy was inherent in the announcement. There is the opportunity to undertake and commercialise research through such projects and existing manufacturing expertise. That is very much part of the approach of the Executive and my party to renewables and to many other areas of environmental advancement. Scotland cannot rely on hydro and onshore wind alone as established technologies for reaching that 40 per cent target. The development of marine energy—energy from waves and tides—is at an early stage, but it represents a huge opportunity for Scotland and is an area where the country can definitely become a world leader. It is especially important to build on the synergies with and the expertise of the oil and gas sector. The new £5.65 million marine energy test centre in Orkney will provide a state-of-the-art testing facility for marine power technology with £2 million of Executive funding. That is where Highlands and Islands Enterprise is so important; it is the very body that helped to bring that centre about, and I now know that the Conservatives would all but abolish that body. The project is of international significance. It will put Scotland at the forefront of research and the commercialisation of wave and tidal power. In a rural or island context, the issue is about exporting power to where it is needed. The Government must therefore ensure that the reserved issues relating to upgrading and investment in the electricity grid are resolved. Renewable energy is not all about harnessing wave and tidal power on Scotland's coasts. On the business pages of one of the newspapers this week there is the example of a company called Renewable Devices Ltd, which is based outside Penicuik. Through the innovation of two former scientists turned businessmen, that company will  produce the first household wind turbine, to be unveiled later this year. That is the kind of innovative project that we should be encouraging through business start-up funding in Scotland.

I will make the speech that I want to make, not the speech that Mr Davidson wants me to make. I do not plan to abolish Highlands and Islands Enterprise.

Yes the Conservatives do. I do not plan to cut £260 million from the budget of Scottish Enterprise, because I believe in investment and skills and training. I note that the Conservative party does not believe in investment in skills and training and would cut £260 million from those budgets. That is the difference between my party and the Conservative party. Another industry that can and must grow is food and drink production. Food and drink are worth £4.3 billion per annum to Scotland and there is a strategic aim to increase that to £7.4 billion by 2010. It is important to drive for innovation. One of those areas of innovation is healthy foods, which are increasingly important to consumers in this consumer society. Research by the Edinburgh-based Dr Ron Lewis demonstrated that Shetland lamb has high levels of the fatty acid known as conjugated linoleic acid, which is known to have healthy benefits because it reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease. [ Interruption. ] Members might laugh, but I would have thought that a farmer such as Alex Johnstone would have known that it is quite important to develop such innovative projects and to use the produce from our countryside. If the member does not agree with that approach, that is his problem.

I do not think that it is producing less. An article in The Herald today illustrates that sales of whisky—if that is the statistic that Andrew Wilson is using—are down, but their value is up. In that context, I am not sure that he is correct.

I take the minister's point. It is an area in which I am sure the parties on this side of the chamber would wish to continue investing. The parties opposite clearly would not. I will make one other point on food and drink resources, which are important for Scotland as a whole, and that is on fish. The fish sector is under-utilised in terms of quality. It is an important area that must be driven forward at this time, despite all the difficulties that the industry faces. The more central point is to do with the power of the supermarkets, which is an issue that I raise as an island representative in view of the price of the product on supermarket shelves. For example, why does salmon in the Sainsbury's down the road from me cost between £12 and £25 a kilo retail price, when the price to the farmer is £1.50 a kilo? The same applies to many products. The power of the supermarkets is immense, but to what benefit to primary producers? The importance of food retailing and production, through initiatives such as the development of organics and farmers markets, is important in that context. I finish with a couple of points on skills, for which the Conservatives have little regard. It was disappointing to note, in an article in The Scotsman on Monday on the developing Inverness economy, Highlands and Islands Enterprise's concerns about being able to get enough young people to become labourers or to work in the construction industry. That shows why it is so important that Highlands and Islands Enterprise and Scottish Enterprise are allowed to develop skills training. It also shows why the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report on lifelong learning, and the minister's response to it, rightly emphasised parity of esteem—the importance of using vocational routes to work and valuing them equally with academic careers. Glasgow College of Food Technology published a survey that suggested that Scotland's tourism and hospitality industries are facing a shortage of skilled staff, which was illustrated by the fact that 66 per cent of those who were questioned said that in the next 10 years there would be a lack of sufficiently skilled workers. Those are the challenges. They are long-term challenges, and they must be met by the enterprise network and the Scottish Executive.  I do not find compelling the arguments of those who argue for the cutting of budgets in areas where there is clear evidence of skills shortages. That must be addressed. It is profoundly worrying to me that some people appear to think that that is the right approach to business development, training and investment in the future of the Scottish economy. It is right to concentrate on Scottish growth, which is what we will do. That is why enterprise in education—running right through to secondary 6, as the minister mentioned—is so important. It is why modern apprenticeships are so important. It is also why it is important to allow younger people from 14 to work partly in a business, where they can gain a time-served apprenticeship in conjunction with their school work.

No, I am finishing. Projects such as Columba 1400 in Skye are important, because they will take teachers and create the inspirational beliefs and structures that are so important for the future of enterprise in our education sector. In time, such initiatives will serve to promote the growth that we all seek.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets and Her Majesty's Government about the impact of proposed zonal charges for transmission losses on the promotion of renewable energy generation. (S1O-6680)

Most of Scotland's renewable energy potential is in coastal and island areas, such as my own constituency of Shetland. Does the minister accept that there is a need to ensure  that the cost of installing or upgrading large capacity grid connections for those areas neither stops such developments nor hits domestic or business consumers disproportionately hard?

Does the First Minister accept that the United Nations must be the forum of international decision making, to ensure that unilateral military action is avoided?

There is no doubt that Saddam Hussein's regime must disarm. Few hold any truck with his regime and its actions. There is no doubt that UN resolution 1441 made the inspectors' work possible. Saddam Hussein's regime must be disarmed of its weapons of mass destruction. This debate and the debate across the country have been about how to achieve that objective. It is true that there have been 17 UN resolutions on Iraq, but Keith Raffan's earlier point about containment was important. What threat does Saddam Hussein currently pose to the international community? For the period of the Clinton Administration, the UK Government was happy to go along with a policy of containment. Only when the US Administration changed and the policy of pre-emption came into play did the UK's policy change. It is that inconsistency of approach, which many have mentioned today, that worries many people throughout the country. It seems certain that a second UN resolution on this matter will be vetoed and voted against. As the Spanish foreign minister said last night, it is not even certain whether it is worth putting a second resolution to a vote. However, on Monday,  as John Swinney said, Kofi Annan, the UN Secretary General, said that if the US and others were to go outside the UN Security Council and take unilateral action, they "would not be in conformity with the UN charter". Given the French line this morning, and the veto that still therefore overshadows the second resolution, Kofi Annan's words are immensely important. If a veto is used, there will be no resolution. There has been much criticism of the French, but it is important to remember that the French and the Germans were on the receiving end of Donald Rumsfeld's tactful suggestion that they were the "old Europe". It is important to recognise that in international diplomacy, as in every walk of life, language of that nature does not constructively aid a process of international deliberation. It is also important to recognise that the US has used a veto at the United Nations 76 times since 1946. The United Kingdom has used its veto 32 times, and France 18 times, the last of which was in 1989. A veto is a veto is a veto. If the international world matters, with the United Nations at its kernel, we cannot pick and mix. The importance of the United Nations has been paramount for many members. For me, it is hugely rewarding that so many have made that point. What is the alternative? The Conservatives certainly did not answer that question; they do not have an answer. President Bush's spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said earlier this week that the US would replace the United Nations with "another international body" to disarm Saddam if the UN remained recalcitrant. What in heaven's name did he mean? I share the concerns of many members, if not the majority, that the US Administration's policy of pre-emptive action when its national security is threatened is profoundly dangerous. The developing situation around North Korea's nuclear arsenal only reinforces that danger. The irony of ironies is that the US is now asking the UN to consider North Korea's nuclear arsenals. Members have rightly mentioned other rogue states around the world. I am not anti-American. I lived in America for a year and have many friends there. I am, however, very concerned about a right-wing Republican Administration that seeks to change the international world order in pursuing a policy of pre-emptive action. Three international institutions have shaped the UK's international perspective: the EU, NATO and the United Nations. As Susan Deacon said, they are all divided over Iraq. The world community has just put the International Criminal Court into being,  as Pauline McNeill mentioned. She was right to say that the United States should be involved in that. We cannot pick and mix when building our international institutions. Future world strength in resolving such intractable problems as the current crisis needs the maintenance and enhancement of such bodies. I was disappointed by the Conservatives' approach this morning. I have listened to people such as Kenneth Clark, Geoffrey Howe and, today, John Young—[ Applause. ] I do not make any political point. They have supported the position of many throughout Britain. I cannot believe that any member—and I say this to Labour members—is comfortable about being supported by Iain Duncan Smith's Tories and by David McLetchie, who gave that cheap speech this morning. Forgive me, as I have forgotten who mentioned this point first, but for David McLetchie to mention the word "humanitarian" only once in 12 and a half minutes, given the subject of his amendment, showed the true position of the Conservatives. Members may recognise the Liberal Democrat amendment, as it is very similar to the one that we lodged in January and the same as the House of Commons amendment that we tabled in November. I know that many members believe strongly in the importance of international institutions; that is what has been so important for me in the debate. Those institutions must be rebuilt. The Liberal Democrat amendment encourages an approach towards Iraq whereby the United Nations is the only institution with the political and moral authority in this situation, and under which there should be no military action unless it is sanctioned by the UN Security Council, and only as a last resort, after all other avenues have been pursued. The amendment supports more time for the weapons inspectors and a substantive vote in the House of Commons. I was pleased that the First Minister recognised that in his remarks. This is not easy for any member, especially Labour members. The case for war has not been made. More time is needed. Is that too much to ask? I encourage Parliament to support the Liberal Democrat amendment at this most grievously difficult international time.

Will Mr Fitzpatrick take an intervention?

Will Mr Wallace explain to us the Conservatives' alternative to the United Nations?

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment has been made of the effects of the outcome of the negotiations on general practitioner contracts on the provision of GP services in the islands. (S1O-6581)

I thank the minister for his reply, particularly for his point about pressure on island GP practices. Will he ensure that the negotiations reflect the difficulties in retaining doctors that the Lerwick doctors' practice and Shetland NHS Board are facing? Does he accept that the Lerwick practice is running with only 50 per cent of its recommended doctor work force? Given that recruitment and, crucially, retention are widespread difficulties for island and rural GP practices, will he consider measures, particularly out-of-hours cover, to help those areas?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the aquaculture industry and what matters were discussed. (S1O-6468)

I understand that the minister plans to publish the framework document in March. Will he confirm that he is looking at two specific areas, namely, a one-stop-shop approach for the industry for making applications and the need to bear down on costs as a result of the incredibly intense competitive pressures that exist, given the nature of salmon farming at the moment?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I absolutely agree with what the minister has said. However, does he understand the frustration of fishermen, who see that although they return information on discards to his department, which sends it on to Brussels, people  in other EU member states do not?

The appalling, unfair and discriminatory outcome of the December fisheries council is already hitting the fishing industry in my constituency very hard indeed. Grotesque uncertainty exists about the present position. Crews, agents and local fisheries managers are trying to run an industry for which there are few details and less hope. For many Shetland fishermen, after a promising 2002, the  outcome of the fisheries council in December was a body blow. I welcome the Minister for Environment and Rural Development's work in meeting fishermen from my constituency and the fact that the First Minister met the fishing industry on Monday in Scalloway. However, current fisheries policy, which is forever being micromanaged from Brussels, gives fishermen an impossible choice: bankruptcy or breaking the law. That is the reality of the present position, and why I oppose the arbitrary and artificial balance to the £50 million package that has been announced. I recognise a change of position, in that fishermen will be compensated through tie-up moneys where Europe has imposed a mandatory period in port. That is welcome, but it will not be enough unless the support is of sufficient value that boats will actually use it. I suggest a simple formula that targets those boats and crews that are most in need and most disadvantaged by the present appalling position. Unless enough resources are applied to transitional support, boats will not take it and the results will be threefold. First, those who are unfortunate to be decommissioned will face bankruptcy. Secondly, many will fish regardless of the rules. They will fish north of the 61 deg line, but there will also be displacement. I agree with the remarks on displacement that have been made by Alasdair Morrison and George Lyon. We need to seek to avoid it, but there can be no doubt that it will happen unless the transitional support is adequate. To argue that there will be no displacement under the current package shows a fundamental misunderstanding. Thirdly, imports of fish, which Elaine Thomson mentioned, will increase. Prices will remain as depressed as they have been in recent weeks around Scotland's fish markets. A Whalsay skipper who spoke to me on Saturday said that 300 boxes of good fish that were caught this week and landed into Lerwick on Friday were worth a gross of some £11,000. A week before Christmas, the same quantity of fish landed into the Lerwick market grossed £16,000. There are some serious issues with imports and the situation will get worse. I fear that too many bureaucrats have no idea about the reality of the position that fishing communities around Scotland face.

I am really not interested in the Scottish National Party's constitutional nonsense. I am interested in finding the best deal for the Scottish and Shetland fishing industry. I am sick to death of wasting time on facts that do not matter. I am interested in finding a common fisheries policy that works, because the present one does not work. If the SNP had been leading in the fisheries council, it would have achieved nothing more than an 80 per cent cut in quotas. I will take no lectures from that lot on the issue. The choice is stark: enforced bankruptcy or breaking the law. The director of conservation policy in the European Commission's fisheries directorate-general yesterday told the Rural Development Committee that the common fisheries policy had failed. However, the European Commission wants to continue to micromanage the industry. Yesterday, the Commission suggested six detailed points of change to the interim measures so as to alter the draconian days-at-sea rules. They are more of the same, however, and the policy is still to micromanage. That must change. Unless decisions are made locally and quickly, fishermen will increasingly ask, as they are asking now, "Why are we in the common fisheries policy?" I am not prepared to accept the outcome as it stands at the moment; I trust that the Government is not either.

I am not a member of the Finance Committee, and in entering this rarefied air of consideration of the budget in such detail I feel somewhat of an interloper, but I agree with Richard Simpson's point about the need for the Opposition parties to illustrate what they would do differently. My party does that at Westminster, and while the Government of the day disagrees with it, at least the debate is about alternative proposals. It is an important principle of opposition politics in Parliament that Opposition parties produce their own fundamental budget proposals.  First, I will concentrate briefly on a small area of the environment budget—the Scottish community renewables initiative—which is a new area of expenditure funded from that budget block. It is a grant scheme for communities and individuals to provide for the installation of green energy supplies for projects such as community halls or homes. The days in my part of Scotland, or indeed in many members' parts of Scotland, where the condition of old snooker tables in community halls gets worse because there is no heat can be done away with under the scheme, because it can provide for a clean, renewable energy source that is always on. That ensures that heating is available for youth clubs and sports clubs where communities are unable to afford the cost of heating such facilities. The initiative is important in policy terms and in terms of practical improvements for the people who live in our communities. For community projects, the green power can come from a wind turbine, solar panels, hydro, wave, geothermal or biomass. For such projects there is a £10,000 maximum grant for a feasibility study, followed by up to £100,000 grant aid for the capital cost. The community projects must, of course, be non-profit distributing. That is an important area, and it is an important grant scheme that is being provided by the Scottish Executive in this Budget Bill. There is a householder scheme on top of the community scheme. The feedback from Highlands and Islands Enterprise's energy office in Kirkwall, which is handling the scheme, is that it is generating such high demand that the budget may not meet the demand. I ask the minister to work with colleagues in other departments to examine extra funding for the scheme, because it is precisely the sort of scheme that can make a big difference to community groups and individuals the length and breadth of Scotland. Community and domestic renewable energy schemes are welcome and valued in their own right, but they are just the tip of the renewables iceberg. My second point relates to Scotland's ability to target and harness renewable resources. There are currently only 13 operational windfarms in Scotland, but as many as 760 new wind turbines in up to 40 windfarms will be needed over the next 10 years if the Executive is to meet its renewables targets. The 40 per cent target that is currently being consulted on is even more challenging. That is why tidal and wave technologies are so important. Renewables offer the chance to do something for the environment and future generations; at the same time, they offer enterprise opportunities, which must be important in the context of debates  that are happening, and have happened this week in Parliament, on economic growth and gross domestic product figures. Scotland has the chance, which must not be missed, to take a lead in wave and tidal current power. The Danes in particular have already grasped the immense benefits of leading in wind turbine manufacturing. Scotland's universities can be at the forefront of wave power research. It is particularly important that the enterprise budget concentrates on that area, and that the excellent work of the research assessment exercise ensures that research is married to engineering and construction skills. There is an opportunity to transfer the hard-won skills of our offshore oil industry to offshore renewables. In the week when BP made it clear that its long-term strategy was to move away from Alaska and the mature North sea fields towards investments in Russia, it is vital for the north-east not to lose the skills in Aberdeen and the surrounding communities as companies take strategic decisions to transfer to other parts of the globe. Tidal power has great potential and a prototype was tested successfully in my constituency in Yell sound last year. The 1993 Department of Trade and Industry survey found that 10 per cent of the UK's electricity demand could be met by harnessing the tidal currents of the Pentland firth alone, which would provide enough electricity for the whole of Scotland. I hope that, in future budget bills, the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services will make proposals that concentrate on and harness renewable energy resources. To provide power where it is needed—in the population centres in the central belt of Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom—the Scottish Executive and the UK Government have an important role in providing subsea cables. Investment in such strategic infrastructure will be needed from public money, European money and private money to benefit the energy policy that the country needs. The budget delivers much throughout the public services, but it is in the detailed matters, and particularly projects such as the Scottish community renewables initiative, that MSPs and Parliament can make a difference to people from Shetland to Stranraer and can show that budget bills are about not only vast quantities of money, but real differences to people in their local communities. On that basis, I have great pleasure in commending the bill to Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the fishing industry and what matters were discussed. (S1O-6428)

On that support package, if there must be some decommissioning of the white-fish industry, as the Scottish Fishermen's Federation agrees, will the minister accept that white-fish quota must be retained in Scotland's fishing communities? Given the fact that beef quotas are subject to a siphon, which means in effect that the Government owns the quota as a tradeable asset, does he accept that there must be a mechanism for the Government to purchase white-fish quota to prevent other European Union member states from buying that entitlement to fish?

It is unfortunate that the committee debate will now be overshadowed by the spat over the decision. Of course the matter is important, but to raise it in such a way is unfortunate. Members can make such points in speeches. I wish that they would. I am hugely grateful to Annabel Goldie for her introduction. I am sure that Gordon Jackson, Alex Neil and I are particularly grateful for her recollections of our foreign jaunts. I associate myself particularly with her remarks on the work that so many people—our clerks and advisers, as well as committee colleagues across the spectrum—put into the inquiry. That is why Kenny MacAskill's speech was so disappointing—SNP committee members engaged constructively in a good report and it is unfortunate that Kenny MacAskill did not talk to his party colleagues about the way in which the inquiry was carried out. His speech reminded me of days of yore, when Sarah Boyack had to deal elegantly with debates on transport and we used to hear rants of the same order. The committee sought to answer three fundamental questions with the recommendations that are in the body of the report. How do we bring more visitors to Scotland? How do we help visitors to travel to and around Scotland? How can the  Government and the other relevant bodies enhance the business environment for tourism operators? I will deal first with the "more visitors" theme, on which the committee sought to examine the BTA's role. I share the view of many members that the BTA is a positive force for Scottish tourism. That came out clearly not only in the case studies that Annabel Goldie mentioned, but in the evidence that the BTA gave to the committee. There have been some concerns about the way in which changes took place—I know that other members are interested in that point. It struck me that Westminster's Culture, Media and Sport Committee has been more vigorous on the point than we have. The answer to the problem lies in paragraph 19 of the committee's report, in which the recommendation is to "set specific targets for BTA in attracting tourists to Scotland". The minister referred to that in his remarks. It is entirely right. Scotland must vigorously ensure through the agencies that are under our responsibility that the BTA delivers for us, however the service-level agreement is described.

I share Brian Fitzpatrick's view. There is indeed an opportunity—that is how we should look at it—to achieve a lot more than was achieved in the past. That is the focus that the committee is encouraging the Government to take. The minister and others have spoken about the fact that more visitors are coming through business tourism. That struck the committee, too—I refer in particular to the evidence that Rhona Brankin, Adam Ingram and I took. Business tourism presents a huge opportunity. The minister mentioned the 18,000 midwives who will come to Scotland in 2008—that strikes me as a good year in which to have a baby. [ Interruption. ] I am not going there. Business tourism is an important development for Scotland. The sector is growing; it already accounts for 25 per cent of Scottish tourism spend. For VisitScotland, the average return on the leisure market is about £12 for every £1 of spend; the average return on business tourism in Glasgow is £110 for every £1 of spend. There are significant advantages to be gained in the business market. The committee report's  recommendations, particularly at paragraph 27, are important in that regard. A number of bodies are undertaking much proactive work on the subject of travelling to and around Scotland. Given what has been said, it is only fair to quote from the letter that all members received from BAA Scotland in the past week. I was pleased that Annabel Goldie mentioned that the committee would be returning to the matter, as there is more work to be done, and not just by us—there are also important matters for Westminster. BAA's letter says: "BAA's best financial interests, and those we believe of the travelling public, are best served by promoting more direct international services". That strikes me as an important sentence. We should look to the opportunity there. On the next page of its letter, BAA points out all the destinations to which Scottish travellers can now fly directly and adds: "New routes to begin later this year include Barcelona, Cologne and Prague". It strikes me that that should be encouraged and enhanced, rather than denigrated.

I refer Mr Paterson to what I have just read out: "BAA's best financial interests, and those we believe of the travelling public, are best served by promoting more direct international services". Another important recommendation, to be found at paragraph 189 and thereafter, is on attracting visitors and relates to internal transport. We recommend an evaluation of public service obligations, a subject that is close to my heart. I acknowledge that the minister has picked up on that point, but I draw to his and the Parliament's attention what a travel company told me the other week in a letter. The company takes Americans—a very important market—on a bonnie Scotland tour, spending 13 days and 12 nights in Scotland at a cost to the individual American of $3,645. The tour includes two nights in Stirling, two nights in Kyle of Lochalsh, two nights in Inverness, a night in Kirkwall, two nights in Lerwick and back home via Edinburgh. The constraint for that travel company is the internal cost of flying around Scotland. That is why I commend in particular the committee's recommendation on public service obligations, which I hope the minister will consider in consultation with his colleagues.  The minister referred to the foot-and-mouth outbreak and the events in New York in 2001. As colleagues have said, contingency planning is vital, especially given the international situation and the importance of the American market to Scotland. There is a natural tendency to concentrate on the domestic market, given that it accounts for 90 per cent of the visitors to Scotland. However, the USA spend of £201 million in 2001 is significant. I encourage the minister to be proactive with the appropriate agencies on that issue. I commend the report to Parliament and encourage colleagues to contribute to a lively debate that is important to the future of the Scottish economy.

Will Mr MacAskill give way?

I apologise to colleagues for having to leave before the end of the debate because of another engagement today. In contemplating Miss Goldie's speech, I am struck by the fact that she spends longer on her soundbites than she does on analysis of the current position of the Scottish economy. How can the Tories say what Scottish business needs? We all recall their record—one business went bust every three minutes of every working day under the Tories and they had the worst-ever record for business start-ups. By 1997, investment in manufacturing was lower than when the Tories came to power. During 18 years, they presided over the two worst recessions since 1945. In Shetland, we all remember Lord Lamont—

I have not finished yet. We all remember Lord Lamont of Lerwick spending £10 billion in the worst economic crisis caused by incompetence that the country can recall. I am very happy to give way to Miss Goldie so that she may defend that record.

Miss Goldie forgets that the Tories lost the election and that Scottish business—like everyone else in Scotland—voted no to the Tories, which is why they did not have one seat after the 1997 election. Their record was shown up by the electorate. I take up Andrew Wilson's point about analysing the current position of the Scottish economy. It is entirely right to do that and the minister was right to illustrate what the Executive is doing in that regard. I share serious concern about the current situation, not just of Scotland, but of Europe and the world at this time, which is where I might differ from Mr Wilson. Any analysis of the figures that are currently available in the UK and international context is worrying, including the fact that one in five families is struggling to meet debt repayments at a time of high employment and when interest rates are at their lowest level since 1956. There is worrying financial frailty in the UK economy. On the day when Alan Greenspan of the Federal Reserve in the United States cast doubt on the American Administration's strategy of vast tax cuts for the richest in US society, what indeed will fuel worldwide economic growth?  Therefore, it is right to consider these issues, but we should concentrate on the matters that come under the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament and what the Parliament and Government can do to promote those matters. That is where the SNP and the Liberal Democrats differ. Andrew Wilson would argue for further powers in that context. Those of us who believe in a federal United Kingdom would argue for the development of powers in that way.

I am always thinking urgently, but I will introduce our proposals at the time when all parties introduce theirs in the coming election campaign. I will pick up on two areas of competitiveness, as that is the focus of the debate. The first relates to the slow business take-up of broadband connections, particularly among small and medium-sized enterprises. A study from the Federation of Small Businesses last year illustrated that 54 per cent of small businesses had modem connections, only 14 per cent were using ISDN links, only 4 per cent used broadband and 15 per cent of surveyed businesses did not even have connection to a computer. There is a challenge to take up the advantages of e-business. That is why the Scottish Executive strategy in that area is right. That is why the enterprise network must be at the heart of that. Incidentally, I noticed that neither the SNP nor the Tories were forthcoming on their proposals for the enterprise network. I understand that the Tories plan to abolish Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise and that the SNP plans to regionalise the current structure. Those are important issues when there are others among us who believe that the enterprise network is at the heart of delivering skills. The Tories do not agree, obviously, because they plan to abolish the very body that concentrates on skills.

Oh well, their policy has just changed. We look forward to discussing that further. I was disappointed by the evidence given to the  Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee last week that a business park in Aberdeen, fully wired for broadband telecommunications access, had been unplugged because there was not enough business interest. That is one of the challenges that the Parliament, the Executive and the Government face. I will finish with a couple of points on renewables. It is important to pull together the commercialisation of research in our universities and the engineering skills that we have throughout Scotland. That is a particular challenge for Aberdeen and the north-east in the context of the changes that are happening in the oil and gas sector. There are considerable opportunities for Scotland as a whole. This is an important debate. It is an opportunity to discuss such matters properly. I promise that my party will give full vent to our thoughts on the matters in the coming weeks and months. I implore Parliament today to support the Executive amendment, which is the only reasonable amendment before it.

It is nice to see Mrs Ewing speaking in the chamber this afternoon. I have some sympathy for the minister, who has had to sit through two days of land reform, although by the look of his wind-up speech in the stage 3 debate he was thoroughly enjoying himself. We look forward to a thoroughly entertaining wind-up speech this evening. Margaret Ewing raised an interesting point. Policy makers and Government have to confront two important dilemmas with renewable developments. The first is the concerns of  communities, representatives, environmentalists and environmental non-governmental organisations about the siting of renewable energy developments. As George Lyon—my colleague who has brought this debate before us—said, that conflicts with the desire to reduce greenhouse gases and develop renewables to meet the United Kingdom's energy needs. The second dilemma, which is equally important, is the desire of consumers and the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets for cheap power, against the requirement to upgrade transmission lines and the national grid, in order that we can move the renewable power from areas such as the constituencies of George Lyon and Margaret Ewing into areas of Scotland where the power is needed most, in other words where the great mass of our population lives. Those are two fundamental policy issues that we must confront. I share Robin Harper's enthusiasm for the Scottish community renewables initiative. I have two thoughts on that. The potential for the draughty public hall in many outlying areas to be warm all through the winter, so that youth groups or whatever can take advantage of that, and so that the snooker table's cloth is not so slow that the ball hardly crosses the table, is considerable. The fact that grants of up to £100,000 are available is highly desirable, as is the fact that grants are now available to individuals. I suspect that the minister's budget will quickly be exceeded, because the demand for such projects will be considerable. That is only to the good, because the issue is also one of raising awareness and helping to confront the dilemmas that I mentioned by encouraging an understanding of renewables and developing them. I was pleased on Tuesday night to attend the Shetland renewable energy forum in Scalloway, instead of my group meeting—it was preferable to my group meeting. At that we discussed a series of issues, and I will reflect on one or two of them. One of them was the point that George Lyon made about community ownership of, or involvement in, the development of renewable power. The planning bill that an Executive will bring forward after May will provide an opportunity to consider such issues. I hope that such matters are considered in the minister's discussions with his planning colleagues. I know that Shetland Islands Council and Highland Council and, I presume, others are examining carefully the provisions that could be put into such a bill to deal with some of the issues that Margaret Ewing rightly raised, and the point that George Lyon raised about community involvement. It would be remiss of me if I did not quickly mention one of the great problems with renewable developments, and that is the disgraceful activities  of the Crown Estate Commission, which will take money away from, and affect the financial viability of, renewables offshore, because it will charge for the use of the seabed. As I have politely suggested to him in the past, I hope that the minister will continue to make representations to colleagues south of the border on removing such a power. I have one final thought, which concerns the benefits to engineering and the potential manufacturing benefits. We need to develop the industry by using the engineering talents that we have in many parts of Scotland—not least on the Clyde—to develop the necessary manufacturing techniques and to use that expertise for the development of what can be a great Scottish industry for the future.

Will the First Minister ensure that, in the review that his colleague will carry out, the implications for research work and for staffing levels at Scottish universities will be carefully considered? Will he ensure that the Scottish Executive will have a clear view before the end of that consultation, and that it will hold discussions with the UK Government so that the UK Government is fully aware of the views of the Scottish Executive on the matter?

I move amendment S1M-3760.3.3, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "recognises the reserved nature of issues relating to the current international situation and the public concerns that exist and therefore agrees to support UN Security Resolution 1441 as unanimously adopted by the UN Security Council; agrees that the Government of Iraq must fully comply with all the provisions of the resolution; agrees that, if it fails to do so, the UN Security Council should meet in order to consider the situation and the need for full compliance; believes that any decision that Iraq is in "material breach" of Resolution 1441 is for the UN Security Council as a whole to determine and that no military action to enforce Resolution 1441 should be taken against Iraq without a mandate from the UN Security Council, and further believes that no British forces should be committed to any military action against Iraq without a debate in the House of Commons and a substantive motion in favour."

I seek leave to withdraw amendment S1M-3760.2 in my name.  Amendment, by agreement, withdrawn.

It is a difficult time to confront international affairs. Today, the Scottish Parliament can express a view, and I commend the Liberal Democrat amendment to colleagues throughout the chamber. The same amendment received all-party support in the House of Commons in November and I encourage that consensus in Scotland today. Iraq is the primary focus of international attention at this time, but it is important to  recognise the parallels and links to so many of the world's pinchpoints, whether in North Korea, Afghanistan or Palestine. If only that international attention—particularly from the Americans—were trained on resolving the huge, seminal conflict in the middle east. If Israelis and Palestinians were at peace, surely much would flow from that. The links illustrate the difficulties of divorcing one international crisis from the deeply disturbing developments elsewhere. I cannot conceive that no repercussions would result from military activity in the Gulf. That is why the United Nations is so important. The debate is not simply about Saddam Hussein's evil regime and the nature of the threat that it poses to world peace, but about how the world in general and the United Kingdom in particular confront the threat posed by those who flout international law. I will set out the core principles that Liberal Democrats believe should underpin the United Kingdom's consideration of the issues. No country should ever exclude the use of military force to protect the safety and security of its citizens, but any military action must be consistent with the principles of international law and be considered as a last resort. Any decision to commit British forces to armed conflict should be subject to a debate in the House of Commons on a substantive motion. Recent days have been dominated by the interim report of the chief United Nations weapons inspector, Hans Blix. The activities of the weapons inspectors in Iraq were given authority by the unanimous Security Council resolution of 8 November. The Secretary-General of the United Nations Kofi Annan, the British Government and the British United Nations mission deserve credit for that achievement. Yesterday, the inspectors entered Saddam Hussein's Al-jamhory presidential palace in Baghdad. Iraq is a country the size of France; it will take time to examine the locations thoroughly and to follow the intelligence leads. That time needs to be taken. That is why I welcome the comments of the Prime Minister's spokesman last Thursday that the 27 January deadline, when inspectors are due to report their findings, should be seen as a staging post and not a deadline. The US Secretary of State Colin Powell has said in recent days that 27 January is not "D-Day for decision making". This week, Kofi Annan stated that the weapons inspectors must be allowed to complete their job in Iraq. On Tuesday, President Bush ratcheted up the rhetoric against Iraq, illustrating frustration and impatience, but even he did not set a definitive timetable for the work of the inspectors. As John Swinney said, the smoking gun has yet to be found, but Mr Blix said yesterday that Iraq's declaration, submitted in December, did  not contain any new evidence to verify its claim of disarmament. Mr Blix said—and I am sure that his view is shared by all—that he was concerned that Iraq had been smuggling weapons in contravention of United Nations resolutions. The United Nations weapons inspectors are pursuing their task. Mr Blix demonstrates the dangers of the Iraqi regime, but he does so by operating within the United Nations resolution that gives him his powers. It is for Mr Blix and his colleagues to produce evidence to the Security Council, and for the United Nations then to assess and act on that evidence. That is why the comments of the Prime Minister, the United Nations Secretary-General and the United States Secretary of State about the inspectors having time to complete their work are so important. The core argument, especially against the background of a vast military build-up—HMS Ark Royal is leaving Loch Long this week—is that the United Nations, and not the threat of war, must drive the process. There must be no doubt that the senior inspectors, rather than the intelligence agencies of certain countries, will determine whether or not a breach has occurred. When the inspectors report, it must be the entire United Nations Council that determines whether a breach is material, and what action must be taken.

The Security Council of the United Nations has the responsibilities. That is how the resolutions are drafted and, as I understand it, that is the process that will be followed. I shall touch briefly on the United States, which has a foreign policy that is now based on a doctrine of pre-emptive action against any country that threatens world peace. President Bush committed his country to that doctrine in a speech at the West Point Military Academy in June last year. That strikes me as profoundly dangerous, and threatens to undermine the role of international law. Quite where such a doctrine begins and ends is highly questionable. Such a doctrine can and is being copied. Ariel Sharon cites such an approach in defence of Israel's actions in Palestine. The Indian foreign minister claimed, over Kashmir, that "pre-emption is the right of every nation to prevent injury to itself". Vladimir Putin's actions against the Chechens are accepted on the basis of exactly the same  principle. What has been unlocked by such a doctrine other than greater international insecurity? The Bush doctrine is backed by the Administration's conscious rejection of multilateral approaches on everything from nuclear missiles to handguns. Against that belligerent background, there is a need for sane pressure to be applied. If the special relationship is powerful, the British Prime Minister must, as happened in the autumn, seek to ensure that President Bush and the White House hawks operate under the auspices of the United Nations. As Charles Kennedy has put it: "It is disingenuous to argue that we want to work through the UN, but only if the UN does what we want."

It strikes me as profoundly important that the House of Commons, about whose powers members of Karen Gillon's party have talked in relation to the constitutional settlement in this country, must have the right to debate the matter on a substantive motion. If it does not, should we sit constantly in a position in which all we do is trust, against the word of the many Labour back benchers who supported the Liberal Democrat amendment in the Commons on 27 December? Are we to follow that route, or are we to accept in principle that it is important that the House of Commons should have a vote on a substantive motion? I believe, and my party believes, that that is the route that should be followed. It is wrong to declare that the Government is pursuing an inevitable path to war. Supporting the SNP motion would mean opposing war in all circumstances. That would mean failing to fulfil Britain's obligations under the North Atlantic Treaty to go to the aid of Turkey, as a fellow member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, if Iraq were to attack. No country can ever conclude that it will never in any circumstances go to war if such a war is necessary for the protection of its citizens. However, the Parliament should not send out a message that war is inevitable, as the SNP wishes. The SNP may believe that war is inevitable but Liberal Democrats do not.

I can accept Mr Swinney's remarks about the role of the United Nations, but I can read his motion as well. I believe that the last sentence of that motion is entirely inappropriate, and I have said why I will not support it. The Liberal Democrat amendment, unlike the motion in Mr Swinney's name, stresses the importance of the House of Commons having a debate and a vote on a substantive motion before British forces are committed to any action against Iraq. I reiterate my party's position: the UN must be at the centre of all efforts to resolve the international situation. We opposed, and continue to oppose, the threats against Baghdad of unilateral action. Liberal Democrats have raised, when others would not, the questions, difficult issues and serious international consequences of unilateral military conflict. It is an approach based on ensuring and insisting that Saddam Hussein complies with the unanimous UN resolution, but it is also about recognising that the British national interest may require the Prime Minister to say no to a US demand for a unilateral attack on Iraq without United Nations authorisation. Liberal Democrats are asking of Government the questions that the people of Scotland and Britain want asked and answered. We reflect the scepticism of many. In supporting our amendment, Parliament can say that those issues must be resolved before any action involving Britain is taken. The Liberal Democrat position is clear. There should be no military action against Iraq without a UN mandate, and there should be a debate on a substantive motion in the House of Commons before British forces are committed. That is the right position and I encourage Parliament to support it. I move amendment S1M-3760.2, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "recognises the reserved nature of issues relating to the current international situation and the public concerns that exist and therefore agrees to support UN Security Resolution 1441 as unanimously adopted by the UN Security Council; agrees that the Government of Iraq must fully comply with all the provisions of the resolution; agrees that, if it fails to do so, the UN Security Council should meet in order to consider the situation and the need for full compliance; believes that any decision that Iraq is in "material breach" of Resolution 1441 is for the UN Security Council as a whole to determine and that no military action to enforce Resolution 1441 should be taken against Iraq without a mandate from the UN Security Council, and further believes that no British forces should be committed to any military action against Iraq without a debate in the House of Commons and a substantive motion in favour."

John Farquhar Munro advises me that, unfortunately, Jamie McGrigor got the punch line to his story slightly wrong. Apparently, the line is that the Macneil of Barra thanks Noah, but says that he has a boat of his own. I am sure that Mr Morrison will want to reflect on that. I welcome the opportunity to comment on the wider issue of public service obligations, but I also applaud the work that has been done on the subject that we are debating—air links are important for any island community. Alasdair Morrison, the constituency member, and others deserve credit for the work that they have done to progress the matter and to push ministers in the direction in which they should be pushed. That is the role that everyone who represents a constituency has a responsibility to fulfil. I see that the SNP members are giggling away at that idea, but I note that SNP members who represent constituencies also play that role. No one should get sanctimonious about that. The debate serves to emphasise the importance of islands' air services, especially at this time of year and the pertaining weather circumstances, and it offers us an opportunity to raise the issue of integrated transport. I was envious of the causeways that Alasdair Morrison talked about. I wish that my constituency had as many causeways as his does. People's ability to travel safely to an airport by car or another form of motorised transport without having to go on a ferry is a serious issue for those travelling for medical treatment in Glasgow, Aberdeen or Inverness. It is sometimes difficult for those who do not live on islands to appreciate the cost of island life. One of the essential features of PSOs is that they can take into account not only the frequency and standard of service, but the cost. The cost to individuals is high, particularly for those booking at the last minute, perhaps because of a bereavement and the need to travel quickly to  attend a funeral. The cost to a family of four people travelling between, for example, Sumburgh and Aberdeen can be as high as £1,200. No family can treat such a sum lightly. The cost to the public purse is also high. My research indicates that the health boards that serve the island communities of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles pay the lion's share—about £4 million—of the costs of air services for the kind of journey that Alasdair Morrison described. I believe that there are ways in which we can use PSOs effectively and I hope that ministers will come back to the matter in the future. In the case of Barra, the fear is, as members have said, that the PSO will be lost. Many island groups still look to the day when PSOs can be introduced to tackle the problems that have been mentioned. In these days of cheap budget airlines, why are island fares so high and why do they compare so badly? The solution is made up of two parts. The first relates to the regulations that apply to airports. The operational rules that apply to Heathrow should not be the same as those that apply to Barra or to Sumburgh or Tingwall in my constituency. I hope that the operational standards will be considered in representations that the minister makes to his colleagues south of the border. There is no question about the need to ensure appropriate safety standards, but standards should be appropriate to the island context rather than to the situation that pertains to Heathrow. The second part of the solution is to use PSOs on main routes for the specification of fares, standards and services. That would be a considerable step forward for many island areas. I support the sentiments that have been expressed and the way in which the issue has been brought to the chamber today. In that spirit, I very much support the motion.

Does Mr McLetchie share my concern about the profession regulating itself per se and in principle? Given his declaration of interests, he probably will not share that concern. There have been a number of cases in which the Law Society has not covered itself in glory in dealing with complaints from individual constituents of mine. What will the bill do to improve matters and address the concerns that exist about the principle and practice of the Law Society's handling of complaints?

Will the minister accept the disgust that I feel about the manner in which the European Commission handled the negotiations? The negotiations did not relate to science or the conservation of fish stocks. They were more a cynical buying-off of different member states. Does the minister recognise the utter frustration that fishing communities feel because of such a process? Does he understand that 25 per cent of the productive economy of Shetland depends on the white-fish industry and the ancillary industries that support it? Does he recognise the need to build a stable future for the white-fish industry, in particular in fishery-dependent areas such as Shetland? Given the uncertainty about the interim measures and the possibility that they could run not just until July but until December, will he give a commitment to Parliament to support the fishing industry and fishing communities with financial assistance through that period, including for tie-up, in order that fishermen who are being forced into port can come through the process with a future?

The minister referred in his opening remarks to agonising over science. There are many days when I agonise over Europe. I am instinctively pro-European—philosophically and because of the ties that my constituency has to Europe—but the common fisheries policy has failed. It must be profoundly illiberal for a process of management under the auspices of democratic government now to be undermined by the ability of an unaccountable bureaucracy to impose a solution without regard to the people that it will affect. That is what I agonise over at this time. I welcome the commitment of the minister and the Executive, and the fact that the First Minister, the Deputy First Minister and many other ministers were here for the opening exchanges of the debate. Next week is economic and social life or death for the white-fish industry. The crews of the boats will be in the front line but, as others have mentioned, then come engineers, net makers, agents, the ports, processors and all who may feel the financial wind of change. The Scottish industry needs a minister who will fight its corner with skill, determination and tactical ability. Ross Finnie certainly illustrated that when he came to Shetland a few days ago to have talks with the Shetland industry. He heard about the industry's utter frustration at the failures of the common fisheries policy and, to be blunt, the view that cod have become more important than individual communities and people's livelihoods. There are certainly problems with cod levels in certain parts of the North sea—that is not disputed—but that is not true of the entire North sea. The one-size-fits-all policy of the commissioner and the Commission is a mistake. I hope that the minister will accept that at this time the industry is principally concerned with the quota allocations, and not so much with the common fisheries policy. Not that that is unimportant, but it is a simple fact that there will not be much point in a common fisheries policy if there is not a blinking fishing fleet to prosecute it. I bring to the attention of the chamber research done by the Shetland Ocean Alliance—SHOAL—which shows that the total value of the white-fish industry to the Shetland economy is 25 per cent of the productive economy of my constituency. I emphasise that point: one quarter of Shetland's economy depends on the white-fish fleet and all the businesses that support it. I do not accept the argument that nothing has changed in recent times. Over the last 10 years in Shetland alone,  fleet turnover is down by 15 per cent, fleet numbers are down by 41 per cent and overall employment in the industry is down by 26 per cent. We have had enough pain. As SHOAL states: "If the fleet is reduced any further then the critical mass will be lost and many essential services may no longer be available to local boats." Eighty per cent of Shetland's white-fish landings are bought for markets in Aberdeen and the north-east. Those members who have mentioned the processing industry in the north-east are right to do so. The Commission's proposals would have a devastating impact on that, but also on Scotland in a wider context. I say to Labour colleagues who represent constituencies across the central belt that many jobs in their constituencies will be affected if the proposals go through. Many engineering jobs and the turnover of many businesses will be impacted if the proposals go through. It will not be just Shetland and it will not be just the north-east; it will be Scotland as a whole. However, Shetland, with one quarter of its economy dependent on the demersal sector, has most to lose. The livelihoods of 500 men and women are at risk next week. The minister has a tough job in Brussels. He must overcome the megaphone diplomacy of Commissioner Fischler. To my way of thinking, Commissioner Fischler's open letter to fishermen this week in no way helps. It contains phrases such as: "We are not forcing anyone to scrap their boats or to give up fishing." You could have fooled me. Neither do his threats of emergency action and his tactics in buying off the Spanish help. I asked the minister in an intervention about the sentence in Commissioner Fischler's letter—and one has to presume that it is his view, because it is in an open letter—that clearly states that he will not allocate resources to fleet subsidies from 1 January next year unless the Council comes to a decision on the current proposals. If that is not a threat to Spain that says, "Support my proposals or else," I do not know what in heaven's name it is. The minister must stick to his guns and hold the United Kingdom Government to the commitment given by the Secretary of State for Scotland that the UK will vote against any proposal that would effectively close the Scottish white-fish industry. There can be no reneging on that commitment. The minister is not going to Brussels unarmed. He takes with him good arguments on science, technical measures and the steps already taken by the Scottish industry, as other colleagues rightly mentioned, through decommissioning and gear changes. The minister has received  constructive proposals from the Scottish industry, not least from the Shetland Ocean Alliance. Shetland has given the minister some bullets; next week the Shetland economy depends on the minister's being able to fire them.

I agree with what the minister just said. However, does he share my worry about what Franz Fischler wrote in his open letter to fishermen, which was published earlier in the week? Mr Fischler said: "If the Council does not come to a decision on the reforms this December, then I cannot allocate any more resources to fleet subsidies from 1 January 2003 onward." How are those statements compatible?

David Mundell's speech was thoughtful and provocative. I look forward to the views that were outlined in the Conservative's opening speech being widely contradicted in the closing speech by his colleague Mr Monteith. The debate is broadly consensual. I associate  myself with the comments of the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on the work of the clerks, the advisers and the former minister, Wendy Alexander. I welcome the positive response from the present Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, Iain Gray, and thank all those who gave evidence, as did Alex Smith—sorry, I meant Alex Neil. I am dominated by thoughts of Ross County's new manager. The Parliament recognises that a growing economy is central to its role in promoting active citizenship in both formal and informal education. I will mention briefly some of the points that the minister made in his opening speech. It is a positive step that we are to push forward on ILAs in the forthcoming strategy. Many of us will look forward to that. I hope that, when the minister brings that matter forward, he will pay particular attention to the role of learning centres, which regard that mechanism as important in their work. My second point is on the strategy recognising the role of the Scottish credit and qualifications framework and the principle of entitlement. Mr Ingram—who has now left the chamber—was slightly unfair. Paragraph 8 of the Executive's interim response states that it "recognises the difficulties inherent in this concept". I am convinced that Mr Gray is more than up to dealing with Sir Humphrey, as Mr Ingram described him, in progressing that concept and turning the committee's ideas—which we recognise are not easy and cannot be introduced overnight—into reality. That is an objective that the committee and Parliament share. My third point is the one that the minister raised about building blocks. The committee always accepted that Careers Scotland, learndirect Scotland and Futureskills Scotland were building blocks for the on-going work to build a lifelong learning strategy. The minister's remarks are accepted in that context. Paragraph 14 of the Executive's interim response deals with "the connectivity between the demands of the learning and labour markets": in particular, the need "to meet employers' future skills needs", and the importance of getting "the right mix of different learning opportunities and routes through the learning landscape". For the Liberal Democrats, the core issue in the lifelong learning strategy is balancing the demand for skills and the need to address skill shortages and skills deficiencies in Scotland's economy, which the Futureskills Scotland document has  illustrated, against an individual's choice of learning. The ability to access learning, the barriers to learning and the routes are all issues that need to be tackled, but balancing the economy's needs against individual choice is at the heart of a debate that the committee pondered over and discussed at length. After all, the world moves on apace. I read the other day that Microsoft's global vision is now "to empower people through great software—any time, any place and on any device." I suppose that that is a play on the Martini advert. The point is that the culture of being chained to one's desktop and personal computer has gone. Microsoft is not alone in embracing mobility. In the past week, Dell, the world's largest PC maker, has launched hand-held computers. The pace of change is huge and the development of ever more advanced mobile processing and communication technologies is becoming ever quicker. The industry giants—Microsoft, in computing, and Nokia, in mobile telephony—now believe that the pocket communicator will overtake the PC, just as the PC overthrew the mainframe computer 20 years ago. Such changes, driven by the needs of consumers who are increasingly on the move, provide dynamic and exacting challenges to an emerging economy. The challenge for Scotland is to produce skilled people to fulfil the opportunities in the new technologies. As the minister and other members have said, the frequent business surveys show that the number 1 concern that comes under the powers and responsibilities of the Scottish Parliament is skills shortages and deficiencies posing the greatest impediment to success. Therefore, it is important to consider the routes through learning and the choices that we ask not only of young people, but of people who return to learning throughout their lives. It is right to develop a genuine debate about the routes that young people take at school, for example. Not for all is academic brilliance, as many eloquent witnesses have told the committee. I emphasise that it is right to consider appropriate routes through education and to encourage with the right careers support both vocational and academic roads on an equal basis. I turn briefly to the vocational route. In my constituency, there are several small businesses that are run by men and women who left school and took a craft apprenticeship. One such person, David Henry, comes to mind. He now runs an engineering business, and he won a Shell livewire prize just last year. His business, which tunes engines for fishing and marine vessels, is exactly the type that we need to support. The vocational route can be paved with gold. To  pick up on points made by Phil Gallie and by the convener, employment in the construction industry has grown by about 100,000 in the United Kingdom as a whole since 1990. Output is up by 1.6 per cent in 2002, and a 2.4 per cent increase is forecast for next year in Scotland. The inevitable labour shortages have pushed up pay rates, hence our personal experiences in seeking to get hold of electricians, plumbers or other skilled workers. The Construction Industry Training Board reckons that the industry needs to recruit 27,500 people over the next five years. Construction embodies the skills deficiencies of the Scottish economy, but a similar picture is painted for the oil and gas, financial and manufacturing sectors. The oil and gas institute of technology should be based in Aberdeen to examine those points. In fairness to the CITB, which is the responsible body for the construction industry, it recognises the requirement to attract new people into the industry. Construction jobs have to be made attractive, which is why they are now advertised in Loaded and Cosmopolitan , as I read. As is the case in medicine, a fully trained plumber or electrician will not appear overnight, as apprenticeships commonly last four years. Changes are required for the medium and long terms; they will not be achieved by politicians by next May. That is why the committee was right to take a good length of time in which to come up with its conclusions and recommendations. The vocational route must be developed in parallel with the academic route, with equal weight given to each. The principle of parity of esteem was repeatedly, and rightly, voiced by Marilyn Livingstone over the past year. Instead of talking down one route, as some might choose to do, I believe that Parliament should talk up both routes equally. I do not observe any great ideological opposition to the direction that Wendy Alexander set out in "A Smart, Successful Scotland", which concentrates on building a knowledge-based economy. There is no incompatibility between having a knowledge-based economy and recognising the importance of vocational routes through learning. Rather, the approach is born of economic and social necessity. The renewable energy sector can and should be a great Scottish economic success story, developing wave, tidal and other forms of new technology, using Scotland's intellectual capital and commercialising that knowledge. Scotland lost the wind-farm technology race to Denmark; we must not lose the races for other new technologies to other nations. We must be able to commercialise the knowledge in our universities and secure the huge economic spin-offs of the  introduction of such new technologies. With engineering talent and through the work of companies from throughout Scotland, we can develop those industries and the associated opportunities. That approach is helped—Scottish Enterprise has certainly grasped this point—by the connection between learning and enterprise. The proof of concept fund, which moves university research into commercial projects, began with £6 million in 1999 and will reach £33 million in 2005. That must be the right approach. Part of that approach must focus on attracting more young people into science disciplines, where there is a good Scottish story to tell, but where there is much more to be done, not least because the annual economic rate of return on academic research is estimated at between 20 per cent and 28 per cent. Many pounds spent means a big bang. That investment is badly needed to train new scientists against a background of a steady number of people sitting standard grade science and a worrying 15 per cent fall in the number of people sitting higher biology, chemistry or physics. The knock-on effect of that in universities is significant, with a 34 per cent fall in applications and acceptances for degree courses in science. There is the challenge for public policy makers: science needs to be a career in the making and an alternative to others. However, when we debate such matters as Dolly the sheep, the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine or genetically modified crops, we do not give science a fair crack of the whip. The public policy debate on BSE was instructive. It was the worst recent example of how not to make science an attractive career for young people. I hope that people will reflect on that. The problem is with the way in which policy makers evaluate scientific evidence, rather than with science per se.

Absolutely. That was a clever try. As Mr Gallie knows, in fishing it is not enough to assess just one piece of science. That is the problem with the stance that the European Commission has adopted on the issue. If the member would like me to speak for 12 minutes on the science of the fishing industry, I can do so. On Monday night I attended a board meeting of Firth and Mossbank Enterprise—FAME. The agency seeks to build new community initiatives. It deals with the people about whom many of us thought during the inquiry—for example, the single mother with three children who did not have the best start, did not receive a full education and now wants to gain from the learning experience. The strategy must help and focus on people of that  sort. In the coming months Mr Gray will report to Parliament on the conclusions that he has reached for the strategy. I hope that it will be targeted on those very people.

Does the First Minister accept that BP's decision yesterday to cut 40 per cent of the jobs at the Sullom Voe oil terminal in Shetland is a serious blow to the islands' economy, especially when it is faced with the impending devastation of the fishing cuts? Will he ensure that the enterprise agencies and local council are given adequate resources, through such investments as the fibre optic cable and potential renewable energy projects, to tackle that likely economic downturn?

Does the Deputy First Minister accept that Franz Fischler's delphic mutterings on Monday were no great progress? Does he accept that the Scottish fishing industry needs a long-term recovery plan for stocks and for fishing communities, which will face considerable crisis if the European Commission's plans are allowed to proceed? Does he accept that that is a better way to approach the matter than is a policy that is based on the political virility of Herr Fischler, who fails to understand the realities of cod in a mixed fishery?

To ask the First Minister how the predicted shortfall in skills in the construction industry is being addressed. (S1F-2204)

Does the First Minister recognise the importance of apprenticeships in the training of construction craftsmen and accept that, in my constituency, the Sullom Voe oil terminal is important both as an employer and as a provider of training apprenticeships? Is he aware that there is deep concern in Shetland about impending job losses at Sullom Voe, given the terminal's significance to the island economy? Will he ensure that the Government and its agencies play a full role in ensuring that skills-retraining measures are available to those who may be unfortunate enough to lose their jobs?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and what matters were discussed. (S1O-5794)

I am grateful to the minister for that answer. I thought for a moment that Sir David had the power to reallocate ministerial responsibilities. Will the minister confirm that the cod fishings closure proposals from the European Commission would destroy fishing communities such as Shetland and many others throughout Scotland? Does he accept that the imminent European Union-Norway negotiations are an extremely important staging post in terms of the position that Commissioner Fischler is going to take? Will he ensure that when that position is known he will discuss with and make representations to the Commission to ensure that the ultimate outcome of the talks will satisfy the fishing industry in Scotland?

The debate is serious and, in the main, the speeches have reflected that. I say to my colleague Alasdair Morrison that one of the reasons why there is an issue about black fish, which he was right to mention, is the manifest failure of the common fisheries policy. One point on which I agree with Jamie McGrigor is that the failure of the common fisheries policy must be addressed in the coming negotiations on the issue. I am deeply concerned that the Commission has used the cod proposals as a smokescreen to move away from the difficult decisions that must be taken on the common fisheries policy. That makes me, much as it makes fishermen, extremely cynical about the way in which the Commission has behaved in recent weeks. The minister made it clear yesterday—although, to speak bluntly, I wish that he had done so earlier—that there cannot be a closure of the cod fishery in the North sea. Commissioner Fischler's total closure proposals are a negotiation. Fischler has already contradicted himself by saying on the one hand that there is no alternative to closure and on the other that there might be another way. Every position in Brussels is a negotiation. However, the present position is a disgraceful way in which to treat an industry. People out there depend on the industry and to operate in that way is contemptible. As members have mentioned, the scientific advice that has been much discussed in recent days predates the changes that have been introduced in Scotland. Scottish decommissioning has reduced effort, larger mesh sizes have increased the biomass of cod and area closures and further technical gear changes have worked. Richard Lochhead was right about the percentage of the Scottish haddock and whiting quotas that have been caught already this year. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation has raised important questions about the ICES scientific advice. The minister should give a commitment to pursue rigorously those legitimate questions. The evidence about stocks in the northern North sea rather than the southern North sea should be  considered seriously before a final decision is taken. The Commission's credibility on science was utterly compromised by the deepwater species fiasco earlier this year. I have an important example from my constituency. The monkfish fishery is particularly important to the industry in Shetland. There is no basis in science for the current proposals on monks from the Commission. It has not surveyed that fishery. The proposals are based on a precautionary principle, not on science. The minister must stand up and argue for fair science and he should ensure that the Commission follows that science.

It is important that a mechanism for deepwater species is found, but the debate is not about that. I want to concentrate on the politics of the debate. We are dealing with European politics. The minister must fight Scotland's corner and make it crystal clear that he was not appointed Scotland's fisheries minister to do the European Commission's bidding. I am not wedded to constitutional politics, so the point is not a constitutional one. The UK position in the discussions should not be the Whitehall position, but the Scottish one. If necessary, the First Minister should clear that with the Prime Minister. The matter is too important for that not to happen. That is what fishermen in my constituency are most concerned about. The worst aspect of the situation is the EU-Norway talks. I am extremely concerned that they will not be in our interests. How can it be right that the Commission, which is prepared to destroy the Scottish fishing industry, should be allowed to negotiate with Norway before a position on which to negotiate has been agreed? That must change. These are desperate times. My constituency will bleed jobs and investment and there will be massive economic and social disruption if the changes are allowed to proceed. Financial support is important. This is a defining moment for the Parliament and the Government and they must succeed. I advocate action.

Will the minister clarify what will happen if the European Commission's negotiations with Norway, which are to begin shortly, take a position that is unacceptable to the minister and the Scottish fishing industry? Those negotiations will happen before the Council of Ministers has had any discussions on the issue.

I echo Irene Oldfather's congratulations to Kenny MacAskill on bringing the issue to the Parliament's attention and I echo his congratulations to the Nordic Council on  its 50 th anniversary. I, too, look forward to the event in November, not least because the Norwegian fisheries minister is due to be present. John Farquhar and I met him in August when we visited Bergen with some colleagues to see salmon farming. The fact that the Norwegian fisheries minister will be in Edinburgh in November is timely, to put it mildly, given current events. It is important to acknowledge—I am sure that the minister will touch on it—that the recess featured the successful Scotland in Sweden event, in which not only the Government but the Parliament played an important role. That is an illustration of the development of the links that Kenny MacAskill was right to talk about and to push for more of. It is arguable that my constituency, given its geography, has a slightly different perspective on the issue from that of other parts of Scotland. Shetland has an historic link with our Norwegian and other Scandinavian neighbours. After all, for many years it was ruled from Norway and latterly Denmark. Indeed, some people might argue that Shetland continues to be technically on loan to Scotland. During the height of the 1980s campaign against the proposed massive expansion of the Douneray nuclear plant, the declaration of Wyre was signed by many Orcadians and Shetlanders. The declaration was sent to the Queen of Denmark, with a request to take back Shetland and Orkney, as that would aid the campaign. The historic links have led to more recent ties, including those that were forged in the second world war when the Shetland bus was manned by Norwegians who were living in exile in Shetland. The "bus" maintained vital supply lines to the west coast of Norway and the Norwegian resistance who were fighting the occupying German army. Other Norwegian servicemen were based in Shetland. Their legacy is a generation of Norwegian men who married Shetland women and settled on one or other side of the North sea. Many old memories were stirred and new links forged when the restored Shetland bus vessel the Hitra sailed over to its wartime base in Scalloway. For the modern generation of Norwegians who visit my constituency in some numbers, a visit to the Scalloway Museum is part of their itinerary. As Kenny MacAskill rightly said, the Nordic Council has nurtured two of the main areas of nordic co-operation—culture and the environment. Both areas have strong relevance to Shetland. Our island culture has many roots in its nordic past. That is best personified in the modern age by Up-Helly-Aa, a festival that is a century old but that looks back to our Viking past. It is also possible to hear the echo of Norwegian, Scandinavian and Scottish music in the distinctive Shetland fiddle music of today. Most if not all Shetland place  names echo their Norse origin. Shetland's environment depends on the North sea, which we share with our nordic neighbours as well as with our Orcadian and Scottish neighbours. I have already mentioned the declaration of Wyre. It was natural that Shetland should turn to the nordic nations when we were faced by a threat to our environment from the Dounreay plant. Those nations feel as strongly as we do on that subject. The Shetland campaigning group NENIG—the Northern European Nuclear Information Group—took its campaign against the Dounreay expansion to the Nordic Council and won its support. As the importance of the environment increases, further co-operation can only be a welcome factor, as Kenny MacAskill mentioned. I look forward to seeing Scotland as a whole build better relations with the Nordic Council, working together on our common interests, particularly those relating to culture and the environment. No remarks about Scandinavia are complete without the excellent illustration of what I have been saying that was made by Jo Grimond. When, on his election, he was asked by The Times of London for the name of his nearest railway station, he replied "Bergen".

To ask the First Minister whether he has met the Secretary of  State for Culture, Media and Sport and the Secretary of State for Scotland to discuss the sale of the Scottish Media Group. (S1F-2139)

Does the First Minister accept the need for diversity of ownership in Scotland's national newspapers? What progress is being made at Government level with regard to that diversity both in Scotland and in the UK? Does the First Minister accept that it would not help to maintain such editorial diversity if the current owners of The Scotsman 's stable bought The Herald 's stable?

I am not.

Perhaps the best thing that the minister could do in winding-up is to read from part 4 of the bill, which states: "A local authority has power to do anything which it considers is likely to promote or improve the well-being of— (a) its area and persons within that area; or (b) either of those." The minister could do no better in helping the Conservatives than to read that section, as Mr Davidson and Mr Harding appear to have utterly failed to read the bill. Mr Harding uncharitably described the coalition as tired and decrepit, which is presumably how John Major feels these days.

The same remarks apply. The former leader of Perth and Kinross Council has sadly departed, but it was interesting that he mentioned wine. I suppose that that is a welcome change from milk and honey, which the SNP seems not to be promising these days. The bill is important for local government, Scotland and the Parliament. The power to advance well-being, which the minister mentioned and which has been derided by the Conservatives on my extreme right, is about more than simply creating the circumstances to do more in local communities. As Trish Godman rightly said, the power encapsulates the principle of subsidiarity, as it allows local government to take responsibilities that it should have and allows the Parliament to extend the devolution process beyond this chamber and ensure that that process continues down or up—depending on one's perspective—to local government. The Parliament should applaud that important principle. Iain Smith rightly spoke about the creativity of thought in many councils throughout Scotland, for example in respect of post offices. The power allows such creativity and will bring it to local government. The bill is an important step forward. Community planning powers are enhanced when the bodies that members have mentioned  have the same boundaries—I accept that that applies in my Shetland constituency. I will give two small examples of community planning working in practice in Shetland. The Shetland Welfare Trust provides care services for elderly people. Last Friday, it celebrated its 10 th anniversary in Whalsay and I was pleased to attend the celebration. The trust has created six excellent care centres, which—I grant—has been done on the back of available resources that flowed as a result of oil revenues to the council. It has done that because the community was brave enough to say that it values people and wants to ensure that they can be given the best things possible in life and that they are respected. It wanted to create the circumstances in which people could have a happy life. I believe that the community shows self-confidence and believes in working with agencies and different organisations to achieve its aims. The current developments and measures that the minister proposes are exciting. Initiatives such as the joint future initiative formalise processes between health boards and local authorities to ensure that in community care, for example, there are significant advances. That simply did not happen under the previous Tory Administration. Indeed, I remember well when community care was introduced—as I was a researcher at Westminster at the time—and the chaos that was created overnight. The joint future initiative is the kind of measure that will make a real difference to local authorities and to national health service boards in delivering for local people. The second example relates to enterprise companies. Orkney and Shetland have worked extremely hard in pursuit of a fibre optic cable, to give the local business community and domestic customers the opportunity to take advantage of the e-business world—I pay tribute to Peter Peacock's role in that respect. In addition, the community has considerable advantages—as do much of the Highlands and Islands and the Western Isles—in respect of renewables. All those aspects of community development can come together through community planning, because the local authority has a logical position in leading the initiatives and leading the consortiums that pull together the projects for fibre optic cables and energy cables. That is the epitome of community planning. It uses the local enterprise company, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, some of the bodies to which Trish Godman referred and the local authorities to pull together funding and also ensure that a bid for European funding can be successful. That kind of work across agencies is crucial and the bill develops that. My final point is on part 5 of the bill, in particular  the section that allows for "Remote participation in and calling of local authority meetings". Obviously, that will be useful for councillors in Shetland Islands Council. The minister has responded imaginatively to requests to introduce that element to the bill. The councillor for Unst, who must be the most northerly serving councillor in Scotland, Mr Mark Ritch—who is a friend and colleague of mine—will now be able, through various mechanisms, to take part in council meetings in Lerwick from his home in Baltasound. That is a welcome measure, not least because it takes two hours to travel between Unst and Lerwick. I suspect that the provision could improve considerably the lives of councillors in Peter Peacock's old stamping ground, the Highlands, as it is a vast area. There is much to commend in the bill. I pay tribute to the role that the community planning aspects will play in ensuring that the bill is accepted in Parliament today.

What was the date of the meeting?

It is obvious that the debate is not of great importance to all members of the Parliament. Nevertheless, it is an important issue for those of us who represent constituencies in the Highlands and Islands. Crofting is a way of life. It is a state of mind. Perhaps the best definition of crofting is that it is a piece of land surrounded by legislation. Crofting is the cornerstone of a vast area of Scotland. The Parliament should take the opportunity today to reaffirm its belief in the importance of crofting. We should reaffirm our commitment to retaining and enhancing the opportunities that it brings. Agriculture underpins crofting activity and should be the essential focus for Government, in respect both of legislative change and of grant and investment policy. I will concentrate on three areas, the first of which is the white paper on crofting reform. I welcome the consultation exercise that ministers have begun to put in place. Recently, I attended a meeting with the crofting assessors in my constituency—I am sure that other members have attended similar meetings. Also, last Monday, I attended a public meeting that was addressed by the Shetland branch of the National Farmers Union of Scotland, the Crofters Commission and a representative of the Scottish Executive environment and rural affairs department. A number of common themes emerged from those discussions. I will take the opportunity of writing to the Minister for Environment and Rural Affairs during the consultation exercise, but I want to raise a couple of issues in the brief time that is available today. The first issue is the need to be clear about the purpose of the bill, which will be the first on crofting in the young life of the Scottish  Parliament. For that reason, the bill should incorporate the belief that crofting is an important agriculture-based activity. The legislation should be limited to the essential areas of reform that the consultation shows to be important. Concern has been expressed about issues such as the principle of crofting regulation being devolved to crofters in townships. In my view, the Crofters Commission has a genuine role to play. That is especially the case in the light of the beefed-up proposals that ministers are making on the appeal process. Cases in which it is difficult to come to a judgment may be few, but intense local difficulty would result if cases were determined locally. It is important that ministers reflect on the consultation exercise in that respect. I hope that the minister will also reflect on the importance of retaining the crofting counties agricultural grants scheme, which is an important vehicle in the provision of infrastructure improvements across the crofting counties. The grants scheme may be small in Scottish budgetary terms, but it is important to the areas that it serves. My second point relates to the importance of agri-environmental policy to the crofting counties. The environmentally sensitive area system of support, which is in place in many areas of Scotland, has been a considerable success. In my constituency, 849 crofts and farms are signed up under the 10-year ESA programme, which is worth some £2 million to the Shetland economy. The ESA measures enhance the environment and have notably reduced stocking densities. That has had the result of improving habitats for wildlife—indeed, the corncrake is making a welcome recovery. I cannot believe that it would be good public policy for the ESA tap to be turned off in two years' time, when the first crofts in Shetland that signed up to those measures come to the end of their 10-year period. I am not persuaded by the minister's arguments that areas such as Shetland will benefit from the rural stewardship scheme. I understand that success in the RSS relates in large part to the employment of consultants. In that respect, I can do no better than to quote from a letter that I received from the Shetland Crofting, Farming and Wildlife Advisory Group. The SCFWAG team wrote: "No one in Shetland has been accepted into the scheme this year. SCFWAG drew up one RSS plan for a holding with as wide a range of habitats and archaeological sites as we are realistically likely to get in Shetland. The total of 35 points for the plan fell well short of the required 43.5 points. ... we feel that the RSS in its present form still does not meet the requirements for a workable agri-environmental scheme in Shetland." Therefore, I ask the minister to reconsider his position on that area of policy, which is extremely  important for the future of the islands and the other areas that are covered by the ESA programme. I noticed in an article in The Scottish Farmer of 14 September—I am sure that the minister regularly reads that journal—that a representative of his department said that the change from the ESA scheme to RSS would not be entirely seamless. I am sure that we could all accept that in terms of the current position. I hope that the minister will be able to reflect on that important area of policy. I also have a suggestion about agri-environmental policy in relation to the organic aid scheme that is used by many crofters. I believe that that measure could be better described as a value-adding one. That makes it consistent with the Executive's "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture". In that context, would it not be better to bracket the organic aid scheme within the same budget as LEADER II, rather than to decrease the RSS and ESA budgets to pay for the scheme? Organic aid is in many ways a matter of a management decision about adding value to a crofter's output. If it were viewed in those terms, advantages would flow to other areas. My third point relates to crofting as a business.

I accept much of Robin Harper's analysis, but I believe that the essential point about organic status is that most crofters have been farming organically for many years and arguably since time immemorial. In that regard, crofting is consistent with the niche marketing that Mr Harper described, including local slaughtering and production of meat for local marketplaces and the pursuit of wider policy objectives. I will finish with two brief points. The first relates to animal welfare and transportation. At next week's agriculture council meeting in Brussels, the Danish presidency will seek to implement tighter regulations on animal welfare. Sheep and cattle are being transported from Shetland and Orkney to the Scottish mainland. It is essential for crofting businesses that there should be no further impediment to that trade. Animal welfare requirements during shipping are precise and demanding. I ask the minister to ensure that there will be no threat to the existing arrangements. Crofting is an agriculture-based activity. The  sustainability of crofting, particularly in areas such as Shetland, depends on fewer imported inputs, more home-grown produce and local marketing. The debate gives Parliament the opportunity to consider crofting in that context. I look forward to hearing the minister and I hope that he can clarify the Government perspective on those issues.

Does the minister accept that when the fisheries council next meets, it is important to resist the advances made by the friends of fishing campaign on the reform of the common fisheries policy? Will he also ensure that the Scottish perspective on the common fisheries policy is strongly expressed, particularly in light of the Danish presidency's recent actions? Will he also stress the importance of ensuring that where that approach is taken, the European Commission should act in a balanced and neutral manner?

I welcome this debate on the economy and on growth. Andrew Wilson deserves credit for emphasising the need to focus on the Scottish economy. We cannot ignore that, and this morning's debate gives the Parliament an opportunity to address it. Mr Wilson referred to the residual strength of the Scottish economy, and his motion concentrates on that to some extent. However, it is bizarre to criticise the limitations on the Parliament's powers and in the same breath to criticise ministers for exercising the powers that they have. That is not a consistent position. It will not help us to achieve Mr Wilson's objective: a long-term analysis of the Scottish economy. Miss Goldie did not explain in her eight-minute speech what the Conservatives would do on any subject relating to the Scottish economy. We had 18 years of cuts in taxes and no investment in our public services or skills. That policy approach was rejected by the people of this country and I am sure that it will be rejected again in future elections here and in the UK. What is desperately needed is not a fixation on statistics that relate to two quarters of one year, but an analysis of what needs to change in the long term. We need an analysis of the changes in patterns and trends that affect Scotland, and of the difference that Government can make through strategic investment and that Parliament can make in scrutinising the role of Government.

We made clear our position on that decision in London, where we can do something about it, rather than here, where we can do nothing about it. In establishing areas in which the Liberal Democrats contend that improvement needs to be made, we do not need the sterile argument that Fergus Ewing has just made about the powers that the Scottish Parliament does not have. If MSPs want to debate macroeconomic policies, they can be elected to the palace of varieties on the Thames. By holding the Executive to account, the Parliament has an important function in considering growth and productivity issues in Scotland.

I would like to make progress first, but then I will be happy to give way. First we need to understand what is happening in the wider world, as Iain Gray rightly pointed out, but I noted that Andrew Wilson and Annabel Goldie did not relate their arguments to globalisation and the natural circumstances of the international situation that affects Scotland and the whole global economy. It is impossible to insulate or separate ourselves from the international context, which, dare I say it, includes England as much as it does the United States of America. A lack of foresight is apparent in that the UK trails the US economic cycle by six to 12 months and Europe follows six to 12 months later. It is therefore imperative to keep an observing eye on what is happening in the USA. The USA has recently revised its GDP numbers to illustrate that it was in recession in the first nine months of 2001. The Federal Reserve has cut interest rates time and time again. No country has more fiscal freedom than the USA, yet it has an impending double-dip recession. There is no global recovery. Jeremy Peat of the Royal Bank of Scotland stated recently in a report that "serious growth would have to wait for global recovery."

Andrew Wilson made a number of points there, but I am not wholly convinced by his arguments about the economy of the United States. There is more difficulty to be faced and we should be aware of that, rather than insulating ourselves. Jeremy Peat's recent analysis illustrates the worrying figures that there are on output and jobs. He commented eloquently on the problems of too much dependence on the service sector. Much good can be done in our domestic performance in the service sector and tourism. A downward trend in trading in the technology and telecommunications sectors has had a severe impact. Previous generations of Scottish politicians begged companies in those sectors to come to Scotland as part of an inward investment strategy. That short-term fix, which was the Tory approach throughout the 1980s, was based on the decline of the manufacturing industry. It was not about building our indigenous economic performance from within. Screwdriver plants offering low-skill jobs were never the success story that they were cited to be at the time. It is vital that our approach is based on improving our entrepreneurial activity and encouraging the growth of businesses. The enterprise networks have an important role to play in that. The enterprise network must also recognise the views of Scottish Engineering, which represents 400 companies. Just the other week, Scottish Engineering said that this is the worst year on record for the electronics sector since records began. We must take a co-ordinated approach to those issues in both the long and medium term. Through the capital and investment priorities that may be announced later today, the Scottish Executive could consider making changes to infrastructure in the areas of transport, training, skills, the environment and energy. I hope that, in the spending announcement to be made later today, the Minister for Finance and Public Services will concentrate as much on the medium and long-term investment that the Scottish economy needs as he does on the short-term issues that face Government when it makes policy. There is a deep reservoir of talent in the commercialisation of research, on which the Scottish economy needs to build. We must take and tap into the best of Scotland's intellectual capital, in relation to which I believe two areas are particularly important. The first is the life sciences industry. I had the opportunity to visit Dundee recently, where I talked to a number of companies that are engaged in that area. High-risk and long-term investments, involving a significant amount of money, are being made at an early stage in order to drive forward exciting new advances in life  sciences. That hugely important area for the enterprise network does not produce short-term outcomes and, to that extent, it does not attract the attention that it needs. We should support that industry because it involves not only Scottish brawn, but Scottish brain. The second area is the renewables sector. Scotland lost the opportunity to lead on wind power—Denmark captured the lead in that sector. However, we could take the lead on wave and other renewable energies. Those are important opportunities for Scotland, and the proposed energy institute could be part of that work. I am frustrated by the lack of drive on renewables, but it is important that the sector is constantly pushed forward, as it is an area of Scottish success. I conclude with the observation that the strategy, "A Smart, Successful Scotland", is about medium and long-term investment in the future of the Scottish economy, and the same applies to work that is being done on enterprise and education within the education sphere. Those medium and long-term steps are appropriate and strategic—they are not part of an utterly pointless rush at the issues. Mr Gray's amendment also deals with the medium and long term and, on that basis, I commend it to the Parliament.

I welcome Winnie Ewing's continuing visits to Shetland, particularly at Up Helly Aa. I notice that, two years since his last visit there with Mrs Ewing, Duncan Hamilton has only just recovered. I welcome the opportunity to make a brief contribution regarding lifeline services to my constituency and that of the Deputy First Minister. The issue is far too important for our constituencies to be used as a political football, as the Tories have just done, and I will play no role in that kind of behaviour. I agree with Maureen Macmillan. For many years, I have shared her frustration about the way in which things have evolved, and I have felt particular frustration in the past year with regard to NorthLink. The situation has changed, and I hope that it has changed considerably for the better in recent weeks, but I wish that the change had happened somewhat earlier. It is incumbent on Tory members to get their facts right in such situations. There are important details that I hope the minister will be able to clarify, but it is extremely important to separate some of the issues that relate to TUPE and the specific classification of employee we are talking about. I would like to make three points, the first of which relates to TUPE. The separate transfer of crew, who will at least have employment with NorthLink on 1 October, is quite a different issue from the situation of the shoreside staff who work in Holmsgarth, in Mr Macdonald's Aberdeen constituency and in Orkney. The crew members will have to wait to see what the redundancy payment position is. That will be sorted out under TUPE regulations at some point, probably through  a court of law or industrial tribunal. That is unfortunate and there is no question about that, but that position will at least work out. I am more concerned about the current members of P&O Scottish Ferries staff who will simply not have a job on 1 October. I cannot conceive of any circumstances in which they should not receive redundancy payments from P&O, as their employer. They are not transferring to another employer and they will be redundant, so I believe that redundancy payments should apply to them. I hope that, in winding up, the minister will be able to inform the Parliament that this is the position, that he will support the calls that Jim Wallace and I have made for that position to be upheld, and that P&O will pay due redundancy to workers who are in that situation. P&O still refuses to confirm that those workers are due redundancy. That is nonsense—there is no transfer, so the payment of redundancy money must be upheld. My second point relates to livestock. Livestock boats are not new, if I may say so gently to Mary Scanlon. Livestock boats have been servicing Orkney and Shetland for many years during the peak shipping season—September, October and November. It is not a new phenomenon. The ships are not a lifeline only for cars and passengers but also for livestock. In relation to her work as reporter to the Transport and the Environment Committee, I would like to tell Maureen Macmillan that I was pleased to note that the original draft tender mentioned livestock. I hope that in the tendering exercise in five years' time, those matters will be dealt with appropriately again. It is a source of some disappointment that that point was not retained in the draft specification. A number of other members have made pertinent points about TRS. In delivering a reliable, affordable and regular service for exporting and importing livestock to the northern isles, it is extremely important that the TRS system is available to the two new companies—Andrew Banks's company and Norse Island Ferries—in circumstances where they comply with the appropriate regulations. I welcomed the minister's confirmation to the Transport and the Environment Committee earlier this summer that that would indeed be the case, and I hope that he will confirm that again today. I hope that he will also confirm that it will be his objective in handling the TRS applications. To wind up, I look forward to attending the naming ceremony for the Hjaltlond in Lerwick on Saturday and to shaking hands vigorously with NorthLink's management and congratulating it on introducing the first new ferry to service the northern isles for 50 years. That is no mean achievement and the minister and the Executive should take due credit for it. There will be a  welcome step change in the quality, safety and comfort of the service for islanders. I welcome that step change, but details need to be clarified. We hope that the minister will clarify one or two important points that have been made in this brief debate.

Does the minister agree that, wherever the institute of energy is located, it must concentrate on the skills shortages that exist in the electricity industry and  on the possibilities for the renewables sector? Will he also consider how the institute can link to academic Scotland and encourage more graduates to look for opportunities in the oil and gas industry, which is still a great Scottish industry?

To watch Margaret Curran and Kenny Gibson—two vigorous politicians—agreeing on so much was an illustration of how much agreement there is about eradicating the scandal of fuel poverty from Scotland today. There were a couple of exceptions, however, to that consensus. One of them, of course, was arguably the best deadpan comic turn outside the  festival. That was Mr Aitken, who managed to ignore 18 years, as Sarah Boyack rightly said, of pensioner poverty, three million unemployed—"A price worth paying"—and everything else, to illustrate that everything that the Executive is doing is down to him and a previous Conservative Government. Yes, really. The second exception was the now sadly departed Mr Alex Neil, who provided a couple of fundamental points from a fundamentalist. I am sure that all politicians enjoyed Alex's creative and positive contribution to his own party in a recent Sunday newspaper article. Few will take lectures on the joys of politics from Mr Neil in that regard. This has been an important debate. At the start of the last parliamentary year before next year's Scottish general election a warm, well-insulated, energy-efficient home must be the aim of any civilised community, irrespective of health, wealth or age. Society should, through its various means, deliver that objective. Therefore, the Government is right—and I accept that the Opposition has acknowledged that—to endorse and, indeed, enlarge its exacting targets for the eradication of fuel poverty. I am sure that both ministers have a hard task in ensuring what is probably the most important aspect of the fuel poverty issue, which is the delivery of their objective across all the departments of government. Many members raised in the debate different aspects of the issue that spread across many departments and agencies of government. To ensure that the Government drives in the right direction on one particular issue is a key task and a difficult one. If Hugh Henry and Margaret Curran can deliver that and break down the traditional departmentalitis in government, they will have delivered something valuable indeed. I will pick up on a couple of brief points from the debate. One is on energy deregulation. The latest studies show that simple free-market energy deregulation helps everyone and is best value, particularly for disadvantaged groups. It does not appear to me to be sensible that Scottish consumers pay more because they are less likely to switch between different suppliers, as happens south of the border. There is a need for ministers to consider that policy within the current debate on energy regulation. The progress on the warm deal is, as members said, significant and welcome. Between April 1999 and March 2001, 96,300 homes have been insulated and emissions of CO 2 have been cut by 77,000 tonnes, which is a point worth bearing in mind in the week of the Johannesburg summit when societies and countries across the globe are considering what contributions they can make. All will recall the Rio statement of "Think global, act  local". The warm deal strategy is surely an illustration of that. The other aspect of the warm deal that I believe is important is the number of people who have been taken out of unemployment and are part of the work going on in home insulation companies across Scotland. In my own constituency of Shetland, Heatwise does an excellent job in that regard. On the central heating programme, considerable investment is being made on installing central heating and insulation in eligible properties, which are council housing and housing association tenants and pensioners in private homes. However, I raise one note of discord on the central heating programme and that is to do with the performance of the Eaga Partnership. In a week when other ministers have come a little bit unstuck in relation to quangos, it is important for ministers to keep a close eye on the performance of the agency given the task of installing the central heating. I understand that I am not the only constituency member to have had representations about the speed of action from Eaga. I could read the minister various letters. Indeed, I have probably sent him a couple of them. I would be grateful, therefore, if in his wind-up speech Mr Henry could assure Parliament that ministers are keeping a close eye on the performance of that agency. It needs to perform for us to get the benefit of the programme. I acknowledge that when Parliament is asked in a year's time what it has done as an institution in its first session, the central heating programme will arguably be one of the most tangible illustrations of change that Parliament has achieved. I agree with Sarah Boyack on that point. As a Liberal Democrat, my long-standing aspiration has been to tackle the scandal of fuel poverty. To be part of partnership parties that are doing something about it and to be able to proudly say that during the next election will be a subject of satisfaction for my party and me.

I agree with the minister's comments. However, will the minister reflect further on the deep frustration that local fishermen feel at the Commission's handling of deepwater species—particularly at the lack of science to back up the deal that the Commission negotiated with the Spanish presidency? Will he undertake to ensure that, in future negotiations on CFP reform, it will be at the heart of his agenda that science will underpin stock assessment details?

I hope that Glasgow members will allow me a brief word on this subject. Like all members, I am one of the statistics to whom Bill Butler referred. I fly in and out of either Glasgow or Edinburgh every week in pursuit of this extraordinary job that we all do. I will share a couple of thoughts on the importance of the arguments that Glasgow members have made today, which I find extremely compelling. I agree with the points that Bill Butler, Bill Aitken and Robert Brown made on the compelling case for rail links to Edinburgh and Glasgow airports. Lewis Macdonald might share my aspirations with regard to Dyce, because the rail link is on the wrong side of the runway from the terminal. I will concentrate on the international competitiveness of the airline and airport markets, which a number of members have raised. Transport links are one of the most important factors. As Nicola Sturgeon said, in the United Kingdom there is significant competition with Stansted for the low-cost-carrier market. An important aspect to Stansted is that it is a centre for a number of low-cost carriers. As Nicola Sturgeon said, Glasgow and other Scottish airports aspire to that position. The market is extremely competitive. The BAA must reflect on that in deciding how to make Glasgow airport and others as competitive as possible. It is important to recognise where traffic goes in terms of passengers coming to and from our cities. I understand that about 30 per cent of the passengers who travel into Edinburgh airport go into the city, whereas the figure for Glasgow is around 13 per cent. That must be borne in mind, as should the points that were made by members who have more knowledge than I on the importance of an integrated network of rail services in Glasgow that can link to the rest of Scotland.  At lunch time today, at a meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on international trade and investment, we heard from David Field from the BAA and Kathryn Munro from Ryanair. Mr Field was keen to emphasise that the BAA's single and most important objective was to build better air links to Europe. Bill Butler has already mentioned the BAA's £60 million development fund. The speakers were keen to emphasise the importance of all the public sector agencies, including the Government of the day, pulling together the factors that can help air travel and make passengers' lives that little bit easier when they arrive in Scotland. Rail links were mentioned in that context by VisitScotland and Scottish Enterprise to improve the competitiveness of Scottish airports. The inbound-outbound figures for the new routes to Oslo and Ireland that Ryanair have opened up illustrate the importance of transport links to passengers, which can also be seen from passenger surveys. An important point is that the cheaper the ticket, the more the individual passenger will spend at his or her destination. If Scotland can get the balance right between attracting people here because we offer cheap, good-value services—whether people fly into Glasgow or our other cities—and offering a destination with our country's natural abilities and features, it will be a winning formula that I will endorse and advance. I hope that the minister can respond positively to the compelling case that the members who represent Glasgow, led by Robert Brown, have made.

I accept that the period is unspecified, but I presume that the whole point is that ministers will go over to negotiate a principle for the future common fisheries policy, which will be enshrined from 1 January next year. If that is achieved, Mr Ewing's points do not arise.

Will Mr Wallace clarify what steps Spain and Portugal have made on decommissioning?

It is a pleasure to follow my fellow islander and colleague Alasdair Morrison. I agree with much of what he said, particularly in the latter portion of his speech. Reform of the common fisheries policy is vital. The current system is a failure and a discredited and outdated form of fisheries management, and it must go. Scotland's fishing industry must be supported and nurtured and we must achieve the best result that we can through the inevitable bun fight that approaches over the next few months in Brussels. As the minister outlined, key principles need to be enshrined in the proposals for a reformed CFP, not the least of which is the retention of the six and 12-mile limits and the issues of relative stability and access that relate to that. It is a red herring—I noticed that Richard Lochhead was happy to go fishing for the red herring—that the Spanish will be prosecuting fisheries in the North sea after 1 st January 2003.  That is a bogus argument.

Just a minute. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation and the other fishing organisations recognise that that is a bogus argument. The principal spokesman for the Opposition should recognise that as well.

Mr Lochhead should be aware of what we expect from the Spanish. The southern states are bound to articulate their case. I would be disappointed if they did not as that is the process. I am pleased that Mr Lochhead is not negotiating on behalf of Scotland, given his apparent lack of knowledge of that important point. The reality is that we need to achieve relative stability now. The longer-term issues will be resolved if we get right the detail now. Mr Lochhead should be aware of that point. The other important theme is the co-financing system of socioeconomic support to take the industry through the period of change. It is no surprise that the Spanish object to the Commission's proposals. Spain receives around 46 per cent of the current fisheries subsidy support that is available to all member states, whereas the UK as a whole receives less than 6 per cent. I suggest that the ministerial team should consider forwarding a new financial package to somehow take into account and accompany the needs of the southern states when considering the balance between stock recovery, fleet restructuring and the socioeconomic conversion issues. The introduction of regional advisory councils, as other colleagues have mentioned, is a considerable step forward. Ministers must work hard to ensure that those have an important role after the introduction of the new CFP. I share some of Jamie McGrigor's concerns about the episode of the past couple of days. The minister was robust on that issue in public comment, following the fisheries council on Tuesday afternoon. I agree particularly with Mr McGrigor's point about the science. The Commission ignored the science on deep-water species. That is a worrying theme. Commissioner Fischler is keen to say that cod, hake or his species of the day is under such-and-such an attack, that the statistics are such-and-such and that we must instigate serious management measures. Mr Fischler must be called to account  for his lack of consistency on science points. I hope that the ministerial team will pursue that in times to come. I agree with Richard Lochhead's point about the proposed EU fisheries research institute. I share his aspiration to have that in Scotland. I argue that it should be at the North Atlantic Fisheries College in Shetland. Ministers will expect me to say that. The principle of science is important. I understand that the proposed institute will not report to the Commission, but to the Council of Ministers. That is an important difference and a stage further. Three young men in Yell, in my constituency, have recently taken on an inshore fishing vessel that can be rigged for white fish. I want those young men to be part of a new and sustainable white fish fishing industry, in my constituency and in constituencies throughout Scotland, that has a future, in which men can return to sea and reinvest in their vessels. The pelagic fleet is reinvesting because of financial confidence, but we are not seeing that in the white fish industry. I hope that, in driving forward a new CFP, ministers will be seized of the need to ensure that Scotland has a sustainable industry with a growing number of men re-employed in it, after the period of severe disadvantage that they have been through. We want Scotland to be able once again to cherish and nurture an extremely important industry that provides a stable food with health advantages for people the length and breadth of this country.

Will the member give way?

Does Richard Lochhead accept that if a regional advisory committee that comprised fishermen, management, Government agents and scientists made a unanimous report to the Commission, the Commission would be foolhardy to turn it down?

In the minister's assessment of fleet policy, will he share with the chamber his reflections on the UK paper on the Commission's green paper? The UK paper, which has been circulated to members, does not mention Scottish decommissioning. Will the Scottish decommissioning package that was funded by the Executive be taken into account in the overall balance of the Commission's proposals on restructuring?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will reconsider its policy on the provision of financial support for lifeline air services to islands in the light of evidence set out in the comparative study of public service obligations in Europe by Cranfield University. (S1O-5261)

I thank the minister for his reply  and welcome the commitment to consider public service obligations as part of that study. Will he confirm the record level of spending given to Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd by the Scottish Executive but note that only £9.39 of the price of an air ticket relates to landing charges? In respect of the cost of flying between Aberdeen and Shetland, a £300 ticket is not greatly reduced by having lower landing charges. Will he undertake to visit my constituency and meet local people, businesses and public sector organisations to consider how best to take into account such factors in reviewing the consultation when it takes place?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Executive has taken to ensure that the interests of the fishing industry are properly recognised by the European Commission's proposals for reform of the common fisheries policy. (S1F-1934)

On the European Commission consultation that was announced on Tuesday, does the First Minister acknowledge the importance in the review of maintaining the Shetland box, the six and 12-mile limits and relative stability against the attacks of the so-called friends-of-fish countries in the European Union? Will he ensure that the 20 per cent  reduction in fishing vessel capacity in Scotland that has already been achieved through decommissioning will be our fleet's contribution to cuts in capacity? Will he agree to work to attract the European fisheries research institute not just to Scotland, but to its natural home in the middle of the Atlantic and the North sea, Shetland?

I will make a few points that relate to the Highlands and Islands. I am the member for Shetland, where air services are somewhat important. I begin with the observation that seven and a quarter hours is not a unique length of delay because of transport difficulties for my constituents—nor, I suspect, for those in the other island groups around the coast of Scotland. I welcome the SNP debate on the subject, but I do not welcome the SNP's approach, which tends to carp about problems rather than provide some balance. Links to mainland Europe exist. For example, KLM uk flies from Aberdeen to Amsterdam. Of course those links are not enough and business and other interests would like more such links. Business people who speak to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, for example, make that point repeatedly and I accept that argument. We must find ways to encourage those developments. To say that there are no  links, as has been suggested from the SNP side, does not help in a debate on what are complex issues, which also relate to the structure of the companies concerned and to how best we can attract them.

I am sure that Mr Macdonald, as minister with responsibility for transport, will have heard that point. It is simplistic to say that low-cost carriers provide the solution for the Highlands and Islands, as the issues are more complex. Apart from anything else, we cannot rely on a Boeing 737-800 to get into Sumburgh, and it cannot be landed at many of the airports in the HIAL network. Low-cost carriers operate on the basis of one type of plane, one engineering need, one set of spare parts and so on. That is their raison d'être and that is how they operate. Furthermore, we have seen what can happen to low-cost carriers: Go and easyJet have already merged. Decisions on international links have to take account of 11 September—I cite the demise of Sabena. Those are important issues, and we should find ways of improving services in the Highlands and Islands.

I am sure that Audit Scotland will review the operation of Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd—as it does on a statutory basis. If it finds faults, I hope that the lessons will be learned. We should consider such issues in detail, however, rather than commenting on them from a position of complete ignorance. The lifeline services on which some parts of Scotland, such as Shetland, rely are extremely important not just for business travel but for domestic travel and for patients. Patients from Shetland have to fly down to Aberdeen to attend Aberdeen royal infirmary at Foresterhill and the  range of services that are available here. My chief concern is that about £1.4 million of Shetland NHS Board's money is spent every year on flying people to and from the islands by British Airways. Although that is a necessity, I cannot believe—and have always struggled with the thought—that British Airways cannot provide a cheaper option for that block booking, which has to be made and which costs the health board, and therefore the Government, a very large amount of money. There are arguments around public service obligations, and I am pleased that the minister has recognised them in his amendment. I recognise—unlike the SNP—that money does not grow on trees and that to win the argument I have to argue for spending in competition with other spending priorities in Mr Gray's budget. I accept that reality. There are good arguments in the Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership's report why PSOs may be appropriate, and I hope that the minister will find time to consider them carefully. A recent story in Business a.m. indicated that the Executive was in discussions with a business that had offered to provide management services to Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd. I hope that the minister will comment on that in his winding-up speech, particularly in light of recent decisions concerning Sumburgh.

As Mr MacAskill is interested in the cost of travel in the Highlands and Islands, does he acknowledge that £9.39 is the cost that HIAL accords to each ticket? The cost of the tickets is the issue—nothing else.

As a Shetlander, it is a great pleasure to be in Aberdeen. Normally, Shetlanders in Aberdeen are known by the Marks and Spencer bags that they are carrying back to the boat at 10 minutes to 5 every night. The other side to being a Shetlander in Aberdeen on which I must comment is the "oor oil" stuff, although Winnie Ewing has left and she will probably be slightly taken aback or annoyed by what I have to say. In the 1970s, I distinctly remember her standing in a Lerwick hostelry pronouncing firmly on the importance of oil to Scotland and how it was "oor oil". A Whalsay fisherman tapped her on the shoulder and said, "Winnie, it's no your oil; it's wur oil." The SNP never recovered from that in Shetland. There are a number of good reasons to be in Aberdeen. It is a great pleasure to join other members in commenting on what a fine job the University of Aberdeen and the other bodies that are hosting us have done this week. The debate is important. To debate oil and gas in Aberdeen is right, as other members have said. It is the energy capital of Europe, and I hope that it will become the energy capital of the world, although I acknowledge Houston's role as that. Local members have made much of Aberdeen's credentials on that point, and I will not repeat those credentials. I will make the technical point that, when considering how investment matters to the oil and  gas industry, it is important to acknowledge that, 20 years ago, the Forties field in the North sea had an oil recovery rate of 42 per cent. Today, the Forties field has an oil recovery rate of 63 per cent. That shows how much the oil and gas industry has changed and how much future investment matters. We are not debating investment for today, we are debating investment for the future.

I would certainly like such action to be announced quickly. However, I heard on BBC Radio North East at 10 minutes to 7 this morning that Brian Adam was leading the debate, not just that he was opening the debate for the SNP, when he did neither. I see that he is speaking from the back benches. David Mundell has criticised others for their press releases. Brian Adam's press release yesterday was perhaps a little presumptuous in saying that he was leading the debate. Mr Gray, in his opening speech, made a number of important points. He also had to deal with a bizarre intervention from Richard Lochhead on Scottish jobs in the oil industry always being in Scotland. It is important for Scotland that groups such as the Wood Group and Halliburton have Scottish jobs.

No. Richard Lochhead has made his point. It was a terrible point. I will deal with it. It is important that the Wood Group and others are based in Houston and Venezuela. Those are Scottish jobs and Scottish companies doing really well throughout the world. I am proud of that.

I do not think that the playing field tilts against the Scottish economy, given the importance of oil and gas to Aberdeen. The decisions that the Wood Group makes, for example, are made in Aberdeen. We should recognise that and we should, as Alex Neil did, seek to celebrate what we do well here, instead of  running down various aspects of the industry.

I ask Rhona Brankin to forgive me. I would like to push on.

The skills gap, as Marilyn Livingstone and other members have mentioned, is important, but, as you said "One minute", Presiding Officer, I will skip all that. Let me deal with the politics. I take no lectures on cynicism from the Tories or from David Mundell. The Parliament has a way of dealing with such issues. The issue of National Air Traffic Services—NATS—for example, on which I distinctly remember Mr Tosh speaking rather forcibly, was one on which the various parties had different views. That is the way it should be on reserved matters. It is entirely right that Labour back benchers speak in favour of the chancellor's budget—the chancellor is a member of their party, and they should speak to the matter accordingly. I am not clear, however, about whether ministers have come to a collective view on the effects of the budget on the oil and gas industry. Those effects need to be borne in mind. This is an important opportunity to raise issues relating to the oil and gas industry in Aberdeen and in Scotland—and in my constituency of Shetland. Representatives of the industry have said important things about the budget, which need to be taken into account. Other members have referred to the Smith Institute seminar, which some of us attended yesterday. John Browne, the chief executive officer of BP Amoco, made specific reference to those factors. Brian Wilson was sitting next to him, and I am sure that the points made were taken on board. The matter is reserved, and it is the responsibility of our Westminster colleagues to take it forward. That is why we have lodged an amendment, which is what the Parliament should vote for.

I accept the figures on the potential for renewable energy, but does the member share my concern that there is a considerable gap between the prices that consumers demand and the possible cost of renewables to business and domestic customers?

I observe that Lewis Macdonald is the perfect minister to wind up the debate, given his previous responsibility as convener of the Holyrood progress group. For David Mundell's benefit, I make it clear that neither Lewis Macdonald nor I had the bravery to say "Auf Wiedersehen, Pet" to Linda Fabiani as we left that group. It is nice to see her and Alex Neil sitting on the same side of the chamber, because they did not do so during the brief question-and-answer session last night on a somewhat important building project—at least to us—that is taking place at the other end of the road outside the door. I, too, congratulate Marilyn Livingstone on initiating the debate. As Alex Neil and others have reflected, it is important to recognise the role of the construction industry in a modern Scottish economy, not only as an employer and a generator of wealth but as the sector that builds the infrastructure that is so important for our future. I endorse the motion, which calls for a strategic review of the industry. I hope that the minister will respond positively to the suggestions that Marilyn Livingstone and others have made on addressing skills shortages and other issues. The construction industry needs to offer people an attractive career. The current skills shortage in the industry suggests that the career that it offers is not attractive enough. In my constituency, there are shortages in certain key areas, not least of which are those of skilled heating and ventilation engineers and electricians. I share the concerns of other members who reflected on the need to  address those shortages. Brian Fitzpatrick mentioned the fact that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee is examining that issue and the way in which we balance the competing needs of our economy with those of our further and higher education sector. Robert Brown and other members commented on the interim report that the committee has produced on the issue. There are a number of reasons for the skills shortages that manifest themselves across the industry. One is the British sickness—the belief that it is more respectable to wear a suit in the office than to get one's boots dirty on a building site. To some extent, that sentiment is reflected in the rewards that the construction industry can bring. I was interested to learn—indeed, I was horrified to learn—that it is possible to earn a higher hourly rate if one works in public affairs in Edinburgh than if one works as a chartered architect or engineer in a constituency such as Shetland. I know who provides the best service to the country and it is probably not the lobbyist. Another reason for the skills shortage is the lack of training opportunities and access to funding. In that respect, the Parliament needs to ensure better co-ordination between the industry and government and to give greater encouragement to firms to offer apprenticeships. In my generation—if that is not an odd phrase—many businesses, from Dounreay onwards, were encouraged to offer craft apprenticeships to people as they left high school. Although the modern apprenticeship scheme has been an undoubted and welcome success, more can and should be done to enlarge that area of training. The motion refers to the cowboy element of the industry, which undercuts reputable operators and provides clients with a poor service. An equally important point is that that element does not provide the quality of training that the industry requires. The industry is often too confrontational. That is the result of clients' addiction to competitive tendering without thought for quality. A low fee for the designer at the design stage can lead to an inefficient design that costs more to build and does not serve its purpose. Keen tenders for the construction stage can be double-edged swords. It is in no one's interest for a contractor to start on site knowing that he has to seek causes for claims or cut corners if he is to avoid making a loss on the job. From the start, there is a conflict between the architect and the contractor and the contractor and the subcontractor. Time that should be spent on delivering a quality, value-for-money project can often be wasted arguing over clauses in conditions of contracts. However, there are signs that that is changing and that contractual problems can be addressed.  In the longer term, we need to concentrate on higher standards and lower costs. Linda Fabiani mentioned the Egan report. One of its important recommendations was that the industry should seek to "replace competitive tendering with long term relationships based on clear measurement of performance and sustained improvements in quality and efficiency." Some large companies, such as the British Airports Authority, have followed that approach for some time using partnering to build teamwork between client, designer and contractors. That approach works. The strategic review that the motion calls for would give us an opportunity to examine that approach, to see the benefits of partnering and to consider how it could be extended across the board. On that basis, the motion's suggestions are well worth pursuing.

To ask the Scottish Executive what proposals it has to address the levels of freight costs faced by island communities. (S1O-5205)

I thank the minister for his answer and for his announcement about livestock the other day. Does he accept that there might be increased competition on freight to the northern isles as a result of freight issues relating to NorthLink Orkney and Shetland Ferries Ltd? In that context, will he undertake to examine the financial effects on NorthLink as a result of that undoubted increase in competition?

The minister mentioned the fare structure. It is now possible to obtain a ticket between Aberdeen and London Heathrow for £89.50, which, as it allows considerable flexibility, is available not just to people who can travel at longer notice but to people who wish to travel at shorter notice. Is he aware that no such flexibility of fare structure is available to the people whom I represent on Shetland, or indeed to people living on Orkney or the Western Isles? Will the minister seek urgent meetings with representatives of British Airways to tackle them on the social responsibility issues that the First Minister raised recently? In my view, British Airways simply has no sense of social responsibility.

Will the minister undertake to hold urgent discussions with British Airways and to ensure that we can achieve some change in that regard?

People are extremely annoyed about the fares that they have to pay—

I am grateful for the minister's explanation. When the current—dare I use the word—quota of the habitats directive has been fulfilled, will the Scottish Executive ensure through the member state that any new tranche of designations will take those wider points into consideration? Is that a possibility?

In June this year, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, of which I am a member, will visit Shetland. Rhona Brankin, who is present, is also a committee member. I hope that the committee, during an inquiry that we hope to begin on tourism, will also have an opportunity to look at eco-tourism and sustainable forms of tourism in one of the more far-flung parts of the country. We hope to arrange a visit for committee members to the cliffs of Noss. The cliffs were part of my farm, before I left the non-viable area of agriculture and went into something else. The cliffs of Noss are recognised internationally for the size of the colonies of many different species of birds. The cliffs of Noss area is designated in numerous ways, but it is principally a national nature reserve. I am not convinced that all those designations add much to the island of Noss. The cliffs of Noss were a tourist attraction for many years before nature organisations came into being. There have been great advantages to visitors in recent years in the Nature Conservancy Council and, latterly, SNH organising access to the island and the cliffs to look at the birds. However, I argue that that tourism would have happened anyway—perhaps through local arrangements. I contend that SNH is in the worst possible world. SNH is the messenger that gets shot. I sympathise with Jamie McGrigor's arguments, but I disagree with him on one point. SNH is not driving the designation agenda. The agenda is being driven by European designations that were brought about by member states agreeing the habitats directive. SNH is simply the messenger that has to enforce those tiers of designation. That is what is wrong with the system.

I will deal with consultation in a minute. My main point is this: if an organisation that is separate from the Government but is the Government's main environmental agency is in such difficulties because its scientific advice is not believed by local people and communities and is disputed more and more, we need to consider why that organisation is there. If European requirements mean that the UK has to meet targets on designated areas, I am not convinced that SNH is the correct mechanism by which that target should be delivered. The main environmental adviser to the Government—especially since we have a Scottish Parliament and Scottish ministers—should be the Government itself. SNH should not be left in a position that must be ghastly for its staff, who are  committed to natural heritage but are dealing with the worst of all possible worlds.

I am simply not aware of any appeal that has come before the committee resulting in the overturning of a decision about which local people are concerned. There is no meaningful consultation on the designations. I am concerned about the fact that people's views are dismissed simply because they relate not to scientific areas but to social and economic aspects. However, those aspects are as important to local people as the scientific case. If people's arguments are dismissed because they do not meet the precise requirements of the designation process, the process is meaningless. SNH, I repeat, is in the worst of all possible positions. The body that acts as the Government's adviser should be part of Government. That is the position at which we should end up in this debate.

I would not hold it against the minister if he did not want routinely to meet Scottish Natural Heritage. Does he understand the real concerns that exist about the consultation process that Scottish Natural Heritage follows for nature designations? Does he accept that where socio-economic factors are not taken into account, such consultations create real uncertainties and concerns in local communities? Does he envisage a mechanism that would allow the Scottish Executive to introduce proposals for ensuring that such factors are taken into account in future?

I welcome the announcement by the First Minister on additional funding. Will he reflect on the fact that during last year's election campaign, the SNP's penny for Scotland was not for health, but for fuel duties? Will he note that the Conservatives' policy is to vote against the budget and against more investment in health? Will the First Minister confirm that 8.3 per cent of Scottish gross domestic product is spent on health and that that figure will rise because of his announcement? Investment in the modernisation and reform of the NHS, including the improvements in our national health plan, is crucial. Some people in Scotland still wait too long for hospital treatment and some people are still bedblocked. Will the First Minister ensure that the Minister for Health and Community Care's proposals show every man, woman and child in this nation how the improvements that the funds bring will provide a demonstrable return for the people of Scotland?

I too welcome the introduction of the bill, which seeks to  encourage entrepreneurship and strengthen consumer protection. In many ways, the manner in which the bill is being dealt with in the chamber reflects the importance of Scottish MPs in the House of Commons doing an appropriate job of scrutinising Government proposals. I am sure that those who believe that the bill has and will have a profound effect on Scottish business and on insolvency law will make full use of their representatives in the Westminster Parliament. To do so will ensure that the bill is scrutinised adequately and amended appropriately. The role of the Office of Fair Trading is a matter that is reserved, but I hope that that role is considered actively by MPs. Those of us who represent rural parts of Scotland have felt some disquiet about some of the issues surrounding the role of the Office of Fair Trading. I hope that there is an opportunity to examine that role. In the minister's opening remarks, he mentioned in some depth the important insolvency provisions in part 10 of the bill. I am sure that he and his department will reflect on the significant differences in the way in which receivership and administration operate north and south of the border so as to ensure that, where appropriate, differences are reflected adequately in the final bill. I want to make a general point about Sewel motions. It is clear that we are considering the bill in its current form. However, if the bill were to be amended, which is not impossible to imagine in the Westminster context, what mechanisms are open to the minister that will ensure that the Scottish Parliament can fully take into account amendments that may be lodged at Westminster? We should be able to scrutinise the final bill.

In 55 minutes, we will get a rant from the Tories on why we should have less Government and less of the Parliament. I wish that the Tories would decide what they want. They have just lectured us on the  need for ministers and the Executive to do everything. In less than an hour, we will receive a lecture to exactly the opposite effect. There we go. Maureen Macmillan hosted a discussion with the tourism industry at lunch time. I am sure that David Davidson was not there for perfectly understandable reasons. At that meeting, I heard about the need to talk up Scotland, rather than to talk it down. Once again, the two Opposition parties have given us a rather predictable series of points about all that is wrong—

No, I will make progress first. We have heard quite enough from the Conservatives.

I assure the member that the truth is quite the contrary. There are a couple of positive points. In his speech, the minister mentioned international events. I draw his attention to the international pool championships, which will take place in my constituency in June. Eleven hundred separate participants and eleven different nations will take part in an international sporting event. We must applaud and celebrate that, and congratulate the organisers. One of the driving forces for tourism in my constituency is music and the ability to use music creatively—culturally and socially, as well as educationally—to enhance Shetland's status as a great product. The way in which we have been able to sell to the American market, through visitors on cruise liners every year, has been particularly important. That is an example of making the best of a small community that is a long way from the central belt of Scotland. I have three brief points to make. On overseas marketing, we should not enter into a constitutional battle about the British Tourist Authority. Instead, there needs to be a rigorous service level agreement between VisitScotland and the BTA, so that Scotland—through VisitScotland—can obtain the services that it needs from that organisation. I saw a poster recently, which—on the back of foot-and-mouth disease and September of last year—had a promotion for the whole of the United Kingdom that consisted of Tower bridge and the Coldstream Guards, with a little strapline about Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Let us find ways to enhance the BTA's service. We should do that through a rigorous working arrangement, which could be to the advantage of VisitScotland and the Scottish tourism industry. That could be worked through in a concrete way and I encourage ministers to consider that  potential. Instead of reinventing the wheel, we should take the best of the BTA's work and tackle the specific points that I raised. That would deal with Dr Ewing's point about the areas that are excluded from the BTA's campaign. If a service level agreement were in place, that problem would not arise. On international connections, I share the aspirations of others, including Kenny MacAskill and David Davidson, for more international connections to and from Scotland. That is rightly part of the minister's action plan. The low-cost carriers provide a unique challenge. It must be borne in mind that it might not be in Scotland's tourist interests to promote a net outflow of potential domestic visitors, as is the case at the moment. In discussions this morning, VisitScotland pointed out to me the potential market that is offered by the new destinations to which low-cost carriers fly direct from Scotland. I hope that those opportunities will grow. For example, if the low-cost carriers provided an Inverness to Milan link, areas of Europe that have not previously benefited from VisitScotland's marketing might open up. We should take advantage of that potential rather than talk it down. However, there are no guarantees with low-cost carriers, as we know from the Dublin to Edinburgh route, from which Go was in effect forced out by Ryanair in a hard price-cutting war. We would therefore need to reflect on that before targeting and marketing on the basis of the operations of the low-cost carriers. Finally, I want to comment on the integration of tourism and information services. Tourist information centres play an important role in providing a range of services to visitors but, as the Parliament debated only last week, many areas of Scotland—indeed, all areas of Scotland—have considerable problems with post offices. I cannot believe that we could not pool tourist information centres, post offices and other community facilities that provide services to local people and visitors. By pooling those things, we could create what might be called community information centres, instead of simply tourist information centres, which would be facilities that were available to all. That is the kind of imaginative thinking that is needed to provide information for both local people and the important Scottish tourism industry.

Does the minister accept that to invest in CalMac, the northern isles ferries and HIAL is to invest in infrastructure? Welcome as that is, it does not change the fares that people in the outlying areas of Scotland face. Does she accept that, while the investment in HIAL has improved the company's position, it has not led to changes in the exorbitant price of flying to and from the northern, western and other isles in the outlying parts of Scotland? Will she give an undertaking that she will look at innovative transport policies, such as public service obligations, to counter the cost of living in those areas?

Peter Jamieson is a sub-postmaster in Sandness—a small community on the west side of Shetland. A long line of Jamiesons have run that sub-post office, which is in a very rural and isolated part of  Scotland. The sub-post office is under threat and has been for some time because of the reasons that other members have enunciated. The financial pressure that that business is under is replicated in other parts of my constituency and in constituencies across the country. The rolling out of measures that will tackle the difficult problems that those businesses face and that help their financial viability must take place with due speed and efficiency. It must be recognised that unless action is taken quickly, in places such as Sandness—where a sub-post office has existed for many generations—sub-post offices will simply not survive. I concur with other members in welcoming Robert Brown's motion. Colleagues must consider how the relevant measures should be implemented. The seriousness of the threat to the viability of local sub-post offices, which Robert Brown highlighted, is one aspect of the issue. The other aspect is Postcomm's proposals for the deregulation of postal services throughout the United Kingdom. Three thousand people in my constituency, which is a large number in a small place such as Shetland, signed a petition that opposes deregulation. My colleague Alistair Carmichael and I handed the petition in at Whitehall on Monday. People who live in isolated rural and island areas know that deregulation would mean several things. It would mean the diminution of the service—the daily delivery would go. As the financial pressure escalated on the rump of the existing Post Office, the Government would have to concede the principle of universal charging. I welcome what Susan Deacon said about universal charging and Postcomm's current regulatory proposals. As the Post Office trade unions have said—and as Consignia has confirmed—the price of a stamp would be bound to rise. The day when a stamp costs in the range of £2 to £4 would not be far away. The Treasury might provide an initial sop of money to subsidise those areas, but I am sure that the money would not last. There is significant pressure on that front. Let me gently say to Murdo Fraser that, at Westminster, his party fully supports the proposals. I am intrigued to know what his stance is. I hope that the Labour Government in London is aware of the seriousness of the issue. In my view, it is not good enough for the Government to create a regulator and then hide behind it. The proposals would have a fundamental effect on the delivery of postal services in rural, isolated and island Scotland as well across the breadth of mainland Scotland. I hope that the current consultation exercise will recognise, understand and take into account the points that have been made in every  part of Scotland. The Scottish Executive must take the chance to make strenuous representations to London to ensure that the proposals do not mean the end of the universal service, which is strongly valued in the parts of Scotland that I represent.

I, too, welcome the national debate that the minister initiated today. Does she acknowledge that the guidance that is provided to young people as they go through school is particularly important? In that sense, vocational and academic streams must be acknowledged as equally important in the decisions that young people make as they go through school. Does the minister acknowledge that the national debate must address the pressure that teachers feel because of the bureaucracy that they face, in her constituency and mine, particularly in small schools in situations in which there are composite classes?

The Conservative's worst attack is that Mr Chisholm has a ministerial aide—that is pretty devastating stuff. In his opening speech, Mr Chisholm made some sensible remarks about the problems that face the NHS, which is a refreshingly honest approach from a ministerial team. He also illustrated what is being done about the problems by mentioning the resources and the philosophy that the Liberal Democrat and Labour Administration has introduced. Some refreshing honesty from the other parties would not go amiss. Despite Mr Butler's efforts, he did not get an answer to his pretty straight question about resources. Perhaps the SNP will answer him in the winding-up speeches. The minister gave a precise answer to the Conservative spokesperson's question about  administration, but the Conservatives did not appear to hear it.

No, I want to make some progress. We heard what Nicola Sturgeon had to say earlier on. I will take the opposite tack from that of SNP members, who ducked the question of resources, and will illustrate where resources could be used more effectively. At present, NHS Shetland spends £1.1 million on flying patients from Shetland to Aberdeen for various treatments and procedures. In the Western Isles and Orkney a comparable amount is spent on flying patients to the mainland. To be frank, £1.1 million spent on British Airways is a scandal. I would rather that the money was spent on front-line care in the Shetlands, such as doctors, nurses and treatments. I encourage ministers to consider closely—and to tackle constructively—the money that island health boards spend to fly patients to hospitals, such as those in Glasgow, Inverness or Aberdeen.

I accept that, but Mary Scanlon completely misses the point. My concern is why my constituents who travel to Aberdeen for specialist treatment must pay £300 for the round trip on British Airways. That is the point; if Mary Scanlon knew anything about island life, she would understand it. I hope that ministers will consider alternatives in that area. I suggest that resources might be reallocated. We must consider how we can best spend resources. Those who make the system work, such as staff nurses, doctors and ancillary staff, are a great resource. However, more needs to be done in supporting their work. That means supporting the physical infrastructure and providing new equipment, and also improving terms and conditions. This week, I received a letter from a GP in my constituency. He said: "There is always more pressure to do things in GP that were done in hospitals, but there seems no transfer of money with the transfer of workload, so therefore there is more pressure on time for all staff." I hope that among the measures that will be introduced, initiatives for isolated rural GPs will be considered carefully. Expectations are rising in the general population. New procedures are devised to meet  those expectations, which will rise again as a result. Local staff gave me three examples of such procedures. They were dual energy X-ray absorptiometry—DEXA—scans to determine the need for protection against osteoporosis, new drug treatments such as statins to protect against heart disease by lowering blood fats and new procedures such as joint replacements and coronary artery bypass grafts. The aging population and the change in the aspirations and requirements of the population lead to increased demand on the system. I do not accept the utterly spurious argument that some members have put forward that demand is not rising—that is demonstrably not the case. Anyone who is closely involved in constituency work will know that and should try to find constructive ways around it. For example, if we tackle the moneys that are spent wastefully on British Airways flights, we could find more money for the delivery of health services in constituencies such as mine.

Does the minister accept that IT developments help to reduce the professional isolation of GPs and community nurses in isolated rural and island areas? Does he further accept that that benefit could be enhanced appreciably if the Government tackled the cost of data communication networks? What work is the Executive undertaking to tackle that crucial issue?

What we have heard from the SNP today is opposition for opposition's sake instead of a realistic approach to an important issue that faces consumers and constituents the length and breadth of the country. In the context of competition legislation, we heard nothing of an alternative from the SNP. A single water authority will invest—and needs to do so—£2 billion in the future of water services throughout Scotland. The measures that the bill has introduced, including the ones that have been put in place during stages 2 and 3, give reassurance in a number of key areas relating to the functions and responsibilities of the new water  authority. Chief among those was amendment 24, which concerned the consultation code and customer panels. I hope that it will make a difference by reflecting the concerns of business and domestic customers, local authorities and employees. There is a huge need for capital spending in Scotland. It is important that Scottish Water reflects the needs of urban and rural Scotland. Through the efficiency savings that a single authority can achieve, it will be able to invest in the communities that members serve. The cost to domestic and non-domestic consumers is important. The fact that water-only bills in the north of Scotland will fall by 9.2 per cent in the following financial year and that combined water and waste bills will be frozen, is a sign of the bill's approach. I have no hesitation in commending the bill to members.

I speak on amendment 106, principally in relation to proposed new paragraph 5(2), which refers to the nominating bodies for a customer panel. I welcome the minister's earlier remarks about the geographic structure of those panels. However, I look for ministerial guidance on whether two particular groups will be represented on customer panels and on how best to represent them. The first group is local authorities and my point is related to Dennis Canavan's earlier remarks on another amendment. When I was a councillor in Shetland in the mid-1990s, the Conservatives removed water and waste-water services from local authority control. There was no overriding case for doing so in the geographic circumstances in which I was then involved. Strategic planning, housing and economic development factors solidly come together under the ambit of local government. I believe that strategic guidance, the principle of community planning and community planning initiatives are best brought together under local government. Water and waste-water services are an essential development part of those elements. Therefore, local authorities should be part of the customer panels. The second group is non-domestic users of water and waste-water services. I am thinking in particular of fish-processing businesses in my constituency and other areas, such as north-east Scotland, which pay huge amounts of money to water companies and need to be represented on the customer panels to drive forward the efficiencies that the bill aims to achieve. Amendment 106 would recognise those two groups.

The tone of what I will say in speaking to amendment 111 will be the same as that which David Mundell used when he moved amendment 103. As an island—indeed a rural—member, I wish to express concern about the function and location of local offices of the new water organisation. I do so more in the sense of how best to find a mechanism to tackle the obvious consumer and community concerns about proposals that Scottish Water may have to remove local offices. I also want to pick up on the point made by Mr Mundell about the natural tendency of such large, centrally based organisations to centralise their powers. Amendment 111 would lay an obligation on Scottish Water to carry out engineering, planning, design and operational work in local offices, unless the organisation can show that moving such work to a central location would save money. Furthermore, Scottish Water would be obliged to make such a case to the water commissioner. I respect the minister's arguments on amendment 24 and the consultation code. However, as far as centralisation is concerned, I want to push him on how we can best make the same argument, using the routes that are available in the bill. After a spirited group discussion on this point, I came to recognise that amendment 111 gives rise to two specific concerns. In particular, Keith Raffan pointed out that it would be wrong for the Parliament to seek  to micromanage Scottish Water. Indeed, I take that point. The other significant concern about amendment 111 focuses on the central issue of efficiency. Scottish Water is required to achieve a level of savings across the whole network and any impediment to that requirement might translate into charges for individual consumers. As a result, the central question is how we can best achieve a mechanism that allows local communities to have some input into decisions about offices in their own locality. I have pressed the minister and written to the chairman designate of Scottish Water on those points. This morning, ministers should provide clear guidance about how the consultation code would work in relation to the closure of a local office. Would that be considered under subsection 1 of the new section proposed by amendment 24? Furthermore, would that provision take into account issues such as office closures and substantial changes in staffing complements, expertise and retained functions? Amendment 111 is a method of achieving the same end as amendment 24, and I invite the minister to consider its merits.

I endorse the sentiments behind Donald Gorrie's motion and the comments that members from all parties have made. The debate is surely about a civilised Scotland in which we value instrument teachers and in which Government, Parliament, education authorities, unions and society value those who provide so much for our young people and give so much of their time. It is about a Scotland in which we value those people as full teaching members of the school community. Like Sarah Boyack, I received representations from—and was therefore encouraged to take part in this brief debate by—a constituent. In my case, the constituent teaches classical violin in schools throughout Shetland. Members should bear in mind the fact that that involves jumping on planes and inter-island ferries. I will quote from his letter, which raises an issue that Brian Monteith mentioned. The letter says: "Historically Instructors have been paid on a scale 92.5% of the corresponding teachers scale. As numerically we are very much in the minority compared with teachers, we would have equally low clout in pay negotiations and therefore this 92.5% link has been of great value to all Instructors." That is an important point. I hope that the minister will reflect on it in her closing speech. My constituent is a member of the EIS. As he states in his communication, instructors are being invited to accept a new salary and conditions package. The recommendation that they received at the end of last year to accept the deal said: "This agreement deletes the current contractual entitlement of Music Instructors to be paid 92.5% of all corresponding scale points for teachers." The constituents who have approached me on the matter are certainly concerned about how they are being represented. That is important and that is why this debate is important. I hope that the minister will act on that matter. I value the role that instrument teachers play in Scottish schools, especially in my constituency. Music is in the blood of communities such as Shetland—especially after Up-Helly-Aa last week. Last Tuesday afternoon, during the Up-Helly-Aa festival, an excellent concert, organised by Shetland Arts Trust and entitled "Fiery Sessions", took place in one of our local theatre halls. The concert brought together young and old, as well as new and traditional forms of music. It was performed with verve and dash. I hope that the minister will have the chance in future years to observe or perhaps take part in the festival for herself. Up-Helly-Aa is a part of my community's future, history and culture. It is very much about music.  That is why the development of and investment in core music provision—brass, woodwind and classical violin—and non-core provision, which for Shetland schools means traditional fiddle, accordion and percussion, is so important. The number of children receiving non-core music provision in schools in Shetland is rising thanks to the pioneering work of David Gardner and others in Shetland Arts Trust. My daughter now plays the piano—rather well, I may say. My son would rather play left back for Rangers, much to the chagrin of his parents, but there we go. There must be a purpose to such investment—and there is. Linda Fabiani made a good point about the cultural strategy. Shetland's cultural strategy, which feeds into the Executive's, heavily emphasises the role that musical tradition can play. That is important for building and enhancing the experience that I believe we should make available to all children, irrespective of background, in a civilised society. At the heart of the programme are the instrument teachers. They are dedicated to raising standards and to stretching our young people's minds and imaginations. Their creative talents should be rewarded and considered fairly in the context of the teaching profession. I hope that, in winding up, the minister will respond positively to the principle that many members have advocated in the debate.

Much of what Alex Neil has sought to do should be commended. He has, as Trish Godman said earlier, sought to open up the process by which quango appointments are made. However, Alex Neil should have acknowledged during the debate, as he did on "Newsnight" on 15 January, that 80 per cent of what he was seeking to achieve has now been achieved by the Scottish Executive's proposals. That, for a member's bill from an Opposition back bencher, is no mean achievement. A lot of what we are seeking to achieve across the parties—apart from the Conservatives, to whose sanctimony I will come in a moment—should be applauded. Perhaps the minister, when winding up, could cover the legislative mechanism and the timetable under which the Executive will bring forward its final proposals. There are two central issues in the debate: parliamentary scrutiny and the politicisation of the appointments process. It is important to examine closely what the Executive is proposing for parliamentary scrutiny: a Scottish public appointments commissioner, appointed by the Queen on the recommendation of Parliament—not on that of the Executive. The Tories and, presumably, the SNP will oppose that measure. All vacancies will be advertised to the relevant  parliamentary committee and the Scottish public appointments commissioner will be able to raise with the relevant minister any concerns whatever about the appointments process. In addition, if the commissioner is not satisfied with the minister's response, the matter can be referred to Parliament before the appointment is confirmed. The checks and balances that the Executive—and the Labour and Liberal Democrat groups working together—proposes to put into the system are important for improving the very system of accountability and the process that we want to establish. The real points are these. First, Mr Neil's bill would give the perfect opportunity for SNP members—but not Mr Neil himself, whom I recognise as a fair convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, although I thought that we heard a bit of a music hall turn from him today—to make every quango appointment a political interrogation. Tricia Marwick illustrated that this afternoon. Secondly, the parliamentary commissioner will appoint the independent assessors, thereby resolving the issue that has been raised in recent weeks. As for the Conservatives, their position is consistent with only two principles: political opportunism and, now, the increasing tendency of the Scottish Tories to be controlled by everything that Iain Duncan Smith says in London. David McLetchie illustrated that at its best during First Minister's question time. He criticised other parties in the same context. Just yesterday, however, we heard an utterly irresponsible and opportunistic line on the very important issue of the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine. The Tories should be ashamed of themselves. It was the Tories who took political appointments to a new height. Let us recall that, under the previous Tory Government, 30 per cent of the quango appointments were not just Tory MPs, but Tory MPs' wives. I ask you! The case that I always recall is that of Hamish Gray, who lost the Ross, Cromarty and Skye seat to Charles Kennedy in 1983. What did the Tories do the day after Hamish Gray lost that seat? They put him in the House of Lords, made him a minister of state in the Scottish Office and, not only that, gave him special responsibility for the Highlands and Islands, the very region that had kicked him out of the House of Commons. I will therefore take no lessons from the sanctimonious Tories on my far and extreme right. I am pleased that the Liberal Democrat and Labour parliamentary parties have brought pressure to bear on the Executive to improve its initial proposals, which are, indeed, significantly improved. I have set out what those improvements are, although the Tories will still oppose the proposals. I look forward to the election campaign  and to opposing the Tories on that process. I urge members to endorse the Executive's proposals as outlined by Mr Peacock, and to oppose Mr Neil's bill.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Do not be so sanctimonious.

Do not be so sanctimonious.

I am grateful for the opportunity to slow down Mr Neil in the middle of his peroration. Will he confirm that, as convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, he was asked to nominate the independent assessors that he has just mentioned? I hold in my hand a document that lists the independent assessor posts and the bodies that were invited to make nominations, among which Alex Neil's name is listed.

I welcome the minister's opening speech, particularly his careful and diplomatic remarks on the subject of the euro, which Alasdair Morgan raised with him. I  recognise a good European when I see one. I would say the same about many members on the SNP benches. I am not so sure about those on my extreme right here. The Conservatives always give themselves away by using phrases like "We must remember that we are net contributors to Europe" as David Davidson did. It is, of course, absolutely the case that we are net contributors to Europe. Those of us who believe in Europe and in its expansion and in so much more of what needs to happen to raise standards, as well as the aspirations and living standards of people who live throughout the European Union, will recognise that we are one of the richer nations in the EU. If we are to play a proper, constructive and meaningful role for the future, contributing to Europe is an essential part of that process. I have no difficulty with that. I welcome also the minister's announcement on LEADER +. An important aspect of the Parliament is that the European Committee—I greatly enjoyed my time on that committee—and the nature of the plenary sessions have given us the opportunity to discuss structural funds. Some of us who were previously in local government will remember not being able to get to the heart of how structural funds were distributed throughout Scotland and how the more shadowy mechanisms were used. That opportunity is now here with the Parliament, and members of all parties across the chamber can take that opportunity. I swiftly move to a couple of areas that I want to mention in terms of how funds should be applied, given that they are available. The transitional relief for the Highlands and Islands, which other members have mentioned, is of considerable importance to me as a constituency member for that area. Last week we debated in Parliament renewable energy and last night I and other members from the Highlands and Islands heard presentations from the Crown Estates Commission and Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd. It struck me that the issue of structural funds was a connecting theme throughout those events. If Government is serious about, for example, using renewables for a long-term energy policy, that can come about by the use of structural funds. For example, the interconnector that is being talked about for the western seaboard and the interconnector that could produce and take power from the northern isles down through Dounreay and the northern Highlands, through the main grid, could be usefully funded through structural funds. That is one of the hard infrastructure projects that bear attention, as Mr Peacock mentioned in his opening speech. Investment in airports is equally important in terms of infrastructure. A project that would pool soft and hard infrastructure investment would be to address the  digital divide—investment in the hard infrastructure of broadband and satellite telecommunications and in all the ways in which people can take advantage of the advances in telecommunications and digital technology, no matter whether they live in urban or rural Scotland. We must allow people to use the skills, which can be funded through other sources, to drive forward a knowledge economy. If a knowledge economy and Executive initiatives such as a smart, successful Scotland are to mean something, they should be funded in a supportive way.

The driving initiative that the Executive is taking through the pathfinder projects will create access. In the areas that are being considered in the first instance, the public sector is the driver. That will lead to the private sector picking up the kind of initiative that Mr Adam talks about. That is already happening in central Scotland. We must recognise the importance of the Executive's role in using the hundreds of millions of pounds that are available to Scotland. Tricia Marwick made the point that it is important that we do not think of it as the tap being turned off in 2006, but that we ensure that we take a position about Brussels—arguing through different agencies, the Government at Westminster, and using our MEPs as well—to allow us to take the best advantage of what happens thereafter. We should not necessarily conclude that the relationship will end at that point. We must make the case for continued investment in Scotland.

I accept what Tricia Marwick says about the pressure that new entrant countries in the east will place on structural funds. Presumably at that stage the SNP will not criticise whatever Administration is in power in 2006 for not obtaining exactly the same amount of money that Scotland is receiving at present.

Peter Peacock is describing the range of soft-infrastructure projects and hard-infrastructure projects. Does not that illustrate the difficulty that Government faces in delivering its priorities? The First Minister announced five priorities for Executive spending in the debate a couple of weeks ago. Mr Peacock is now outlining the balance between soft and hard infrastructure projects. How do we get that balance right?

I share the broad sentiments of Richard Lochhead's motion, which, I noticed, was well trailed in The Press and Journal , that very well-informed local newspaper in the north-east, last Saturday. I have it in front of me. It was a useful introduction to this evening's debate. I also agree with the point about "Offshore Europe". I have attended a number of those exhibitions. There is nothing better than a night out in Aberdeen with the Shetland contingent. One  would be advised not to go on a night out with the Shetland contingent after "Offshore Europe", but it is still an important lesson, not only in the night life of Aberdeen, but in matters to do with oil. I will sweep up Elaine Thomson's remarks about the good things that have happened of late. From my constituency point of view and from a general Scottish and UK point of view, the announcement of the development of the Clair field is one of the more important announcements in the past few months. I will pick up on one aspect of the motion—renewable energy—and follow on to some extent from Alasdair Morrison's debate last night, which considered renewable energy from his constituency point of view. I will raise a further matter of oil and gas development in the North sea—the medium-term and long-term decommissioning of oil rigs. There is a great deal of activity in the decommissioning industry, particularly in oil companies, engineering companies and marine operators. In my constituency, the Shetland Decommissioning Company Ltd is determined to get a hold of that work as it develops. I take some personal satisfaction from that, because from the time that I was the chairman of the Lerwick Harbour Trust, we have worked hard at home on reinvestment and reinvestment again in deepwater quays, heavy lift facilities and other necessary shore-side businesses to ensure that, when that development of policy arrives and the oil industry starts to take strategic steps on decommissioning, Shetland will be able to catch part of that work. Progress has been slow, but some projects are now beginning to move—as the cross-party group on oil and gas, which Elaine Thomson chairs, will know. The Phillips Petroleum Company UK Ltd's Maureen platform was recently refloated and towed to Norway for interim storage until disposal begins in the early part of next year. Aker Maritime, the main contractor on that job, provides not only expertise, but an opportunity for links with companies such as the Shetland Decommissioning Company, which can then build its experience in executing such works. Similarly, Kerr-McGee North Sea (UK) Ltd's Hutton tension-leg platform is due to be removed from site by 2003. The decommissioning of that platform is expected to be based around subsea structures, pipelines and tethers. The Shetland Decommissioning Company is also heavily involved in that work. That is an illustration, if Richard Lochhead's wider point is to be made, of the need for ministers in Scotland and in London to be well appraised of that work and for the ability of domestic and indigenous companies to seek to grab some of that work. Phillips's vast Ekofisk platforms are likely to be  removed using the new-generation heavy lift platform techniques. I understand that a feasibility study into that technology was commissioned. If the minister is up to speed on that point, I ask him to tell us how that is proceeding and to develop the argument in his closing speech. The other important offshore development concerns TotalFinaElf's Frigg field, which is now subject to public consultation. It is a vast development. Six platforms are being decommissioned, three of which are in the UK sector and three of which are in the Norwegian sector. Platform removal is expected to commence in 2006. That is some time away, but the point is that domestic Scottish companies, including the one that I mentioned in my constituency, need to be up to speed with contacts and ensure that they are aware of the opportunities so that they can build up that work. The dependence in my constituency, in Aberdeen and in the north-east generally on the oil and gas industry is heavy. I urge ministers to take full account of the decommissioning opportunities so that Scottish businesses can take advantage of the renewable options that Mr Lochhead mentions in his motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there will be any reform of the less favoured area support scheme for 2003 and whether any such reform will involve crofters, farmers and local authorities. (S1O-4451)

Does the minister share my frustration about the fact that the latest changes to the less favoured area support scheme do not take due account of the difficulties of agriculture in Shetland or of the fact that 60 per cent of the units in Shetland are losing out under the current arrangements? Will the minister assure me that, as it is altered during 2002, the scheme will take account of circumstances on islands—particularly those in my constituency—and that those changes will be made in time for the start of next year's scheme?

On this issue, I share common cause with my island colleague,  Alasdair Morrison, who has raised an important matter. Many islands have the ability to develop and produce renewable power in great quantities. As Sarah Boyack rightly said, if the Governments here and in London are serious about the use of renewable power, we must be ambitious not only about the projects that Alasdair Morrison described but about the targets that Sarah Boyack mentioned. I am sure that ministers will reflect on those thoughts. My constituency has built up wind power expertise through an initiative in areas such as Fair isle and through a commercial company—Shetland Aerogenerators Ltd—that has a Scottish renewables obligation contract and supplies power. There is huge potential in the northern isles—in Orkney and Shetland—for such power. Wave power is simply stored wind power. I am sure that Alasdair Morrison knows that, in his constituency, hardly a day goes past without the waves of the Atlantic pounding the western coastlines. I am pleased that a number of companies are looking at the potential of wave power in my constituency. One of them, Seapower Scotland, is looking at an SRO site. A series of enterprising local people are also looking at engineering prototypes for harnessing wave power. Tidal power has enormous potential in Shetland, too. Unlike wind power, it is continuous. I welcome Brian Wilson's announcement in the House of Commons last week that the Stingray project, the world's first tidal stream energy device, will be based in Yell sound this summer. I would also like to mention the ability to export, which Alasdair Morrison rightly said is the key to delivering on Government targets. I welcome the UK Government's interconnector feasibility study for the Western Isles, but the cable should be extended to other areas such as the northern isles. No area should be ruled out. We could then look to build enough capacity into the system to meet the targets that we aspire to and need to develop. I hope that the minister will respond to that positive suggestion in his winding-up speech. In a Westminster context, Alasdair Morrison mentioned the Crown Estate Commission. He is rightly leaving that issue to his colleague, Calum MacDonald. I, too, leave it to my Westminster colleague, Alistair Carmichael. No doubt if the minister wishes to take issue with the Crown Estate over what it will seek to charge in rental income for cables, he will do so more elegantly than me. I will be right behind him on that issue.

Well, we are all doomed, are we not? I am interested to see that Andrew Wilson got hold of our research paper but I note that he did not read out the section that says: "By making the economy dependent on the price of a barrel of oil, both the public and the private sector would find it impossible to plan investment decisions". I wanted to make a couple of observations on the economy. We had a great deal of doom and gloom from the SNP. I prefer Annabel Goldie's style because she ladles lovely rich metaphors over her speeches and leads Andrew Wilson on—it is clear that he is always up for being led on. Andrew Wilson did not put this debate on the economy in the context of world events, particularly what happened on 11 September, which, as the Fraser of Allander Institute's most recent quarterly summary states, has had a significant impact. The summary breaks down the effects on some of the sectors of our economy that Andrew Wilson was talking about. Only Andrew Wilson and his party would blame all the effects of the events of 11 September on the Government without some acceptance that there are wider factors.

I will pick out the parts out of that document that I want to. When I think about making a speech, I get my team to write such a paper but I do not necessarily agree with everything that is in it. The exchange rate is causing difficulties for businesses. Before Christmas, I visited a shellfish processing factory in my constituency and discovered that the issues that it is struggling with are freight and the exchange rate. The events of 11 September are extremely significant. World trade growth grew by 10 per cent last year. It is not expected to grow at all this year. That says something. The fact that world growth is expected to be stagnant is important in our context. Scottish economic growth appears to be triggered by strong retail growth to a large extent at the moment. The retail sector represents 29 per cent of Scottish GDP. That is a significant spur.  However, good labour market intelligence and the new Future Skills Scotland organisation are crucial in assessing how to create the conditions for sustained growth and competitiveness. To examine one sector, the turmoil in electronics, which Bristow Muldoon raised at First Minister's question time, raises two fundamental issues about the way in which we consider our competitiveness. The first is that we should not be dependent on companies that will ultimately take their decisions not in Livingston, but in air-conditioned offices in San Diego or Seoul. We should therefore invest in strategies to build domestic birth rate and in such measures as the £1 million that the minister announced before Christmas for the Alba Centre. That is much more the way forward. I welcome the point about the euro in the Executive amendment. According to the Scottish Council for Development and Industry's 2000 survey of Scottish export, 63 per cent of Scotland's manufactured goods go to the European Union. That export is valued at some £13.2 billion. We are and always have been a European trading nation, which makes the case for British membership of the euro even stronger. The politics of where Britain stands on the euro are utterly depressing, none more than the Prime Minister's recent speech, which indicated that Britain has always, over the past 50 years, prevaricated on the great issues of Europe. I urge all those who have influence—the minister certainly has influence—to move the argument forward. It is demonstrably in the interests of the Scottish economy. Those who were at the Scottish Retail Consortium's event last night heard, I am sure, from right across the sector a strong indication of business's views. The launch of the euro throughout 12 nations and affecting 300 million people has gone remarkably smoothly. That fact must be a real blow to the Eurosceptics. Our European Committee produced a report on the state of preparation for the euro in Scotland before Christmas. Its main recommendation was that the Executive endorse the pressing need for "sustained effort to ensure preparation throughout Scotland". The Parliament and the United Kingdom must ultimately answer one question: is Scotland a European country and a European trading country? The answer is yes. Scotland's trading pattern indicates that. The consequences of a clear and decisive route towards the euro are important. I urge the minister to make progress on that.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the likely economic impact on the fish catching and fish processing industries of the 2002 quotas for white fish and for pelagic fish landings and what action it plans to take to mitigate any detrimental effects. (S1O-4412)

I welcome the minister's answer and I welcome the additional quota allocations that have been secured for the Scottish fishing industry this year. However, does the minister accept that there are pressures on shore-based services in constituencies such as mine? Because of the welcome decommissioning programme, there are fewer boats to use engineering, electronics and other shore-based services. In that context, what assessment is being made of shore-based services? Does the minister have any proposals to tackle those problems?

I want to associate myself with remarks that were made by the minister and Annabel Goldie, and I am pleased to hear about the progress that the minister is making on the matter. How will the £6 million that she has announced for the West Lothian strategic action plan be spent? Furthermore, on her previous point about the commercialisation of research at universities throughout Scotland, is there any possibility of finding out how more of that work can be used to the advantage of small businesses generally?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

So do I.

The member should not be so sanctimonious.

I welcome Murray Tosh to his serene position in the chair. I begin by agreeing with Rhona Brankin. She made an important point about the unanimity of view that should exist in Scotland when a fisheries minister is going to Brussels. I do not apologise for repeating the point. The work of the cross-party group of Scottish MEPs on the European Parliament Fisheries Committee is extremely important. The work that all four main parties do is constructive. It plays a significant role in aiding the Scottish case. I wish that we could do more of that at such times. In the limited time that is available to me, I will raise three constituency points, following a series of meetings with the Shetland Fishermen's Association and fishermen in my constituency. The first relates to TACs and quotas. I share the concerns that Richard Lochhead raised about the monkfish quota. My concerns relate to the scientific advice. The SFF's analysis, which it was rightly asked to do by the Scottish Executive environment and rural affairs department, suggests that the levels are stable, certainly in the North sea. I believe that that should be reflected in the final TAC. I respect the fact that there may be differences of view with regard to the west coast, but I do not believe that the Commission's proposals for a 40 per cent quota cut are appropriate to the North sea. The minister should resist them firmly in the council next week. The other aspect to bear in mind on monkfish is that the figures from the International Council for the Exploration of the Seas, on which I believe the proposal was based, relate to scientific evidence from 2000. They could therefore fairly be said to be somewhat out of date. Monkfish is a high-value species. A 40 per cent cut in the quota would be utterly devastating for the Shetland industry. The suggestion that I think the Commission is making—although I do not believe that the Commission knows what its policy is on this—that we can simply solve the problem by mesh sizes is utterly inappropriate. Anyone who has seen a monkfish knows that, no matter whether the mesh size is 80mm, 90mm, 110mm or 120mm, a monkfish cannot swim through it. The logical extension of that position is a closed area for monkfish. All that that would achieve is a repeat of the difficulties that we had earlier this year, because closed areas just lead to displacement of effort and other stocks being hit all the harder. That series of options should be severely restricted—indeed opposed—by ministers. My second point is on the cod recovery plan, or—as it now appears to be called—the cod and hake recovery plan. I have two points that I ask  the minister to clarify in his closing speech. I am concerned that the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency is employing a very strict interpretation of 110mm and 120mm nets that are carried on board vessels. That appears to relate to the 2002 proposals and the 2003 proposals. My information is that what is effectively a one-net rule is not being interpreted as such in other member states. I hope that the environment and rural affairs department will be able to quickly clarify those rules to the industry. I also have a significant worry—which I have made clear in repeated letters to the Executive—about small, low-powered, inshore seine-net fishing vessels. When she was in her previous job, Rhona Brankin was probably fed up with me asking about the issue. However, it is an important issue for a small number of boats because of the effect that 110mm or 120mm meshes would have on them. Those small vessels, which are low-powered and carry fewer crew, catch arguably the best-quality fish, which are landed and go to market as quickly as possible. Those boats play an important role and the department should consider quickly how it can support that sector. The North Atlantic Fisheries College ran a trial with a Shetland boat, the MVF Harmony. The trial was funded by the £1 million package that was announced by the former fisheries minister earlier this year. The trial results make it clear that the adoption of either of the cod-end net designs that were tested would reduce discarding of undersize haddock or whiting, but would also have a substantial, short-term economic impact on single seine netters. I hope that the ministers will take that point on board. A third of Shetland's economic output depends on fishing, which illustrates its importance to my constituency. My survey of the crisis in the whitefish industry during the summer showed the knock-on effects for shore-side businesses. That is a significant point to note when considering the overall impact of decommissioning on fishing constituencies. I hope that the minister will have the support of the whole chamber when he argues Scotland's case at the fisheries council next Monday.

Does Mr Lochhead agree that there is a difference between the aspect of the Commission that has dealt with CFP reform and the aspect that he has just described? On the whole, Commission officials who have dealt with CFP reform, such as Christophe Nordmann, have been amenable to the Scottish case.

Does the minister welcome, as I do, the fact that the European Commission's green paper acknowledges that the CFP has failed? Does he concur with the Commission in acknowledging the need for the scientific basis of decision making to be much more allied to the experiences of fishermen? Does he share my disappointment at the way in which the Commission is handling the proposed total allowable catch—TAC—for prawns?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether socioeconomic factors are taken into account when considering the designation of an area of sea as a marine special area of conservation and, if so, what weight such factors are given when reaching a decision. (S1O-4303)

Does the minister accept that there is dismay at the decision to designate Sullom Voe in my constituency as a marine area of conservation, not least because of the fact that it is a working harbour and the largest oil terminal in the European Union? Will the minister undertake to meet me and Shetland Islands  Council to consider the matter further and to examine how to make a socioeconomic case of the issue? Furthermore, does he accept that it is a matter of local concern that the chairman of Scottish Natural Heritage has hitherto refused to meet local people to discuss the issue?

I join in welcoming Cathy Jamieson and Richard Simpson to their new positions. Donald Gorrie got it right when he said that Cathy brought personal conviction to her post, which must be a source of encouragement to all of us who care passionately  about Scotland's children and young people. The debate has highlighted our communities' concerns about youth crime. It has highlighted the Executive's determination to tackle youth crime and it has highlighted the active programme that ministers and the Executive are implementing to build—in Pauline McNeill's words—public confidence in the Executive's determination to address such matters. The figures are stark. The Audit Scotland report that was published in June shows that, of the young offenders who had a charge against them proved in court in 1999, 8 per cent had more than 10 previous convictions. I therefore share Brian Fitzpatrick's view about the need to tackle repeat offending—he got that absolutely right. I also agree with much of Kenny MacAskill's analysis of the way in which society and our communities have changed. He said that there is a duty to protect the young from a small majority of their peer group, which is an important factor to bear in mind in analysing the pressures on our young people from those with whom they play and live. Although some of Bill Aitken's comments might have been made in the wider context, I cannot accept his inference that, following the use of custodial sentences for all those who are aged over 18, the use of secure accommodation or institutions is the appropriate choice for more of our young people. I do not think that that is the right approach for Scotland on the whole. Many members rightly concentrated on the importance of early intervention strategies. Those approaches must begin in schools. It is arguable that getting children to school in the first place is one of the key tasks that must be addressed. I spent a useful night on Monday with the children's panel in Shetland, at which we discussed such issues. One of that panel's members has been undertaking pioneering work not only in my community, but in other communities throughout Scotland, and his expertise is being used elsewhere because he has found and developed strategies and practical ways of tackling the issues. It is important that we find such doers who can deal practically with the issues. Members have cited examples from their regions and constituencies of co-ordinated, concerted action that is being taken locally to tackle and overcome youth offending. The significance of the children's panel system has also been mentioned. I do not accept Bill Aitken's comment that the children's panel is a soft option. I believe that, as Pauline McNeill and Scott Barrie said, it is a humane way of dealing with children. I know from the many cases that have been brought to my attention as a constituency member that the children's panel system can be utterly daunting. However, as Scott Barrie also said, so much work  that goes on around the panel is important in terms of inter-agency working and deals with many problems before they reach the stage of formal referral. Those areas of work, although perhaps unnoticed, are nonetheless hugely important. The panel that I attended on Monday night raised issues relating to the Court of Session's judgment on the European convention on human rights and the cost implications for constituencies such as Shetland of the introduction of safeguarders and the way in which the legal representation argument will now come out. I hope that the ministers will be able to tackle those issues. I support the principle of early intervention for young offenders. I support the ministers' and the Executive's approach in encouraging community-based alternatives to incarceration and I regard the debate as a step forward in an area in which—as others have said—there must be common purpose to achievement of our aims.

At least one member applauded Alex Johnstone's speech. However, I do not blame Mr Sheridan for shouting at him, because he was not going to give way. That is as bad as it gets in the modern Conservative party. Like other colleagues, I welcome the principles of the bill, especially the fact that Scotland's water industry will remain a public asset—that is an important principle, which Liberal Democrat members support. I concur with the minister's opening remarks on the equalisation of charges, which have been reflected in the remarks of members who represent constituencies in the NOSWA area. We have received an unprecedented number of representations about the increases of the past few years and the minister's confirmation that charges would have risen by a further 34 per cent over the next three years had the new structure not been put in place is helpful. Nonetheless, I take the points that several members have made about people on low pay, who have difficulty in paying bills, including water bills. Those are important points, which I hope the Executive will address in the manner of a truly cross-cutting Government. I appreciated Nora Radcliffe's measured arguments on the issues concerning charitable organisations. I believe that the Executive, across ministries, has to consider ways in which those issues can be addressed. I hope that the minister will be able to tell us in his winding-up speech that discussions are continuing across departments to find ways in which those important issues can be progressed. I agree with Andrew Wilson on one point—and one point alone—which is that, over many years, there has been a significant lack of investment of major capital in the infrastructure of the water industry. That must be put right. We have no alternative. The bill presents the best route for meeting the objectives of providing the safest and healthiest water for domestic customers and businesses for a variety of uses. Without the merged authority, my constituents would face significant increases in costs over time. The bill must be supported by all parties. I am not a natural supporter of mergers. I do not agree with the suggestion that they always create efficiencies. Central organisations have many disadvantages as well as the advantages that can be gained through economies of scale. However, I recognise the advantage of having a centralised billing service. It does not matter whether someone lives in Shetland or Stranraer; the billing service must be efficient. I presume that such a service can be delivered.

I do not think that the Scottish Executive has the power to impose a water tax. However, I accept that we need to consider ways in which we can better target assistance to those who are low paid and living on benefits. I believe that that is the premise behind Mr Sheridan's question. On the engineering service, I make the obvious constituency point that there is no point in flying up teams of engineers from Edinburgh or Glasgow to Shetland at vast cost to the new water authority. I believe—and I shall pursue the issue at stage 2—that engineering functions should be devolved to local areas where there is local expertise. I am talking not just about the fix-it side of engineering, but about the strategic direction of those functions. I believe that an essential local service can be delivered efficiently for local areas. Finally, I hope that the ministerial team will be open to questions about the best balance of the customer panels in relation to the geographical areas that they cover. For example, NOSWA is as distant from Shetland as the new water authority will be. That problem can be overcome by having a local customer panel in the islands and Shetland, which could cover the issues and reflect the views of commercial and domestic customers on investment in and maintenance of the service. I believe that all members should support the principles of the bill.

Will the minister confirm that if the merger did not take place water charges for consumers in the North of Scotland Water Authority area would rise by something like 35 per cent over the next three years?

Today? A bill today?

I cannot agree with David Davidson's remarks. This debate is taking place for the reasons that Alex Neil and Des McNulty rightly raised. The suggestion that market forces deliver a solution palpably does not describe what happens. That is why this debate is taking place and is, rightly, being attended and spoken in by many members across the chamber. I share the concerns that have been expressed by Alex Neil and Des McNulty. I have received representations from individuals and from the AUT Scotland on this matter. Indeed, my knowledge has been greatly helped by the work that the  Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee has done on research funding and which we concluded not so many weeks ago. Des McNulty made a good point about the importance of the science strategy and how we can deliver that strategy using the best available people. Surely part of that is the essential focus that Alex Neil's debate brings to terms and conditions of employment.

No, I only have two or three minutes and David Davidson has had his turn. In a former life, I worked as a contract staff member for the then Scottish Development Agency. In my own position, the contract did not matter at all. However, I remember the concern of many members of the then SDA who did have a difficulty with being contract staff because they had worries about their future. Alex Neil's statistic about 40 per cent of research staff looking for a new position at any one time is a sobering statistic for public policy. As has been said, that statistic must be addressed. I am conscious that many colleagues wish to speak. I will just make two points. First, the AUT is to be commended for making a range of proposals. Government is often asked to fix something but those who are doing the asking never seem to suggest how it can be fixed. In fairness, the AUT has suggested a number of different models for addressing this difficult issue. I hope that the minister will consider those options when winding up and enlighten the chamber as to how the issue is being pursued. Secondly, I raise the issue of the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council. I acknowledge that the council has introduced the contract research staff initiative, which has considered the management and redundancy issues surrounding contract staff. However, on the basis of information that I have received, is that enough? Could more not be done in that area, given that there are 5,000 fixed-term contract staff? Again, I hope that the minister will update Parliament on what is happening through SHEFC and what progress is being made on the career progression survey that I believe is under way, or nearly concluded. Scottish universities are multi-million pound institutions. They receive many hundreds of millions of pounds from the public purse. I believe in the spirit of the remarks made by other members. We should value those essential members of academia in their building of a stronger and more economically viable Scotland.

To ask the acting First Minister what proposals the Scottish Executive has for the delivery of effective support to Scottish tourism. (S1F-1393)

Does the acting First Minister accept that a move away from geographical marketing by VisitScotland could squeeze out the island tourist boards, which would not be the right approach for the northern isles or the Western Isles? Is he aware that last week the Scotland stand at the world travel fair in London was augmented by representatives of Orkney Tourist Board, Shetland Islands Tourist Board and Western Isles Tourist Board—the only area tourist boards that were so represented? Does he accept that for many tourist businesses in peripheral areas such as the islands the key issue is not the structure of the industry, but the cost of getting to those places? Will he redouble the Executive's efforts to focus on transport costs?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it plans to take to ensure equitable financial treatment of students undertaking nursing diploma courses and those undertaking nursing degree courses. (S1O-4078)

I thank the minister for that reply, which deals with a substantial part of my supplementary. Does the minister share my concern about the unpaid hours that degree nurses have to undertake as part of clinical placements? Will the minister consider proposals to ease the additional financial pressure on nursing students, given that we want to improve recruitment to the nursing profession?

I associate myself with what Margaret Ewing said. She made a measured and important speech in which she detailed the arguments. I also agree with the similar comments that have been made by members of other parties. Margaret Ewing is to be particularly congratulated because at the start of the debate four Scottish Executive ministers were present, as was the convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee, the former chairman of Highland Council's transport committee. It would only be fair to point out that Mr Peacock is a former convener of Highland Council. That level of attendance shows the importance of the issue. The fact that four ministers found time in their diaries to attend Margaret Ewing's debate indicates the support that there is on this issue. I also associate myself with remarks made by colleagues who have pointed out the important improvement that Sarah Boyack has made in taking the PSO forward. The only point on which I disagree with Margaret Ewing is that, for me,  Dalcross signals a point on the way home rather than a point of getting home. I take Struan Stevenson's point—

I take Stewart Stevenson's legitimate point about providing services. The argument about services in the Highland and Islands—I think that, with respect, Mary Scanlon slightly missed it today—is about the cost of the service. Whether to a businessman or a family trying to get away, that issue is just as important as any other. Routes in the Highlands and Islands can grow and Inverness can be the hub that Maureen Macmillan quite rightly talked about, but that can happen only if there is an imaginative approach from the airlines, particularly British Airways. As members have highlighted, we have lacked such an approach in the past and at the moment I am worried that the issue will go backwards rather than forwards. The arguments for the Inverness to Gatwick PSO are extremely important, because I am concerned about British Airways' commitment to the Highlands and Islands. I am not persuaded by the argument that such routes cannot grow; they can, but it will take imaginative pricing policies. I find it a source of great regret that ever since I was elected to Shetland Islands Council in 1994 I have made exactly the same arguments to British Airways about cutting prices—providing family tickets and so on, which other colleagues have made in other places—and the company has never accepted the challenge. After 11 September, I can fly with my daughter to Prague for £65 but my ticket home to Sumburgh tomorrow will still cost £400. I do not expect Lewis Macdonald to respond this evening to the first of my two final points, but perhaps in the fullness of time he will tell me in writing whether he will consider PSOs for the northern isles and other areas. British Airways has the monopoly in those areas and I believe that PSOs should also apply there. I do not want to detract from the arguments that Fergus Ewing and other members have made for a PSO between Inverness and Gatwick. Although those arguments concern economic regeneration and growth, I am sure that members will not lose sight of the need for companies such as British Airways to examine the cost of flying, which is such an issue for us all.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to ensure that the change of shipping company providing the ferry services to Orkney and Shetland in October 2002 proceeds smoothly and without disruption to those lifeline services. (S1O-3968)

The minister will be aware that in order for the contract to start in October next year, the current contract must be extended from the end of this financial year. Will he ensure that those arrangements are finalised without undue delay? Will he also examine the issue of shore-based staff—including those in his own part of Scotland—whose uncertainty continues because no arrangements have yet been made on that matter?

I am substituting for Annabel Goldie. That is a source of relief to Annabel and some distress to me. As I am responding on behalf of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, I cannot become involved in some of the little political barbs that flew around this morning. That is another source of some regret. For example, it would be most unfortunate if I responded to Duncan Hamilton's unworthy attack on my colleague George Lyon. I, too, noticed George Lyon in the bar the other night. The point is that my esteemed colleague was in the bar, not at the bar. I observe that Alex Neil, the committee's able convener, lucidly described rampaging through the senate of the University of Strathclyde. I presume that he would now be accompanied by the committee's deputy convener wearing Finnish national dress and a Goldie bunnet. I will respond to the debate, which has been constructive and cross-party, and to the minister's response to the committee's report. Many members concentrated on the huge amounts of public money that are going into the sector. The figure is £750 million, taken in the round. In comparison, Scottish Enterprise will receive funding of £377 million this year. Given the concerns that Bill Butler and other members talked about, the committee was right to focus on the issue and initiate the inquiry that led to today's debate. As the committee concluded, the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council should start again on the funding of teaching. Bill Butler used the phrase  "the gravity of members' concerns". As he and David Mundell said, SHEFC underestimated the difficulty of developing an evidence base. Worse still, it failed to appreciate that any major change in funding allocation required an evidence base. Members concluded that SHEFC should have appreciated that such an evidence base in itself was an appropriate starting point. SHEFC commissioned research. Why that was abandoned was not clear to all members. Marilyn Livingstone was right to say that SHEFC initiated that work. We understand—as the minister and the committee's convener, Alex Neil, said—that some progress has been made in brokering a deal between the sector and SHEFC. However, as Ken Macintosh and Annabel Goldie said, questions remain about the transparency, independence and objectivity of the process. I am sure that the committee shares the minister's view about avoiding unmanageable disruption. We look forward to seeing how that process develops and to being involved in considering its effectiveness on behalf of the sector, which raised the initial concerns. Identifying a formula for allocations that is supported by a strong evidence base is the right approach. Many members throughout the chamber made that point. Politicians are too often criticised for decisions or policy approaches that bear no resemblance to the facts. Parliament is considering a budget of £440 million and a distribution formula that must stand up to public scrutiny. On behalf of the committee, I say that the minister's comments are welcome. The review of higher education is important and must cover the role of SHEFC. If I heard the minister correctly, she is making room not only for general submissions, but for submissions on SHEFC's role. I am sure that colleagues throughout the chamber will want to return to strategic direction issues, which will be picked up in the committee's work on lifelong learning. Colleagues also raised what might be best described as the curious treatment of the funding for the teaching of medicine. That funding saw an 8.3 per cent rise, whilst other areas saw a fall of 1 per cent. I understand that that point has been well taken by those who have reason to need to take it. Considerable comment was made by members, including Marilyn Livingstone and Duncan Hamilton, about the importance of the banding system and the reduction in bands from 22 to six, with which the committee agreed. In the absence of a robust methodology, however, the committee came to the view on that issue that it could not reach a considered decision. We look forward to hearing the final deliberations on the issue.  The review that has been advocated by the committee is important. It surely presents an opportunity to reassess the way in which public resources are used to finance higher education teaching and a competitive economy that competes globally in terms of training, skilling and retraining Scots of all ages. That will allow a stronger Scottish economy to be built. Ken Macintosh described the change from the historic allocation of funding money, which paid too much attention to what had gone before, to a funding strategy that dovetails the higher education approach and the ideas that surround it. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee will take that issue forward in its work. During the inquiry, Brian Fitzpatrick rightly highlighted the importance of the independence of those who might have been considered to have an institutional position that precluded a robust examination of the issues. I hope that that important point will be reflected in reviews that are to be undertaken. Colleagues referred to the lively debate that used to be called—indeed, it might still be called—the arts versus the sciences. The debate is not new, but it is represented in the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's work. I am sure that the committee will wish to return to that matter. For many members, research is the more exciting area of the committee's report. Last night, I reread the report. At the time that we took evidence, many committee members commented on the stark comparison between the funding formula for teaching and that for research. The funding formula for allocating teaching funds, by far the largest component of university funding, used a relatively simple formula that lacked robust evidence. Yet the allocation of funding research was subject to a process that includes peer review, using over 600 assessors spread over 65 individual assessment areas. The committee was clear that research funding is, as Annabel Goldie mentioned, much more than simply the distribution of SHEFC's main research grant. Only one third of the amount comes to universities through that route. The research assessment exercise provided, and can continue to provide, a sizeable proportion of the overall funds within a UK structure for the allocation of funds. However, as was mentioned by the minister, the transparency review and other considerations will provide the opportunity to examine the dovetail between the economic and social objectives. We need to see how that can be met in Scottish terms. Alex Neil mentioned the role of the private sector. Other members examined how additional  moneys could be introduced. A strong theme of the debate was the ability to grow the moneys that are available for university research funding. We all share that objective. It is incumbent on the committee to look at that issue when the RAE is concluded later in the year. I hope that that will happen and that the minister will have an opportunity to respond more fully to the committee on the detail of its report. Considerable comment was also made this morning about the new universities in the context of the level 3 funding mechanisms. Andrew Welsh highlighted the significant disadvantages for the new universities. Many colleagues mentioned the University of Abertay Dundee. Much work is to be done on the subject of the new universities. Kenny MacAskill pointed out the relevance of the work that is done in those universities and how important it is for some of them to progress from level 3 to level 4 or level 5 funding. As suggested this morning, seedcorn finance provides the opportunity for those research areas to be moved from level 3 through into level 4 and level 5. If I heard the minister correctly, she said that she wished to support the up-and-coming as well as the established. That provides a sizeable chunk of support to the general principle of the approach advocated by the committee. On the research and development strategy, the minister said in her speech that Scotland must derive the greatest possible economic, social and cultural benefits from Scotland's research base. The committee articulated that objective, which is entirely consistent with the research and development strategy that has been advocated in our report. We would all acknowledge that, since we took evidence, and with the launch of the science strategy, the debate has moved on. Just as important is the business transformation work that is going on in Scottish Enterprise. There are developments there, but the committee was strongly of the view that that area could be brought together and co-ordinated. I welcome the work that the minister will instigate in asking the science advisory committee to consider that recommendation. Considerable attention has been paid this morning to commercialisation and the importance of the ability of business people to access our universities to find the right connections to build mutually advantageous goals, ideas and projects, and to obtain and use the technology. A theme mentioned by many was the links and support between business and academia. Equally important is the work that needs to be done with small and medium-sized businesses, which are extremely important and were mentioned by many colleagues. In research spending, the developing policy  must balance the need to be globally competitive—for Scottish institutions to attract research stars—with cross-party agreement and the understandable and immediate desire for more spin-offs, commercialisation and work in that area. That can lead and charge the economic objectives that many of us share. Parliament needs to recognise the challenge that is emerging from work by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on what needs to happen in our primary and secondary schools to encourage more young people to do science and maths and then a degree in those subjects. As colleagues have mentioned, the committee believes that SHEFC mishandled the teaching review. The issues have moved on, and the committee has advocated change and made a series of recommendations. Changes have come to pass since—that is welcome. On behalf of the committee, I welcome the minister's response to our report. She has taken the report seriously and, if I followed her correctly, has endorsed many of its recommendations. I look forward to a detailed response in due course. The issues are too important to Scotland's future to get them wrong. It is the responsibility of the committee, working with the minister and SHEFC, to get them right.

I thank colleagues from across the Parliament for supporting the motion, following Tuesday's historic—I believe that that is the appropriate word—World Wide Fund for Nature oceans recovery summit, which was held here in Edinburgh. I also thank the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development for finding time in what is no doubt a very busy week to attend and speak at the summit. Indeed, she is quoted in the document that was produced following the summit. There is a rather fine series of contributions from distinguished individuals in what is an important document for our oceans and seas. I am pleased to have the brief opportunity to raise these matters in Parliament today. The future of Scotland depends to a large extent on the debate generating a determination to tackle the problems that the seas face. Scotland is an island nation and our coastal communities make a living from the sea: from fishing, tourism, offshore oil and gas and marine transport. Our future depends on the future of the sea. It follows that, if we let the sea suffer, those who depend on it will suffer. I contend that this is not a be-nice-to-the-environment, cuddly debate, but a hard debate about the future of all those who depend on the sea. For too long we have exploited the seas with too little thought for their future. We have ignored the warning signs that have been showing for some time now. The evidence of our mistreatment of the seas grows year by year, no more so than in the form of fishing stocks. A WWF report reveals exactly that. It says: "Between the mid-1960s and 1999, total UK landings by the UK fishing fleet declined by 55 per cent and the value of these catches was reduced by 77 per cent - a decline of £684 million."  That must be of extreme concern to anyone with an interest in such matters, particularly those of us who represent constituencies with strong fishing interests. For many years, fishing policy has continued to hammer white fish stocks, with more efficient nets and more powerful boats as well as the move into deep water and the targeting of new species, such as monkfish and the more exotic orange roughy. Because the need to regulate fisheries by international agreement has been acknowledged—fish do not recognise international boundaries—the politically expedient but crude tool of quotas has been adopted. Quotas work for single species and fisheries, such as herring and mackerel, but it is fair to say, and many accept, that there have been conservation disasters with those species in the mixed white fish fishery. The policy of quotas has led to the scandal of the wasteful discarding of marketable, over-quota fish, so I welcome the fact that the European Commission, in its green paper on the future of the common fisheries policy, accepts that the policy has failed and must change for the better. The result of the policy has been that our cod stocks are at an all-time low. Further scientific analysis of that has been published this week. Many of us worry that we are overfishing the deep-water species as well. For example, the annual catch of orange roughy has plunged from 3,500 tonnes to fewer than 500 tonnes in only 10 years. The result has been a crisis in our fishing ports, which must be addressed. The crisis has had one welcome result—if I can put it that way—in that it has built a partnership between fishermen and the environmentalists, who now recognise that they share many of the same aims. I cannot be the only member of a political party who has been pleased to share a platform at party conferences with the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and environmental organisations, led by WWF Scotland. I congratulate them on their joint work and I congratulate the Government on the way in which it has responded to that work. I hope that more can be done in that area. Productive steps have been taken. Technical conservation measures are being developed and introduced, which I welcome. The record funding that was announced earlier this year for decommissioning is also welcome. Of course, more needs to be done. The Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development will not be surprised that I say that, given my constituency. I do not just want fish stocks to be conserved; I want fishing communities to be conserved. I do not just want fish stocks to be viable; I want those who depend on them to be viable. There is a need to examine closely—particularly as I do not doubt that there will be more cod closure areas next  year—the need for compensation to help fishermen while stocks recover, so that we can have recovering stocks and viable fishing communities. Important aspects of the declaration deal with pollution of the seas. I will focus on the extremes of pollution. The seas around my constituency have been the cleanest in the UK, but they are not as clean as they should be. I and islanders round me remember well the terrible sight of the Braer spewing oil into the sea at Garths Ness in January 1993. That was an horrific warning of the dangers of oil pollution, but even though that oil was light crude, and sustained storms did much to disperse it, Shetland suffered severe environmental and economic damage. Cost cutting by shipping companies cost Shetland dear. I pay tribute to those such as Jonathan Wills who campaigned so hard to get to the bottom of those events. Their work is important. The experience of the Braer made me determined that action should be taken to tackle the pollution of the sea. Some steps have been taken. Due to forthright work by Shetland Islands Council, we now have a full-time salvage tug on station in the area. I acknowledge that commitment, but more action is needed. As a councillor in Shetland, I fully supported campaigns to ensure the highest environmental standards. We called for oil from fields to the west of Shetland to be piped ashore, so I am pleased by BP's decision this week that the oil from the Clair field will come ashore to Sullom Voe by pipeline. I will go from the specific to the general and conclude by offering my full support for the Edinburgh declaration on ocean recovery and its call for the forging of new partnerships and the development of new ways to manage our seas. In the past, the various stakeholders with an interest in the seas have tended to fight their own corners while ignoring their common interests, and the seas have suffered as a result. I draw the attention of the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development to the call in the declaration for an oceans act. Will she examine the wide range of regulations—some of which are devolved, but some of which, I accept, are reserved—that cover shipping, coastal protection, fishing and habitats? Does she agree that there is a need for a co-ordinated oceans act to replace those regulations or pull them together to achieve the joined-up government that we so often talk about? We should work with colleagues at Westminster to provide that joined-up regulation and protection for our seas. That is a challenge that we must face up to. It is a challenge that we cannot shirk. The time has come for change. The declaration that was made at this week's summit is a useful  start. There is much to be done. However, WWF's ocean recovery summit has provided politicians from all parties with an opportunity to progress these issues. I hope that the chamber will seize that chance today.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will make a decision on writing off the housing debt of Shetland Islands Council. (S1O-3879)

I thank the minister for finding time yesterday to meet a delegation from Shetland Islands Council. Does she accept that there is considerable uncertainty among tenants and that there is a clear need to sort out the housing debt details as quickly as possible? Bearing it in mind that the council will meet next on 24 October, will she ensure that those details will be sorted out as well as can be managed by that time?

Does the minister accept that, when considering a long-term strategy, many organisations and farming and croft businesses have made repeated points about the pressures that businesses are currently under? In that context, does the minister recognise that the less favoured areas scheme needs drastic change if it is to give businesses longer-term opportunities that will allow them to take advantage of the strategy? Will the minister look again at the ideas that have come out of Shetland agriculture, which include adding an island element to a revised LFA scheme?

What I said about the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 was said in the context of the paper from the Scottish Parliament information centre. I quote:  "the first major reform of Scottish child care law since 1968, the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 preserved the Children's Hearings System largely unchanged, although some procedural alterations were made by the Act." That was my point.

I share Mike Russell's sentiments, particularly those of his latter comments. I am pleased to follow his contribution—and that of the distinguished former member of the First Minister's policy unit. I do not believe for a moment that "the Children's Hearings system as at present constituted is manifestly failing", to use the words of the Conservative motion. I think it curious that the Conservatives' approach today consists, as others have pointed out, of illustrating the fact that the problems of society have got immeasurably worse since 1995. That was, of course, when Lord James Douglas-Hamilton piloted the Children (Scotland) Bill through Westminster. The resulting act made, as I understand it, no great changes to, and in fact endorsed the Kilbrandon report's principles as far as the children's panel system was concerned—it made only a number of procedural changes. The Conservatives' approach today is at best curious—as Mike Russell said, it simply serves to point out that they were in power for 21 of the past 30 years—yet all has supposedly gone so wrong since 1995. That is typical of Conservative thinking. The Conservatives' motion is superficial, and tries to appear tough on crime, as they often seek to appear in the chamber. There were nods on the Conservative benches adjacent to me when the idea of "locking 'em all up" was raised. It is deeply dispiriting to juvenile justice and to the related issues affecting our society that that is the approach emanating from a so-called serious party in the modern political world. That policy and emotion come through blue-tinted glasses, and that is inherently unsuitable for the Scotland that I believe in and that I want to develop. There are one or two points on which I agree with Bill Aitken. He said that the panel system was "progressive and effective", if I have quoted him correctly, and that the basic principle is that the child's interests are paramount. With the Conservatives, however, that would obviously not  include the area of physical chastisement. The panel system has not been set in stone, as the Conservatives have tried to suggest. To suggest that the system and panel members have remained stagnant, and that only the children have changed, is a bizarre argument. Irene McGugan and Cathy Jamieson were right to raise the issues of the education of parents and of society as a whole. We need to take those issues seriously and develop them—instead of the superficial nonsense that I heard to my very far right. I was interested in what the Lord Advocate said in response to questions on the children's panel system at yesterday's joint meeting of the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee, under Pauline McNeill's convenership. He clarified the point that the general policy is that children should be kept out of court as far as possible, and that only in exceptional circumstances should a child be prosecuted. That was what the Lord Advocate said. If I remember rightly, Bill Aitken and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton were last week defending in a spirited manner the Lord Advocate's independence from the legislature and the executive. They might recognise the importance of being consistent about their arguments. I wish to make three brief points about the panel system itself. I share the views of the Deputy Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs and of others regarding the importance of the work that volunteers do, particularly on staffing panels, as well the importance of the on-going national recruitment. However, will the minister comment on a point made to me by the children's panel in my constituency, concerning the difficulty of recruiting men in the 30 to 50 age group? Such men are invariably in work and, given the time commitment that the panel requires of them, may find it difficult to serve. A number of people who are involved with the children's panel in Shetland and to whom I spoke yesterday on the telephone said that that is a crucial issue. Another point relates to the ECHR. I am sure that the minister will want to make clear exactly when guidance will be sent to panels, as such clarification is needed. My final point is arguably the most important and was made to me yesterday by the chairman of the children's panel advisory committee in Shetland. It concerns the importance of early intervention—about which Irene McGugan spoke. We need to pool the resources available for early intervention measures. I hope that in his response to the debate the minister will clarify some of the issues that I have raised.

Why were such suggestions not taken up when the Children  (Scotland) Act 1995 was introduced at Westminster by Bill Aitken's colleague, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the Crown Estate and what matters were discussed. (S1O-3748)

I am pleased about that. Is the minister aware that the Crown Estate removes £1 million per annum from salmon farms in Shetland and many millions of pounds per annum from salmon farms throughout Scotland? On the grounds of rural development, will she consider the proposals that the Shetland Salmon Farmers Association put to her department and the Crown Estate for a reinvestment of those  moneys in, for example, environmental impact assessments, hydrographic surveys and sea bed monitoring? Does she accept that such reinvestment is badly needed and would be a positive contribution to businesses that pay corporation tax and so certainly should not pay any other tax at the same time?

Will the minister give an undertaking that the remit of the proposed advisory body that he announced today will include an examination of higher still? Many of the representations that I received from teachers in my constituency related to the ability of higher still to deliver. Will he also undertake to examine any outstanding cases in which individuals are still seeking resolution from the SQA for last year's results?

I support the bill. I, too, thank the convener and members of the Justice 2 Committee, who, with the help of consultees and witnesses, conducted detailed investigations into the bill. The bill is an important step forward in the international role of Scotland and of the United Kingdom. I believe that Scotland has played an important part by speedily ratifying the Rome statute—an international agreement to establish an international criminal court. I can do no better than quote Kofi Annan, who, after saying that the UN would do its part in realising the vision of an international criminal court, continued: "We ask you ... to do yours in our struggle to ensure that no ruler, no State, no junta and no army anywhere can abuse human rights with impunity. Only then will the innocents of distant wars and conflicts know that they, too, may sleep under the cover of justice; that they, too, have rights and that those who violate those rights will be punished." Those words stand to this day and hold for the process that all Parliaments in the world will, I hope, go through to ratify and implement the ICC. The creation of the ICC is backed by the international community. It is a just means to an end, an end that the Parliament should be pleased to play a role in achieving. The Liberal Democrats firmly support the International Criminal Court (Scotland) Bill.

That was stirring stuff. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton rightly said that the Lord Advocate is independent of other persons. The Scotland Act 1998 provides statutory functions that apply to the Lord Advocate, which are legally enforceable by him. From my understanding of the amendments it strikes me that, as the Deputy Minister for Justice said when the issue was considered at stage 2: "it would be appropriate to confer new statutory functions on the Lord Advocate only where they relate to his position as head of the systems of criminal prosecution and investigation of deaths in Scotland."—[ Official Report , Justice 2 Committee , 26 June 2001; c 305.] There is a need for political impartiality in domestic cases because otherwise the process could be subject to interference. If the amendments were agreed to, the functions that the bill would confer on the Lord Advocate could conflict with his existing role as head of prosecutions and investigator of deaths. Part 2 of the bill handles civil proceedings, which are outwith the usual responsibility of the Lord Advocate, who handles criminal proceedings. Therefore, there is a solid argument in favour of rejecting the amendments.

I too encourage my colleagues to oppose amendment 40. I appreciate Christine Grahame's point and she has  been consistent in her advocacy of it at all stages of the bill. However, Pauline McNeill has also made a number of important points. Christine Grahame intervened to give an example of problems with residence. It is my understanding that, if the co-accused was not resident in Scotland, that is exactly the sort of circumstance in which the international criminal court would take action. That would be dealt with by the proceedings of the court. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton listed three reasons that were given by the minister at stages 1 and 2 as to why universal jurisdiction is not appropriate for Scotland, the principal one being that the main principle of Scots law is based on territoriality. Paragraph 25 of the Justice 2 Committee's stage 1 report on the bill stressed the importance of maintaining "internal consistency within domestic law, rather than trying to harmonise with the International Criminal Court in circumstances where that is not required."

I find it interesting that Christine Grahame raises what is going on at Westminster and what is said in another place, in another context, about a different form of law, where different principles apply. Perhaps she will want to reflect on that. The second argument that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned against adopting the principle was that universal jurisdiction has hitherto been enshrined in Scots law only when that has been required by international treaty. Pauline McNeill made the same point. Universal jurisdiction was not part of the Rome statute. Indeed, the treaty has been built by way of international consensus. If one looks at the wider picture, especially in the light of recent events, that is an important measure that the international community can use to make progress. It will help to ensure that, in addition to the countries that have already signed up to or are about to ratify the treaty, many other countries will become involved. That is an aspiration that I hope all members share. Thirdly, as Lord James said, it has been argued that Scotland would not want universal jurisdiction in this case, because it demands that our legal system assume the responsibility of global prosecutor. That is a worthy consideration, which should be taken into account. For those reasons, I oppose amendment 40.

I begin by pointing out to David Mundell that Nicol Stephen is here in his present capacity. David Mundell said that Wendy Alexander was the siren voice in the wilderness. I am sure that we are about to hear the siren voice in the heart of a Government that is acting on these issues. My only other comment on David Mundell's speech is that I am sure that we could hear Kenny MacAskill from the Grand-Place without the need for additional technology. However, that is an unfair comment, as Kenny MacAskill is not here. I agree with the point that was made by Duncan  Hamilton and Alex Neil in their introductory comments: the committee's report was timely two months ago. They were both right to say that issues in the sector move forward at such a pace that it is hardly surprising that much has changed in the 28-day e-years to which David Mundell alluded at the end of his speech and which we were told about at the seminar on Tuesday. The rate of change is swift. As John Ward, the chairman of Consignia, said at our seminar, e-commerce in the world doubles every 100 days. That puts matters into context. Given that scale of change, if Scotland is to be part of the process it must be able to compete by having the infrastructure in place. Alex Neil was right to say in conclusion that our main finding—both in our report and from what we heard from business earlier this week—was that we need that investment in infrastructure as quickly as possible. Connectivity—a ghastly word for the English language—was the key issue for the committee and I believe that the committee addressed it, albeit that matters have moved on. Scotland does not have comparable connectivity to that of our competitor nations. Someone said at the seminar on Tuesday that our competition is not with the USA and that we do not want to be as good as the USA—we want to be as good as some of the Scandinavian countries. That illustrates how much we have to do and how much we look to the Executive to drive forward the agenda. The committee made an important finding, in the sphere of entrepreneurship and education, about the importance of primary and secondary school education and of further and higher education. I recall the ScotlandIS seminar that took place before the summer recess, at which the number of science and technology graduates that Scotland is short of was demonstrated to us—we need those graduates to fulfil the requirements of the companies that operate in this area. That is an important point for the wider education sector to develop. Another striking concept that was explained to the committee earlier this week was that of the virtual office, involving a one-stop service provider, not only for all the services that come through a personal computer but for multimedia, voice recognition and a range of other services. Those services would all come from a single provider rather than from a range of providers. If I recall correctly, the view of Tim Summers of Motorola was that such provision would be a huge step forward for the concept of the virtual office. It would be available throughout Scotland—not just in Edinburgh but in the Highlands and Islands or in the Borders, as Duncan Hamilton suggested. We should pay attention to that vision. David Mundell mentioned e-government. The e- enabling drive is advanced in the Scottish Executive paper, "Connecting Scotland: our broadband future", which Wendy Alexander released earlier this week. The principle of the pathfinder approach must be right for the Highlands and Islands and for the Borders and the south of Scotland, simply because those areas are unlikely to see the level of private sector investment that is required. I am pleased that the minister has responded to initiatives in the northern isles, where the public sector and others are considering the possibilities of a fibre optic link between Scotland and the northern isles. That would give businesses in my constituency a huge advantage. For example, a television documentary producer, Ted Harrison, now runs an animation business in Unst, in the very north of Shetland. His business would take a huge step forward if it could access that technology. That example serves as an illustration that taking that step—that big jump—forward will make a huge difference, no matter where one is in Scotland. I welcome the report in this morning's business a.m. , about which I am sure the minister will say more, that she has appointed a broadband tsar who will develop this area further. Alex Neil said that we have five e-envoys, but if we were to have five tsars, I presume that the leading tsar could not be called the A-tsar but would be called the Caesar. Sorry—I could not resist that. Another point that was raised at our seminar on Tuesday was that we must have a debate on how to develop the broadband strategy. I guess that it is part of Opposition politics for David Mundell and others to have a crack at the minister about that. However, I also noticed in this morning's business a.m. that Bill Allan, to whom the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee referred, said: "Having talked to the minister, we share common ground in the core of the strategy. We wish to work with the executive to make broadband provision a commercially viable proposition." Allied to that and to the initiatives that the Executive is developing on the pathfinder areas in the Highlands and Islands and in the Borders, which are important steps forward, the committee is to be congratulated on making progress in this area.

Will the member give way?

I begin by welcoming Murdo Fraser to the chamber. I thought that Mr McLetchie's welcome was slightly grudging. I would have thought that he would have appreciated another good solid right-winger on the right of his team, but his welcome struck me as that of a man looking over his shoulder and worrying about what was behind him. That says more about what is going on in the Conservative party than is imaginable from reading the press day in, day out. John Swinney seemed to get excited about where the Liberal Democrats sit in the chamber. The only observation that I would make is that, from my perspective, it is good to be able to see where the SNP sit—to the left, the right and the centre of every policy area. I welcome the First Minister's statement. It expresses the commitment of Liberal Democrat and Labour colleagues to work in partnership in the Parliament to make a difference to people's lives in Scotland. As others will no doubt do later on, David McLetchie roundly condemned the coalition Government. Indeed, the level of vitriol poured on my colleagues—particularly Liberal Democrat ministers—by Tory and SNP members illustrates, on one hand, that the Tories are, at best, agnostic about devolution and will no doubt oppose devolution if Mr Duncan Smith wins the leadership election and, on the other hand, that the SNP wanted this Parliament but does not know what it wants to do in the Parliament. The SNP appears to be becalmed in the idle backwaters of Scottish politics. The Liberal Democrats and Labour, working together, are making positive differences and real changes for the people of Scotland. The legislative programme that was announced today outlines no fewer than 18 bills that ministers will put before Parliament for its active  consideration and scrutiny. The Scottish Parliament has already passed 20 acts initiated both by the Executive and by members, and I hope that it will soon pass acts initiated by committees. I find it extraordinary that some people—including David McLetchie, who let the cat out of the bag today—would have us return to a situation in which one miscellaneous provisions (Scotland) bill fought for time in Westminster every year.

I heard clearly what the First Minister said in response to Iain Smith's question. I will quote his words, in case no one was listening. "The Kerley principles will be at the heart of"— the Executive's agenda for— "the modernisation of local government". I accord with that view and I believe that it is important that that happens. Perhaps the SNP members should go away and read the Kerley recommendations again as they have clearly forgotten them. The legislative programme that was outlined today contains measures in the two key areas of public service: health and education. However, I also welcome the freedom of information (Scotland) bill, which the Conservatives are clearly going to oppose. Many parliamentarians, organisations and people in Scotland have fought for the opening-up of government at all levels. It has always been a source of amazement to me that it was possible to get more information about the British nuclear industry from Washington than from London. The Conservatives appear to oppose that opening-up of government.

As Mr McLetchie knows, the advice given to ministers by civil servants will not be included in the freedom of information regime—

Mr McLetchie will have to wait until the bill is introduced. The Conservatives may have already decided to oppose the bill but I am comfortable with the principles of the bill and support it. I am not persuaded that other levels of government or agencies should be exempt from  the bill. In that regard, I welcome the point that the minister made earlier about local government. I also welcome the water industry bill. I believe that, as Andy Kerr said earlier, it is an important measure. Indeed, it follows the Transport and the Environment Committee's important work on and substantial inquiry into the industry. To retain the water service in public control is, as Andy Kerr said, an important measure. I was never persuaded by Michael Forsyth's Tories that they should take water out of the control of local government. Particularly in an island context, it made no sense whatsoever.

I will in just a minute. However, the scale of investment that is needed, the rigours of the Competition Act 1998 and the need to minimise price rises—particularly for the domestic consumer—mean that the bill is inevitable and necessary. On the water environment and water services bill, the important point is the updating of the framework of regulation. I would appreciate ministers examining closely the power and the point of the water commissioner. I am less than convinced that the postholder has been a consumers' champion and has stood up for the individual customers and businesses. The water commissioner has an annual cost of £1 million. The consideration of the framework of regulation is welcome. When I think of the land reform bill, I start to think of Gladstone. It contains measures, particularly on crofting reform, that many of us have fought for for many years—right back through the ages in my party. It is a source of pleasure that those measures will be introduced under the Executive and through the proposals that will be announced in due course. Consultation on the land reform bill has created the widest range and biggest number of responses from the public and organisations throughout Scotland. That is hardly surprising, given the nature of the bill. MSPs have been bombarded. I cannot be the only constituency member who has met people on both sides of the debate in the recess and heard the arguments put with considerable passion and conviction. I suggest that, in the light of the 3,000 plus responses, ministers have to make changes to the draft bill and I welcome the First Minister's clarification of that earlier on. The principle is clear: there should be increased access. That principle is opposed by the Tories. Access should be increased responsibly. It is also vital that we have a joined-up government  approach to that for the vast majority of Scots who want to be able to stroll and enjoy countryside close to home. Investment in footpaths, working with local authorities and other agencies, in and around Scotland's main conurbations must be part of the overall Government approach. I will make points relating to representations that I have had on the land reform bill. They are about the legal liability and the criminality elements that were in the draft bill. I do not agree that land managers should be exposed to increased legal liability that would allow people who climb over a fence and injure themselves to take legal action against the land manager. I hope that the bill will reflect land managers' concerns on that point. I also have concerns, which Dennis Canavan expressed, about introducing a criminal offence that excludes people from the countryside. I hope that that will be examined before the bill is introduced to the Parliament. I also welcome the community care and health bill. It must be considered a considerable achievement of the Parliament and the Executive. Many argued that it could not be done or that it should not be done. I welcome the commitment that the Executive gave, which sets a standard of dignity for those who have paid taxes all their days, who have worked for their fellow man and woman and who have served and given for their country. A caring, compassionate Scotland is one that looks after its elderly. The community care and health bill must do that. As it will, it should be welcomed. The bill, which is at the heart of the Government's legislative programme, illustrates the focus on addressing the public service needs of Scotland. That programme is brought to Parliament by Liberal Democrats and Labour colleagues working together. I support the legislative programme that the First Minister outlined today.

Will the minister undertake to examine urgently opening up existing livestock auction marts, specifically in the provisionally free area, given that sales are but a matter of weeks away? Will she also consider allowing slaughtered animals to leave the islands—Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles in particular—because, as no animals will be coming into the islands, there will be no disease issues?

Like Kenny Gibson, I welcome the process in which we are engaged. It must represent an improvement in the way in which we scrutinise these very large sums of public money. Mike Watson also said that the Finance Committee and the Parliament plan to achieve transparency. That is an appropriate way of describing this process and what needs to be done. I note from the Finance Committee's report that no committee is recommending a change in spend in its area. That has to do with the support that is available to committees. A considerable amount of work at a detailed level of expenditure would be required for such changes to be meaningful.

That is the point that I am trying to make. Detailed figures need to be available if such scrutiny is to take place, and they should be provided.  This morning I will highlight two aspects of the Finance Committee's report that interested me—although I did not read it at the press dinner last night, as Alasdair Morgan did. My first point relates to the joint report of the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee, of which Mr Morgan will have an intimate knowledge, and to those committees' comments on the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. The committees' consideration of that issue is an important example of how the Executive, ministers and the system should be held to account—not only in budgetary terms, but more generally. In their report, the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee express several important concerns about the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. In paragraph 39 they say: "We put these concerns to the Solicitor General. We were very disappointed in his responses which we often found dismissive and complacent. In the face of significant concerns about the procurator fiscal service, it is not sufficient to say that 'the notion that the system is cracking up has been advanced as an argument for the past 10 years at least'". There is considerable merit in having detailed consideration of certain areas, which was undertaken in this case by the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee. They have raised important issues that I am sure the Justice 2 Committee will follow through in its inquiry into the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. The report of the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee also illustrates the concerns that exist about consultation and how the budget process is undertaken. In paragraph 40 of their report, the committees note that "The Solicitor General's dismissal of the evidence given by the Procurator Fiscals Society was particularly patronising." That is strong language about a Government minister, in anyone's terms. It is extremely important that the process in which the Finance Committee has been engaged since the Parliament came into being is noticed by the outside world, because it gives organisations that want to lobby Parliament the opportunity to have their points of view taken on board. Secondly, I refer members to the report of the Transport and the Environment Committee. As part of its consideration of the budget, that committee focused on Highlands and Islands Airports Limited. That is an issue of some concern and interest to me. When members' allowances—which we approved last week—were made public earlier this year, I noticed that I was top of the list for transport expenses. That is not surprising, given the constituency that I represent. The Transport and the Environment Committee made a suggestion that could help in that regard. It  provided the Finance Committee with evidence of ways in which we could reduce the cost of flying in Scotland, particularly in the Highlands and Islands. Among the issues that were considered was that of slots for flights between Gatwick and Inverness. I have always taken the view that such slots should be at Heathrow rather than Gatwick, but that is a different issue. The committee also recommended that the Executive consider franchising air services. Those are important points that illustrate the benefits of the budget process to services in Scotland and how the process is able to ensure that the Executive is subject to the necessary scrutiny.

I take your point, Sir David. I share the unequivocal welcome that the bill has received this morning. Like many colleagues across the chamber, I deal with issues of domestic violence in my constituency, and our constituency casework reflects the fact that the issue is one that worries Scotland today. The Scottish Parliament can, quite properly, act to deal with the issue, which is difficult and precise. I suspect that I am not alone in having received representations from advocacy groups that campaign on behalf of women and deal with violence and domestic abuse. There are two main points to today's debate—first, the parliamentary process and how it is followed and secondly, the very real nature of the subject. Alasdair Morgan rightly pointed out the importance of the Parliament's ability, through its committee structure, to initiate a bill. Today is of considerable importance in that respect. Currently, the Procedures Committee is asking members to consider the principles of the consultative steering group. We are being asked to consider power sharing between the Executive, the Parliament and the people who live in our communities. The Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill is an example of power sharing at work. Alasdair Morgan mentioned his experience of Westminster and how power sharing is a refreshing change to the processes that go on in that place. In that respect, I return to a point that was made by Phil Gallie about the need for a miscellaneous provisions (Scotland) bill to tidy up a plethora of smaller measures. Mr Morgan has direct experience of such bills, whereas I remember working behind the scenes on the plethora of measures that such bills can encapsulate. My concern about the miscellaneous-provisions approach to lawmaking is that the level of scrutiny is perhaps not all that it might be, because of the breadth of legislation under consideration. The Parliament and the  Executive will want to reflect on that. I congratulate Maureen Macmillan on her considered work on the bill. I also congratulate her colleagues on the Justice 1 Committee. The issue is important, and the law as it is currently constituted does not provide equal, and therefore fair, treatment to the people who are affected. As the minister said, we need to provide as much protection under the law as is possible. Given the unimaginable horror of events that can affect women, providing that protection is extremely important. My colleague Nora Radcliffe set out the Scottish domestic violence statistics, which are awful and serve to illustrate why it is important that the measure is being debated today and why the bill must be progressed with as much speed as is consistent with good lawmaking. As other members have said, the strength of consultation and the number of bodies that have given clear support and guidance are to be valued. On that basis, the Liberal Democrats support the bill.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister comment on the exclusive story that appeared yesterday in the Daily Record, which alleged that £25 million will be taken out of schools to be spent on Holyrood? Will he confirm categorically that that is not the case?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to encourage the development of improved telecommunications infrastructure in the Highlands and Islands area. (S1O-3591)

If you will allow me, Sir David, I wish first to welcome the students from Zlín, in the Czech Republic, who are in the public gallery, and who will be visiting Shetland tomorrow as part of an educational exchange with Anderson High School in Lerwick. Is the minister aware that a public-private partnership is being considered for connecting Orkney, Shetland and the Scottish mainland with a fibre optic cable? Is he aware that one of the impediments to the success of that project is the potential £64,000-a-year tax that may be charged by the Crown Estate for the use of the sea bed? Will he undertake to make representations to Her Majesty's Government and directly to the Crown Estate about that project, which could provide great advantages to businesses and individuals in the northern isles?

At the beginning of the debate, John Swinney mentioned that there were four Liberal Democrats in the chamber. The word "fourth" has a certain ring to it at the moment, as that is where the SNP came in Argyll and Bute. Later in my speech, I will reflect a little on the events of 7 June. As a Liberal Democrat, I endorse the principles that were signed up to on 28 May. Indeed, the agreement that the First Minister signed in Flanders—a statement by a number of well-established and developing devolved Governments—is intended to strengthen the role of the regions in the European Union. When the minister spoke about the declaration earlier, he pointed out that it endorses devolved government within strong member states as part of the European Union and that it is not a charter for independence. As a Liberal Democrat, I support proposals that  move us closer to the decentralisation of power in the European Union. That is why the Scottish Parliament is not a final solution, but part of the process that will see decisions being taken at the most applicable level that is consistent with their efficiency and with the delivery of good local services. Strengthening the regions of Europe is consistent with the European principle of subsidiarity. None of the European regions that signed the treaty, with the possible exception of Catalonia, seeks SNP-style independence. That said, Mr Pujol's party in Catalonia is agnostic on the principle of outright independence. Such a course of action is not a matter for the Scottish Parliament, but one that all the nations of Europe will have to resolve through an amendment to the Treaty of Rome. Those of us who have been through the fishing debates that took place around 7 May and who have sat through Eurosceptic meetings on that subject do not underestimate the difficulties involved in that process.

The minister can take care of that question when he winds up. I want to deal with subsidiarity and the devolution of power. Independence is not the subject for debate in the chamber today. If it were on the agenda, it would be taken care of at Westminster. Where are the famous five? Have they been standing up for Scotland on this issue? It would seem not, as in the past couple of weeks the famous five have been substituted and Captain Salmond is back in the dressing room after only two weeks on the pitch. Even by SNP standards of failure, that is quite a record. Before 7 May, we had it rammed down our throats how well the SNP was going to do in the election. It is only fair that the chamber reflects now on how badly the SNP did on 7 May. [MEMBERS: "June."] I thank members; it was 7 June. Although, what does it matter if it is June or May? The SNP is a failure every month. I understand that, on 8 June at the SNP's celebratory press conference, champagne was served to the press. That is a significant development, even for that party. Having lost a seat, lost votes, scraped in as the third party in terms of the number of MPs, the SNP served champagne to the press. There we have it. At least the SNP gained one thing: a second leader. The SNP has a leader at Westminster and a  leader in Scotland. Mr Salmond, having suggested that Westminster was an irrelevance, is now happy to prop up the green benches down by the Thames. I always suspected that there was more to Mr Salmond's resignation than 10 years in the job. We have now seen that Mr Salmond resigned because he knew that his party had already failed.

Indeed, Sir David, I am addressing the motion, as the debate that the SNP wanted was about independence.

I take the direction that Sir David is giving. However, as it was the SNP that called the debate, it is meant to be about independence. The SNP's flagship policy was rejected, as Mr McConnell precisely described, by 71 of the country's 72 constituencies. I was told time and again that the independence movement would flower in Argyll and Bute and in Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross. The SNP came fourth in Argyll and Bute and a dismal third in the far north. I leave the SNP to its own devices on those matters. As a Liberal Democrat, I especially welcome the political, economic and social development of the European Union. With its Parliament, Scotland plays a stronger role at the forefront of European thinking. As Mr Swinney, Mr McConnell and others have mentioned, we have had visits in the past couple of weeks from the President of South Africa and the Taoiseach. Mr Henry's European Committee regularly engages with its European counterparts. Members make representations to and work with Scottish MPs on a wide variety of issues. Such developments are not enough for the nationalists. I respect their view, but it is not the majority view in the chamber or in Scotland as a whole. In the aftermath of Gothenburg and the Irish vote on the Nice treaty, surely it would be right to  reflect on the peoples of Europe and how they react to Europe. Following last year's anniversary, as we enter the EU's next 50 years, the deepening and enlargement of the European Union is a prize to which committed Europeans should aspire. Liberal Democrats strive to build a more peaceful and prosperous union, which serves and is committed to its people. My party wants the principles of subsidiarity and devolved decision making to be enshrined in a constitution for Europe. That constitution would be a guarantee of citizens' and states' rights, not a blueprint for centralisation. It would clarify and define the relationship between the regions, member states and the European Union, simplify European law, enhance transparency and guard against the unnecessary accumulation of powers by the centre. The political declaration that was signed by the First Minister on 28 May is consistent with that approach and a step along the road to the kind of Europe that I envisage.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I associate myself with Hugh Henry's remarks, in what I thought was an important piece of analysis. I also associate myself with what Richard Lochhead said about the European Committee's report overall. It is an important and a good report, and it does the committee structure of the Parliament proud to have delivered such a serious analysis of a complex area that has many complex issues of fishing and fishing politics around it. The report is a good, solid piece of work. Last night, the Norway-European Union talks in Oslo collapsed. Josie Simpson, who is the chairman of the Shetland Fishermen's Association telephoned my office last night—in despair, more than anything else. He demonstrated that despair in a clip of an interview with him that I heard on the radio this morning. Those talks are important for the future of fisheries management in the North sea, but they have gone nowhere. I understand that the Scottish Executive environment and rural affairs department officials share Josie Simpson's frustration. If the EU officials who are negotiating at those talks are not up to the task, it is incumbent on the member states to replace them with people who are. I want to pick up on a remark that was made by Hugh Henry—he was right to make it—when he asked what was wrong with the CFP. To my mind, it is clear what is wrong with the CFP, when people such as Josie Simpson, who is respected not only in Shetland but throughout Scotland and Europe, sit outside the room, with Mike Park and others, rather than sitting in the room to help with  the negotiations and to bring to bear practical experience in the discussions.

That proposal has some superficial attractions, but we must still go through the process, in which fishermen must be involved. As Richard Lochhead said, fishermen must be in the room to change policy. My concern about his proposal is that it would not change anything until such time as the zonal management processes have been followed through in relation to CFP policy after 2002. I start, as does the CFP green paper, from the premise that the CFP has failed. There are few people who would dispute the failure of the CFP to create a sustainable fishing industry and sustainable fishing stocks. In many ways, the policy has been an unmitigated disaster. For example, unmarketable fish have been dumped, over-quota fish have been landed and there is the annual December fisheries council—mentioned by Richard Lochhead—which must be the worst way imaginable of negotiating the future of our fishing industry. How can the situation be improved? The committee report makes compelling arguments in response to that question. Those arguments were further enunciated in Shetland at the Shetland oceans alliance conference—known as the SHOAL conference—at Scalloway less than a month ago. I was pleased that the Deputy Minister for Rural Development was able to attend that conference and to contribute to its proceedings, as did a number of other members present in the chamber. Christophe Nordmann, who is the head of the fisheries unit within the fisheries directorate-general, also addressed the conference. To my mind, he made one of his most important comments when he stressed the need for vulnerable peripheral fishing communities to benefit most from a reformed CFP. That must be a driving principle behind the Scottish Executive's approach. I agree with many of the points that were made by Hugh Henry and other members about the principle of relative stability and the Hague preference, and I would like to pick up on two points in particular. First, I see no reason why the six-mile and 12-mile limits should not be encapsulated as permanent features of the CFP. Surely it would be a logical development of the principle of subsidiarity that the 12-mile limit should be enshrined as the management tool for  white fish stocks within that area, as they should be managed locally by local management organisations. I hope that that proposal will be taken up. Secondly, I support members' comments about the Shetland box. I also support the comments that the minister made in Scalloway three weeks ago, when she said that the Executive was considering research in that area and that it might expand the Shetland box if there was a scientific case for doing so. I hope that she will comment further on those points in her speech later in the debate. The committee made a specific point, which I support, about adequate and transparent enforcement of regulations. I endorse the approach that was proposed by the committee. It is important that the same regime for fish landings at ports should apply throughout Scotland, particularly to the pelagic sector. I want to highlight briefly the case of my constituent, Jimmy Sinclair, who is being prosecuted over an alleged incident to do with square-mesh panels. My principal concern about Mr Sinclair's case is that the department received copious information that indicated that the regulations on square-mesh panels have a disproportionate effect on low-powered inshore seiners, such as his boat. It is important that, when we consider making regulations, we ensure that they recognise different forms of fishing activity. Blanket regulations do not suit the fishing sector and, in particular, small boats. I hope that the way in which regulations are introduced will be considered in that light. I will finish with two technical points. To some extent, the first was picked up the other day in the helpful briefing that officials gave to members of the Rural Development Committee. The technical conservation proposals must accept that there is a huge difference between an inshore low-powered seiner and a twin-rig trawler. I do not apologise for repeating that, because it is important for the overall approach that the commission takes. Secondly, on effort limitation, recovery plans and closed areas—whatever description is used—I want to consider what Franz Fischler has said. On 27 May, he picked up the allegation that the European Commission had completely ignored the points about displacement of effort and the effect that that would have. He said that vessel lay-ups were the only way to avoid other stocks being hit by the displacement of effort. Policy must change to take account of that fact. Tie-ups must be in that package of measures. Otherwise—particularly given the current talk of individual transferable quotas—I will be concerned that the fishing industry will wither on a free-market vine, having been surrounded by red tape that is created in  Brussels. I passionately wish to avoid that.

Does Richard Lochhead accept the fact that the former eastern European countries that are entering the EU have no historic rights and simply will not have access to North sea fisheries or other areas?

As Mr Henry noted, on Tuesday Franz Fischler said that there might need to be 40 to 50 per cent cuts in the fishing of certain stocks, including hake. Does he accept that in fisheries management we do not  need commissioners making grand statements without the logical extension of what they are saying being worked through in detail—in fishing regulations that affect all parts of the European Union, particularly Scottish waters? That does not help.

I congratulate the Justice 2 Committee, of which I admit to being a less than perfect member, on the work that it has done on the bill. Rather than sharing the concern that some colleagues have expressed about what has been contributed to the committee evidence and today's proceedings, I think that many members have shown a commendable grasp of an extremely complex and difficult matter. In Margo MacDonald's words, we should not think small; we should think international. That was reflected in the honour that was bestowed on the Parliament yesterday by the President of South Africa, which Pauline McNeill mentioned. He challenged the Parliament to think international and to be international in its outlook. By enshrining the bill in Scots law, we take a step towards meeting that challenge. Roseanna Cunningham began by quoting Kofi Annan. I want to reiterate the point that she made. He said that we should seek "to ensure that no ruler, no State, no junta and no army anywhere can abuse human rights with impunity." That assurance is at the heart of the measures that we seek to introduce through the bill. We should take an international approach—a joint approach. The Minister for Justice, when he introduced the bill this morning, listed those countries that have ratified the Rome statute. To answer Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's fair point about those that have not yet ratified, nations and countries that want to ratify must put as great a moral pressure as possible on those who have decided not to be part of the process.  The Deputy First Minister mentioned that four of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council have signed the treaty. The one that has not is the United States. Several members have mentioned the position that the US has taken on this matter. The US has not always been reluctant to get involved in establishing an international criminal jurisdiction to deal with crimes against humanity. The Americans persuaded Churchill and the British Government to bring top Nazis to justice, rather than lining them up against a wall and shooting them as a political act. The US is keen to ensure that any steps that it takes do not result in a denial of due process to its own citizens. However, its current stance does little to protect American citizens. States that adhere to the Rome statute will be able to prosecute American citizens under their domestic arrangements, whether or not the United States decides to adhere to the system. It will be open to the international criminal court to prosecute American citizens who have committed international criminal offences. It is therefore hard to see the argument that lies behind the current American position. All of us who want to bring moral pressure to bear on states who have yet to take the step of ratification would want to make that point to the United States and the new American Administration. There has been a detailed discussion this morning of universal jurisdiction. I will review a couple of the points that I think are important. Scott Barrie made the fair point that there will be an opportunity at stage 2 to properly scrutinise these matters, take more evidence and reflect on the fact that, in the pre-legislative scrutiny at stage 1, the Justice 2 Committee heard one side of the argument from several witnesses and the other from the ministerial team. However, as Iain Gray said in response to Phil Gallie, there appears to be a contradiction between upholding the traditions and principles of Scots law and moving considerably beyond that approach. Perhaps the committee should spend some time considering that during stage 2. Pauline McNeill made an important point about safe havens, into which category the nations that have not chosen to ratify will logically fall. Mary Mulligan highlighted the importance of UK legislatures dealing in parallel with the timing and scrutiny of the bill to ensure consistency. As Scott Barrie rightly pointed out, there will be an opportunity to develop those issues at stage 2, and I am sure that the committee will do so. The committee has also highlighted time constraints and the pressure to produce reports in order to meet the ratification objectives. However, it is invariably the case that members on the  Opposition benches will criticise the timing of such matters. Furthermore, I imagine that many will wish to jump up and down and say that the Parliament and the Executive have not done what needs to be done to ratify the statute, especially since—as Roseanna Cunningham said—the Irish Prime Minister is visiting the Parliament next week and Ireland has already ratified the statute. Such an obvious example will be brought to everyone's attention, and it is important to bear in mind that there is a balance to these arguments. As Margo MacDonald pointed out, Bill Aitken made an important point about the effectiveness of the ICC. It would be helpful if the committee could take evidence on that at stage 2 and I hope that such an opportunity presents itself. It is a matter of regret that international law has been impotent in the face of the most monstrous crimes in history, committed in the previous century. Surely it is right to do more than simply denounce such offences. We must address our failure to bring to justice the Pol Pots, the Idi Amins, the Saddam Husseins and others whose names will reverberate throughout history for the atrocities they have perpetrated. The bill gives us the chance to take appropriate action, and I urge the chamber to endorse the stage 1 proceedings.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the 2001 integrated administration and control system will take into account the introduction of the less favoured area scheme. (S1O-3432)

Given the foot-and-mouth outbreak and the fact that rural affairs department officials have not been able to visit farms and crofts in recent months, certainly not before the closing date for applications under IACS, will the minister ensure that, where amendments are being made with regard to forage areas—in the light of the importance of making changes in those areas in the context of the introduction of the less  favoured areas scheme—applicants will not be penalised?

Will Mr Chisholm take an intervention?

I will be brief. Does Mr Chisholm accept that the initiative can consider those issues, but that the primary issue relates to people, and so careful consideration should be given not only to imaginative solutions involving PMS, but to practical ways of placing additional staff in those practices?

I begin by expressing my concern over yesterday's court ruling regarding minimum prices for common remedies, which will have an effect on rural pharmacists. I am sure that the minister is aware of that judgment and will reflect on the advice that has been given in respect of it. I hope that he might also reflect on the importance of the Scottish Executive's essential small pharmacies scheme. At times, I wonder whether the 21 st century is to be dominated by the Asdas and Tescos of this world. Their role in our lives appears to have grown much out of proportion. I ask for some consideration to be given to that important issue and to the effect that the court ruling will have on rural pharmacies. I have held a series of useful meetings with general practitioners around Shetland, and with Shetland Health Board, which concluded last Friday with a helpful briefing on this subject. This afternoon, I shall reflect on some of the concerns that have been raised with me. I recognise the fact that my constituency is not unique in experiencing difficulties, and some of the points that I shall raise will be equally applicable to many parts of Scotland. I am sure that other members will acknowledge that. There is a need for a package of measures to tackle the undoubted problem of the recruitment and retention of good local GPs in rural health board areas such as Shetland. As was explained to me last week, that difficulty reflects the nature of a GP's lifestyle in such remote areas. Shetland has six single-doctor practices, three two-doctor practices and one seven-doctor practice, which is in Lerwick. There are currently two GP vacancies in the Lerwick practice and of serious concern is  the fact that nine GPs have left that practice since 1995—the majority for reasons other than ill health or retirement. That turnover is significant, if considered proportionally, and the situation must be addressed. The main concern is the out-of-hours work that is undertaken on a rota basis in such practices. Lerwick recently lost a GP to Elgin, where a co-operative system is in place that means that less time is spent on call. Such arrangements are a great incentive to people with young families and other interests in life. For those reasons, I suspect that Shetland's problems are reflected in other parts of Scotland. Larger practices, which often operate on a co-operative basis, can offer economies of scale, in a sense. As was explained to me last week, that is the difference between the situation in Elgin and the situation in Lerwick. However, if a co-operative could have worked in Shetland, it would have been tried. That point was made to me by the chief executive of Shetland Health Board last Friday. The sheer inaccessibility that is a feature of the geographical circumstances, the need for ferries and the miles of single-track roads make the idea of running an out-of-hours rota system for Shetland a non-starter. In addition, cross-area systems do not work in areas such as the north isles for the simple reason that the ferries between Fetlar, Unst and Yell, the most northerly islands, stop at 10 o'clock at night. Practices have to be located on each island, which exacerbates the problems. Just as public demand for our health service is ever increasing, so our medical students demand ever more in relation to their conditions of employment. Recruitment issues are changing and the contrast, in terms of out-of-hours rotas, between a practice that offers a co-operative approach and a single-GP practice in Shetland is considerable. In addition, the balance in graduating medical students has tipped towards women, who may choose part-time work patterns. Furthermore, many graduates choose a work pattern that includes work abroad. As a result, if we are to attract graduates and experienced people into areas such as Shetland, the package that they are offered needs to be more attractive. The overall package must include relocation expenses. Shetland Heath Board advises me that it can offer relocation expenses to consultants, nurses and associate GPs, but not to primary care GPs. In many areas, however—including the public sector—relocation packages are offered. GP practices are penalised for their independent contractor status. A change of policy for the islands and other remote areas would help with the recruitment and retention of GPs. Housing, particularly the availability of short-term housing, must also be considered in partnership with the appropriate agencies.  Salaried contracts for GPs were introduced recently. Last Friday, Shetland Health Board was given an assurance that, from that day onwards, island health boards could employ salaried GPs under the primary medical services arrangements. I understand, however, that the indicative budget for Shetland is £50,000 in the first financial year. When that money is shared out among the 10 GP practices and 20 GPs in Shetland, it will not make the difference that is necessary. In addition, given that there is to be a move towards a salaried GP scheme, the amounts of money that have been announced are inadequate, as self-employed GPs do not pay themselves by the hour, particularly when they are on call to a considerable extent. Formulae for primary medical services do not work when they are applied rigidly and, as I argued when the Arbuthnott mechanism was introduced, often they do not reflect island circumstances. There is a need for a package of measures to tackle recruitment and retention in Scotland's island, rural and remote areas. The primary medical services investment must be considered in detail in co-operation with GPs and health boards. Thought must also be given to the importance of retaining GPs, a remoteness element to the funding package for GPs in remote areas and a package to help with relocation, including short-term housing. Added together, those measures could provide a stable package for building a strong and successful primary care sector in the area in which it matters: the treatment of patients.

I support the amendment in the name of the convener of the Holyrood progress group. Like Richard Simpson, I will begin by supporting the crucial and important work of Linda Fabiani, Jamie Stone and John Home Robertson on this issue. As Pauline McNeill pointed out, the Conservatives should support and take part in that work.  Although last April's motion was less than perfect, the fact is—as the business pages and the Evening News constantly report and as everyone except David McLetchie can accept—that the building trade in Edinburgh is buoyant. There is a Holyrood factor, which has a bearing on tender prices. However, those are points for another day. Donald Gorrie rightly said that, if the budget requirement is greater than the figure that is stated in the motion, the matter should return to the Parliament. Other members have echoed that suggestion, and that is what should happen at the appropriate time. There is a different motive for the Conservative's motion, which was not hard to find. On Radio Scotland this morning, Brian Monteith—who has left the chamber—said that this is a general election issue. That sums up the Tory approach to the issue. David McLetchie confirmed that it is not just the building that the Tories oppose, but the philosophical principle behind it. They are against devolution—they always have been—and the Parliament is a manifestation of that, which they take every opportunity to run down. The principle that they would follow—in effect, to leave the roof off—illustrates how they would demean, demean and demean again not just the Holyrood project, but devolution itself. I imagine that there are moderate, sensible Tory MSPs who would support the project if they were given the opportunity to do so.

In two seconds. However, those members will not be given that opportunity because, as Brian Monteith confirmed, this is a general election issue. The Holyrood progress group has saved money without compromising quality—that was the purpose of the group—but the Tories cannot claim one cost saving. Their petulant and destructive determination to avoid the Holyrood progress group has been predictable. Members will notice that a Tory member, John Young, is a member of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body and receives monthly reports from the Holyrood progress group. The Tories want access to information without responsibility, so that they can engage in sheer, unadulterated political opportunism.

I have every faith that, if the necessity arises, the Holyrood progress group will produce a report for Parliament, via the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, and explain how such matters will be dealt with. That is the way in which Parliament should handle such issues. As Mike Russell rightly stated, the project has gone too far for it to stop completely. On the radio this morning, John Spencely said that the budget in the brief that was published in June was achievable. It is important to remember that that brief was not confirmed until June. Much has been made of David Black's book, but, as Mr Spencely observed, Mr Black has become very excited by the opportunity to sell it. Once again, the Parliament has heard nothing constructive from the Tories, just a general election rant—which they need, as they are desperate. Are the Tories seriously saying that the project should be abandoned if unforeseen costs mean that the budget will exceed £195 million? Yes, that is what we heard today. Did they propose closing the millennium dome that they initiated when they were in office? Yes, but only when they were out of office. Was it not the Tories, when they were in office at Westminster, who allowed the building of Portcullis House—the most expensive office space, per square foot, in the UK? Did they ask to put a minister on the parliamentary authorities that were dealing with that building? I do not recollect that. All that the Tories do is lodge parliamentary questions. This is gesture politics from David McLetchie. There is no Tory member on the Holyrood progress group, and a Tory MSP abdicated responsibility despite being on the corporate body. Even by Tory standards, this is cheap, facile gesture politics at its worst, and the Parliament should have nothing to do with it. We should support a Parliament building for Scotland.

David McLetchie should be aware that, unlike in his party and the  SNP, there was no whip. Jim Wallace made that clear in the debate that day. David McLetchie should acknowledge that fact and accept it.

I asked David Davidson a straight question about fishing policy. In fairness to him, he gave me a straight reply on the policy of—I presume—the Scottish Tories in the Scottish Parliament. The policy is entirely fair. The trouble is that every Westminster candidate—as far as I am aware from the leaflets that I have seen from Westminster candidates—supports the line that is given in the Fishing News . The Conservatives have two different policies on fishing.

I will finish this point, Mr Wallace. I will come to the Tories later. It is the height of hypocrisy to lecture the rest of us on being clear on a policy when the Tories espouse different policies in Westminster and in Scotland. I welcome today's debate, on Europe day, and I welcome the public exhibition in Edinburgh. It is surely the right approach for the capital to concentrate on Europe and the young people of Europe. Scotland's children have two advantages over most of us. First, they do not hold any of the prejudices that we seem to hold about Europe and, secondly, they are invariably learning a foreign language, which is to be commended. My daughter, who is at primary school, can already slaughter me at French. I know that Mr McConnell is encouraging us all to do our best on foreign languages, so perhaps Mr Stephen will wind up in Spanish. I will concentrate on the Tories' amendment. Despite mentioning the euro in the amendment, the Tories have been noticeably silent on it in their speeches so far. David Davidson challenged us to be forthright and clear about such matters. I will set out some arguments about the euro, on which I hope we can campaign around the United Kingdom—and certainly in Scotland—in short order. It is an important issue for the future of the country. Mr Hague was on television this morning, on his soapbox, surrounded by signs demanding that we save the pound. Instead of taking the facile approach of the Conservative party, let us consider the potential benefits of membership of the euro and the single currency. There would be more trade: independent research illustrates that joining the euro could triple trade between the United Kingdom and the euro zone over 20 to 30 years. There would be greater prosperity: independent research indicates that the more we trade, the richer our economies and our people can become. There would be lower prices: competition that comes from having the same currency causes prices to converge; general economic advantages flow from that. There would be greater stability: caught between the euro and the dollar, the only predictable thing about sterling is that it is likely to head off in unpredictable directions and, as the amount of capital flowing through financial markets grows, the volatility will only increase. Above all else perhaps, we would have greater influence: from the heart of Europe, Britain could lead from the front and propose policies that are in line with this country's priorities. If we remain outside the euro, we will be taken  less seriously by other European countries and so will find it harder to set the European agenda.

I will send Mr Davidson a very important publication produced by Chris Huhne, a Liberal Democrat MEP, which goes into considerable detail on exactly that issue. The document was published extensively at the beginning of the year and makes a positive and constructive contribution to the debate, which is something that the Tories never do. I will debunk two Tory myths about the euro. The Tories claim that joining will mean higher unemployment, but we are talking about a common currency, not a common industrial policy. Unemployment is falling in many European countries—notably France and Germany—and at the Lisbon summit in March, all European Governments committed themselves to creating 20 million new jobs by 2010. Are the Conservatives against that? The Tories also claim that joining will make us all less British, Scottish or whatever. One leading politician said: "It is a myth that our membership" of Europe "will suffocate national tradition and culture. Are the Germans any less German for being in the Community or the French any less French? Of course they are not." I am sure that the Conservatives would agree with those words from Margaret Thatcher. Unlike the Tories, the Liberal Democrats strongly support putting the option of joining to the country, through a referendum. The Tory position is best illustrated by a recent comment in The Observer , which said: "If people go into a referendum thinking 'I haven't a clue about the economics'" of the argument "then we have won because they will go on their visceral instincts". It is depressing to think that such a debate will be won not on the strengths and disadvantages of a particular case. The Conservative split on Europe centres not just on fisheries, but on many other aspects of European policy—indeed, on whether we should be in Europe at all. The split is between those who seek to renegotiate and those who seek outright withdrawal and between those who rule out joining the euro in the next Parliament and those who rule it out for ever. The leader of the Conservative party, William Hague, said:  "I'm against the single currency on principle, and that means for the foreseeable future." "On principle" means "never". I contrast Mr Hague's position with that of two Conservative candidates. Patrick Nicholls MP said he "wouldn't vote to go into a single currency in any circumstances whatsoever". David Curry said: "The United Kingdom should retain the option of joining." The Conservative stance on Europe is an unmitigated shambles. It is part of the Parliament's job to concentrate on the real issues surrounding the single currency, instead of considering the negative nonsense peddled by the Conservatives.

Mr Davidson referred to what his party has said in this Parliament. Does that mean that there is a different policy in Westminster from here? The Fishing News is very clear when it refers to the Conservative party's unequivocal commitment to restoring national control. Is that the policy of the Conservative party?

Is that Conservative party policy?

Will Mr Mundell take an intervention? As he is on the subject of reform, will he clarify the Conservatives' policy on fishing reform? Does he agree with the Conservative party's unequivocal commitment to restoring national control over British waters? Is that the Conservatives' position?

Comments have been made about the Executive's response to the Rural Development Committee's report and recommendations. At Westminster—as members who have served there know well—Governments produce responses to select committee reports all the time. They agree with X and disagree with Y  and no one is terribly surprised; such is the nature of the debate. Rather than pick up on the Executive's response, I will concentrate on what needs to be done for the future and which areas need to be challenged and taken forward—issues that many members brought out well. The Rural Development Committee is to be congratulated on its findings, which, in many areas, challenge the Executive. One of the key recommendations concerns the production and collation of statistical information about poverty and deprivation levels across Scotland. Ian Jenkins made a good point about how we define rural Scotland—it is too easy to say that such-and-such an area is in rural Scotland. There is a quantum leap between, for example, Alasdair Morgan's part of Scotland and my constituency of Shetland or the areas around Edinburgh that call themselves rural. It would be helpful at times to consider the different spheres that rural Scotland covers. Richard Lochhead made a fair point about the fragility of the economies in many of our rural areas and the decline in traditional industries. An important point is that many of our traditional industries are hidebound by regulation. As a crofter put it to me at my surgery on Saturday, his croft is defined as an area of land surrounded by law. Many of us would agree that much could be done in both agriculture and fishing to reduce the regulatory burdens. That is why I welcome the red tape review that the rural affairs department has introduced. I hope that it will make significant changes, but more could be done, for example in the fishing industry. Many members, including Alasdair Morgan, who made his point eloquently, were right about transport. I will not rehearse the arguments about petrol prices, but I hope that when the Executive considers the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's recent report on rural petrol prices, it will produce a solid analysis of the recommendations and that we will have the opportunity to debate the matter in the chamber. I notice that the Secretary of State for Scotland is pushing for an increase in direct flights to Europe from Scotland. That is a laudable aim, but I hope that politicians in the Scotland Office will also concentrate on the need for internal flights, for example between Inverness and Heathrow, and on the cost of flights in Scotland. As I—or rather taxpayers—well know, the cost of flying members from Inverness or Shetland to Edinburgh is extremely high. Members of the Rural Development Committee who have been to outlying areas such as Stornoway know that too. I hope that the Executive works hard on those issues with the carriers concerned.  Many members made the point well about telecommunications. The recommendations of the report are helpful in emphasising that issue. A similar argument to the one about the electronics industry that we have witnessed in the past few weeks applies to call centres. It is said by many in the call centre industry that, as telecommunications move forward and different forms of technology—web-enabled activities—develop, the call centre as we understand it will have to evolve or it will not continue. Those who see call centres as having a great future must consider how that activity can develop, given the way in which the world is changing—it is certainly not standing still. Many correct points were made on the importance of skills and the skills shortage, not only in urban but in rural and remote Scotland. Ian Jenkins made a good point about further education colleges and the limited number of people who are available to fulfil their needs. I conclude with a point about joined-up government. I was asked in a former life to consider joined-up government between enterprise and rural development. It would not be offensive in any way for the Executive seriously to consider that. We need joined-up government between Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise for the simple reason that the social agenda that many members, and the committee report, have highlighted is important. Joined-up government can deliver that agenda.

I thank the minister for his statement and also welcome Peter Lederer to his new post. I had the opportunity to meet him yesterday at the travel fair in the SECC in Glasgow—indeed, at the Shetland stand. On the point that Mr Davidson raised about access, I would ask the minister for clarification on whether the actions of the rural affairs department and the enterprise and lifelong learning department will be completely joined up, to ensure that land managers have consistent advice across all activities that the Executive is carrying out at this difficult time. I welcome the subscription and quality assurance relief for area tourist board members and the particular assistance for Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders. On the £2.3 million of marketing spend, will the minister encourage visitscotland—and will he offer encouragement through his own offices—to use some of that money towards encouraging Scots to holiday in Scotland? Surely that is an opportunity that we should not miss at this time. Does he accept that, as constructive and practical proposals for assisting the tourism industry in Scotland come forward, the Executive should  consider those as quickly as it can?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of NorthLink Orkney and Shetland Ferries and whether the issue of the transfer of staff to NorthLink from P&O Scottish Ferries was discussed. (S1O-3252)

Does the minister join me in welcoming yesterday's announcement at Glasgow travel fair that NorthLink and Shetland Islands Tourism are forming a joint marketing partnership to market Shetland and Orkney? Does she accept the undoubted need for a seamless transfer from P&O to NorthLink, especially for existing staff? Will she give assurances about staff conditions? Will she ensure that new harbour facilities will be available, backed by Scottish Executive finance, as the ports must use reasonable endeavours to meet the challenging time scale?

Will the minister clarify the application of the 21-day restriction to the islands? He said that that restriction would be retained. Does he understand the practical difficulties that that is causing, for example, where an individual crofter may have two code numbers? Does the 21-day restriction apply to the animal or the holding, and will that be clarified before midnight tomorrow? Does the minister also understand that the local SERAD office in Lerwick will be deluged with requests from farmers and crofters? Lambing is about to begin in Shetland, but it is not clear from today's statement what restrictions have been removed in the islands.

And, after the next election, the Conservatives will continue to be so from the Opposition benches, where they are now and will be for many years. Mr Davidson said it all: the Conservatives are prepared to work with Europe—pause—on their terms. Little more needs to be said on the European policy of the Conservative party. On fishing, Mr Davidson and many of his MSP colleagues in Scotland take a reasonable line on the reform of fishing policy, in the European context, which is diametrically opposite to the position taken by their colleagues at Westminster. The Conservatives have two positions on reform of the common fisheries policy; if Struan Stevenson is added, arguably they have three positions. The Conservative position on Europe is clear: it is not clear. Mr Davidson also did that classic Tory thing of running out a few hoary old myths about Europe. The one about bureaucracy is one that William Hague's Tories like to trot out now and again. It might interest Mr Davidson to observe that the staff directly employed by the European Commission number around 15,000, which is roughly equivalent to the average number of staff employed by a large local authority in the UK. Those old myths somewhat defeat the argument. When Mr Davidson challenges all the other parties to say what their policy is, the least that the Tories could do is admit that they have no policy on  Europe, other than to seek to withdraw from it.

It is the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. I know that Mr Wallace was in Westminster last night; I watched him having an interesting debate on "Newsnight" about the Army, which is a subject that he seems to speak on regularly. Perhaps he should try to find the seat that he seeks and he will eventually get down to Westminster to talk about it.

I am sorry—you took me aback, Presiding Officer. I thought that it was Ben Wallace, not you, who was shouting at me.

You shout better than he does. My party argues for fundamental reform of MAFF at Westminster, but that is an issue in England and Wales, not in Scotland. I thought that it would be good that Kenny Gibson was moving the SNP amendment today. I thought that it would raise the temperature of the debate, if not the tone. However, Kenny's heart was not in it today. He usually brings lots of passion to a debate, but I did not think that there was much passion in his speech. Many of his arguments were undermined. Kenny Gibson did not give way to Hugh Henry. I was thinking, when Hugh was seeking to intervene, that if Kenny had considered the recommendations in the 6 th report 2000 by the European Committee, on European structural funds, that would have answered many of the questions that he asked in his speech. The SNP cannot quite decide whether we are a prosperous nation or a poor nation. When we have a debate on Scotland generally, SNP members state that potentially we can be a great, prosperous nation, but when we discuss structural funds, we must be a poor nation as we are not getting enough funds. It would be very important if the SNP could sort out its position.

That is what the SNP likes to do, and Christine Grahame is probably the worst protagonist of that argument. She talks down an area of Scotland that she should try to talk up. In fairness to Mr Gibson, at least he showed much more class than his colleague, Christine Grahame, and made a much more positive contribution. As usual, the SNP cannot decide what it believes on these matters. Structural funds have been of significant benefit to Scotland in boosting economic development projects in areas of lower economic performance, especially in areas making the transition from traditional heavy industries, along with peripheral and rural areas such as the Highlands and Islands. Over the coming six years, Scotland has been allocated more than £1 billion by the European Union. As other members have mentioned, that represents a major investment in economic regeneration, the labour market, education, training and development. The latest programme will run until 2006 and, as the minister stated, it is unlikely to be repeated as regional development funds will focus on the new member states from eastern Europe. It is perhaps worth considering that the emerging democracies and economies of the former eastern bloc are in need of that investment. They pose huge challenges to Scotland in specific industrial sectors such as agriculture and in the new economy, with their propensity to offer cheaper wages in competition with Scottish companies. Structural funds are vital in ensuring that the whole of the European Union benefits from closer economic integration. It is also important to recognise the European Commission's cohesion report, which was published in January. It considers the regional imbalances and the future of structural funds as enlargement looms large. Those issues of how the wider Europe develops are important in a debate about how best to maximise the advantages of the funds that will come into Scotland before 2006.

The Liberal Democrats never believed in a united states of Europe. The important development in constitutional politics, not only in the United Kingdom, but throughout Europe, is that the principle of subsidiarity must apply. That means that decision making is devolved to the lowest applicable level. That is the guiding principle that the Liberal Democrats take into the debate about Europe, as well as the debate about constitutional reform generally. That concept, and how it will work in Scotland and across Europe, is much more important than fragile and superfluous arguments about phrases such as a united states of Europe. It is essential that the value of funding is maximised to close the economic gaps between the different regions of the European Union. Liberal Democrats support the concept of regional development programmes and see them as a major benefit of the European Union, which has recognised the need to manage and address economic imbalances. The programmes are in place to deliver the funds, but the Scottish Executive must work with and support local authorities to ensure that appropriate match funding is in place to deliver key projects. Given the ghastly and profound difficulties facing the south of Scotland, especially Dumfries and Galloway, it is appropriate to consider what can be done to help in the short and long term. The Scottish Executive has rightly announced a package of funding for tourism and business development in the south of Scotland. I briefly attended the Scottish travel fair in Glasgow yesterday. There is a profound sense, among tourist boards in that area and across Scotland, that there is a need for aid. The Executive is taking that forward positively.

I am not a minister in the Executive; I am sure that Mr Peacock will pick up that issue in his speech. Mr Ingram might want to intervene during Mr Peacock's speech at the end of the morning's proceedings. Both the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway will benefit from structural funds. As Mr MacKay mentioned, some projects have already begun, with, I understand, a total value of some £16  million.

No. It is £16 million in total. Perhaps Christine Grahame should check her figures. The first tranche is a result of the Borders economic forum, a model that I understand the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has taken forward in other parts of Scotland. Unlike those who constantly whinge from the sidelines, I congratulate all the partners that have played a positive role in making progress, including Scottish Enterprise Borders, Scottish Borders Council, the tourist board and many others. I am sure that my colleague, Ian Jenkins, will elaborate on that if he catches your eye, Presiding Officer, later on. He and Euan Robson, along with local MPs, Mike Moore and Archy Kirkwood, have played a constructive role in making progress on those issues. Funds need to be refocused towards rural areas that are affected by the foot-and-mouth crisis, taking into account the longer-term effect that the crisis will have on employment and specific business sectors. The important point for both the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway is that they can least afford the loss of economic activity and must not fall further behind. I shall make a couple of brief comments on the Highlands and Islands transitional programme. Telecommunications have been greatly improved in the area with the help of structural fund support, as part of a £5 million investment. The original target was between 500 and 600 jobs, but several times more than that have been created. Telephone networks are being upgraded from analogue to digital, and Scottish Telecom has introduced an element of competition against British Telecom. As a result, the region could soon be on a level playing field with the rest of Europe in its telecommunications infrastructure.

No; I shall carry on. I have given way to the member already. It is worth recognising that much of that investment is the result of work by the former Highlands and Islands Development Board and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, both of which had the vision to put public money into information technology. I congratulate those who had such vision at that time. The modern telecommunications network has been a strong factor in attracting new teleservices and IT-based companies to the area. However, as Mr Peacock is aware, there is continuing concern that further  upgrading of the network is required to prevent the loss of such advantages. In my constituency, I am involved in discussions that I hope might lead to a fibre-optic cable that will link Shetland to the mainland, with a spur to Orkney. Those areas have the positive attitude and approach that might lead to benefits for business and domestic customers. Funding from the European regional development fund is available to assist the development of renewable energy potential. Although that includes assistance for improvements to network connections in remote areas, developing such energy resources on Scotland's west coast is dependent on exporting that power source to the national grid, and work must continue on that matter. On other programmes, I note that, in the European Committee's report on the application and project appraisal process for European structural funds, it has commented on the need to co-ordinate activities between various programmes and objective 2 and 3 areas. I am sure that the minister will assure committee members and the Parliament about any progress on that issue. Indeed, I recollect that Lex Gold gave evidence on monitoring and other issues to the European Committee in Glasgow some months ago. This morning, the minister mentioned the implementation of the recommendations of Lex Gold's review. I want to mention one constituency example in relation to the FIFG, about which David Davidson raised an important point. That funding mechanism has gained some notoriety of late. According to some representations that I received late last night, there is some confusion over the deadline for the first round, which was 28 February. I understand that some applicants were advised that they could submit applications after that date, which is at best unfair, as a number of Shetland businesses were told that they were too late. Although I do not expect the minister to respond to that point today, my letter is in the post and I hope that he will address the issue. Structural funds must leave a lasting legacy of investment in Scotland. It is the role of the Scottish Executive, working—as in the Borders—with all relevant parties, to ensure that the investments made between now and 2006 stand the test of time for the communities that they serve.

Does the First Minister accept that, by rebalancing and repackaging the overall amount of money, we could usefully fund the trialling of selective gear? Will he undertake to consider using the North Atlantic Fisheries College in Shetland, which has considerable expertise in this scientific area and is quite prepared to get on with this work? The college needs to have the bureaucratic blocks on  this matter lifted as soon as possible for the work to continue.

Does the minister accept, and will he look into, the difficulties that crofters and farmers in Orkney and Shetland are facing as they seek to get cattle away—as they normally do at this time of year—to Aberdeen, given the movement restrictions that apply to them? They also face difficulties because of calving and the lack of fodder—it is extremely difficult to obtain fodder at this time. Will the minister undertake to look into their case, in the context of the answers that he has given on the restriction policy?

I want to set out the reasons why I believe that effective and adequate short-term aid, as part of the overall package that was announced a week ago by the fisheries minister, is so important. The Government's investment must be balanced: it must target short-term aid to give the industry an opportunity for long-term sustainability. Last week, I met fishermen at Sullom Voe. Fishing accounts for a quarter of Shetland's economic output and employs more people directly and indirectly than any other primary industry. The Shetland fleet led the way in pioneering conservation measures, and the industry in Shetland is progressive, positive and determined. Fishermen tell me that, on the grounds of conservation, financial viability and the protection of future stocks, a targeted, short-term aid package is needed. I know that that is true and I support that objective. I am not convinced by the arguments made against tie-up, but I want to push ministers on the alternatives. The North Atlantic Fisheries College in Shetland has been trialling fishing gear for many years. I want the expertise of fishermen to be used—with that of scientists—on boats in order to expand trialling. In that way, fishermen could be employed to carry out scientific studies, which would benefit the industry, the crew and their families. For me, that would be better than tie-up, but I recognise that it is a limited solution and could not apply to the entire white fish fleet. However, it could be part of an overall tie-up package. It is about reducing fishing effort, which is, of course, the aim of a tie-up scheme. Trialling, by using fishermen and scientists, achieves many objectives. It reduces fishing effort, gets financial assistance to fishermen quickly and provides research for the future. I resigned last Friday because I sought to convince ministerial colleagues of those  arguments for more short-term aid, but I failed. I was not able to change colleagues' minds last week and then I witnessed a determined line against tie-up. As I was not able to support Government policy on fisheries, I had no alternative but to resign. Let me be clear: when one is a minister, one supports the Government. If one cannot support the Government, one resigns. There has been positive movement, and I urge ministers to continue the dialogue with fishing leaders. I believe that the proposed short-term measures are still inadequate and, on that basis, I cannot support the Government. Therefore, I will vote for a tie-up scheme at decision time.

It is nice to be able to make a contribution this afternoon but it is unfortunate that many members have not had the opportunity to do so because of the constraints on time. I will make a number of points that I hope will, in a fairly consensual style, reflect this afternoon's debate. I am aware that Margaret Curran is summing up—I have seen her savaging people left, right and centre from the front bench. I wish not to be savaged this afternoon. I welcome the first housing bill before Scotland's new Parliament. It is arguably the most consulted on bill in the Parliament's short history, having been effectively scrutinised by committees. It reflects the vigorous lobbying of MSPs and the Government by many organisations, which have brought to the debate the weight of considerable knowledge on the issues. Robert Brown and others rightly paid tribute to the ministerial team that has brought the bill to Parliament today. It is right that Parliament should approve the first principles of a bill that not only improves the social rented housing sector in Scotland but looks to wider issues, such as fuel poverty, which I understand will be the subject of further proceedings at stage 2. The bill tackles homelessness on a strategic and a national basis  while, as Kenny Gibson commented, putting an obligation on local authorities to produce individual local strategies for assessing and tackling local housing need. It includes a welcome measure to abolish a quango and correctly to make what was Scottish Homes accountable to Parliament through ministers. The bill must be twin-tracked; to that end, the Liberal Democrats welcome the measures that it contains. The Government must set out its spending on social rented housing, both on improving existing stock and on investing in new stock. Jackie Baillie's opening speech pointed to that wider context. Those members who reflected that the bill does not have a wider context in terms of what is going on in the housing sector simply cannot have heard that initial contribution. It is proper to give people a right to better housing across all tenures, irrespective of their social, cultural or ethnic background, and to ensure that a range of decent housing options is available to all. I welcome the announcement that the former Minister for Communities made in June last year on establishing the rural partnership for change initiative, which was chaired by a former colleague of mine on Shetland Islands Council. Wendy Alexander said at the time: "Pressurised rural communities often have shortages of available land and high development costs to overcome." When Margaret Curran winds up, perhaps she can give us an update on progress, especially on those two factors, which remain the principal concerns to rural housing associations. I will briefly reflect on those concerns this afternoon. I do so in the context of discussions that I have had with Hjaltland Housing Association in my constituency, which I am sure Margaret Curran will have the opportunity to visit when she goes to Shetland later in the spring. Sylvia Jackson, Murray Tosh and others rightly reflected on the difficulties that are being observed by rural housing associations with regard to right to buy—I recognise much of what they have said. Let me put it into my local context, in stark terms. A four-person house built by Hjaltland Housing Association in Lerwick will have a value of about £40,000. Its actual selling price under right to buy will be £24,840. However, the replacement cost of such a building will be approximately £80,000, because of the high building costs in Shetland. To a large extent, that encapsulates the difficulties that many rural housing associations face, although some of them have more extreme difficulties than others because of distance and transport costs. Given the pressure that that financial equation puts on housing associations, the increasing development costs and the difficulty of acquiring  land where social rented housing is needed, would not a portable discount as part of a menu of options—as Robert Brown described—be a better investment for the taxpayer and the tenant? I ask ministers to reflect on those options. Hjaltland Housing Association is also concerned about the fact that the right-to-buy exemption will not apply to stock built before 1989. In my constituency, such stock accounts for 38 per cent of the housing association's general-needs rental stock, nearly all of which is important in specific geographical areas around the islands and much of which is attractive for purchase. I am not clear what the benefits will be if Hjaltland Housing Association is forced to sell off that stock. I do not believe that the minister intends to cause housing associations financial difficulty, but I ask her to consider those points, which I hope will be raised at stage 2. I reiterate the value of a tenant incentive scheme. Portable discounts are an alternative, as part of an overall menu of options that gives choice while maintaining the financial stability of rural housing associations. I hope that Jackie Baillie will be able to provide some encouragement in that area. There is much to commend the bill. I have mentioned some issues briefly and members of all parties have mentioned other issues, such as the sensible suggestion that there should be a phased implementation of the Scottish secure tenancy. The housing association in Shetland has suggested that to me repeatedly. In the Liberal Democrat submission to the consultation on the bill, Robert Brown welcomed the overall principles behind it and the majority of the proposals that have been made. We have a number of detailed concerns, which will be pursued in the appropriate way at stage 2. The bill complements the Administration's commitments in the programme for government and I am happy to commend it to the chamber.

In moving this motion, I wish to intimate that this measure has been requested by members of all parties in order to give more time for the stage 1 debate. I move, That the Parliament agrees under Rule 11.2.4 of the Standing Orders that Decision Time on Wednesday 14 March 2001 shall begin at 5.30 pm.

Members will have noted from today's business bulletin that the Sewel motion on the Culture and Recreation Bill will be taken on Thursday 8 March. There are two changes to members' business. First, on Wednesday 7 March, the members' debate is on a motion lodged by Marilyn Livingstone, on a strategy to tackle sexual abuse. On Thursday 15 March, members' business is a debate on a motion lodged by George Reid, on national tartan day. Finally, the Conservatives have intimated that the subject of business for the morning of Thursday 8 March from 9.30 am to 11.00 am is criminal justice and that the subject from 11.00 am until 12.30 pm is crisis in the countryside. I move, That the Parliament agrees: (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 7 March 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1564 Marilyn Livingstone: Strategy to Tackle Sexual Abuse Thursday 8 March 2001 9.30 am Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed  by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on the International Development Bill - UK Legislation followed by Stage 3 Debate on the Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Bill  followed by Executive Motion on the Culture and Recreation Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1452 Alex Fergusson: Less Favoured Areas Wednesday 14 March 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Housing (Scotland) Bill followed  by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 15 March 2001 9.30 am Executive Debate on Freedom of Information followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1670 Mr George Reid: National Tartan Day and, (b) that the Justice 2 Committee reports to the Justice 1 Committee by 12 March 2001 on the draft Advice and Assistance (Financial Conditions) (Scotland) Regulations 2001 and the draft Civil Legal Aid (Financial Conditions) (Scotland) Regulations 2001; and that the Justice 1 Committee reports to the Justice 2 Committee by 13 March 2001 on the draft Limited Liability Partnerships (Scotland) Regulations 2001.

That is my understanding.

The motion has been agreed by the conveners of the two justice committees. That is the position.

Foula Primary School is a good school.

In moving this motion, I intimate that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee did not have an opportunity to discuss the Sewel motion on the Culture and Recreation Bill. The committee will deal with it on 27 February and it will be put to the chamber to be formally moved on 1 March. A slot has been programmed, which will be shown in tomorrow's business motion. The change to business tomorrow morning is to allow for the motion of no confidence to be taken between  9.30 am and 10.30 am. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following revisions to the Business Motion agreed on 8 February 2001— Thursday 15 February 2001 (a) delete 9.30 am Scottish National Party Debate on Education and insert 9.30 am Debate on Motion of No Confidence followed by Scottish National Party Debate on Education and (b) after 3.30 pm Executive Debate on Children's Services delete followed by Executive Motion on the Culture and Recreation Bill -UK Legislation Motion agreed to.

Before moving the motion, I wish to intimate that the Scottish National Party's topic for debate on Thursday 15 February is education. I am grateful to Tricia Marwick for advising the Parliamentary Bureau of that. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 14 February 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Health and Community Care Committee Debate on its Report on the Delivery of Community Care in Scotland followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1569 Fiona Hyslop: Debt Advice and Debt Awareness Day Thursday 15 February 2001 9.30 am Scottish National Party Business followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on Children's Issues followed by Executive Motion on the Culture and Recreation Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1614 Trish Godman: Hospices

I am happy to assure members that the bureau will want to consider those matters as soon as possible.

I share the concern that Lord James has raised. I understand that the Parliamentary Bureau discussed the issue on Tuesday afternoon. The bureau would consider taking the issue to the Procedures Committee for a determination.

You are right, Presiding Officer. The Parliamentary Bureau will reflect on that. However, some people think that the Executive's strategy for enterprise is important.

Mr Canavan will know well that the procedures of the Parliament do not include business time questions. All that I am doing today is formally moving the business for the next weeks. I move, That the Parliament agrees:  (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 24 January 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection - The Right Reverend Dr Andrew R C McLellan, Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Justice 1 Committee Debate on its Proposal for a Protection from Abuse Bill  The Clerk has been informed that the following document(s) are relevant to this debate.  Justice and Home Affairs Committee's 9 th Report, 2000 (SP Paper 221)  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1334 Pauline McNeill: Funding of Glasgow's Museums and Galleries Thursday 25 January 2001 9.30 am Scottish National Party Business 12.15 pm Ministerial Statement followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Stage 1 Debate on the Budget Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1506 David Mundell: Robert Burns Wednesday 31 January 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection - The Reverend Ernest Levy, Member of the Jewish Clergy followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No. 2) Bill followed by Financial Resolution on the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No. 2) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 1 February 2001 9.30 am Executive Business followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on the Strategy for Enterprise followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) that Stage 1 of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill be completed by 7 March 2001 (c) that Stage 1 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill be completed by 14 March 2001 and, (d) that the Rural Development Committee reports to the Health and Community Care Committee by 2 February 2001 on the Specified Risk Material Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2001 (SSI 2001/3) and the Specified Risk Material Order Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2001 (SSI 2001/4).

We are seeking to intimate the business for the next two weeks, which has been agreed by all four business managers. Mr Gorrie refers to an event that has just happened, so it is a little difficult of him to ask the Minister for Parliament to reassess business at a moment's notice. There will be discussions, but at the moment all we can do is intimate the business as it is in today's bulletin.

So much for new politics and for the thought that we would be able to develop the Scottish Parliament in a decent and honourable manner.

Some of the language that has been used by the SNP has been pretty shameful. [Interruption.]  Tricia Marwick used the phrase: "act as if you are fit to govern." So much for a parliamentary debate and discussing issues about Parliament in a mature and reasoned way. Such phrases are used because an election is on the horizon. An awful lot of what the SNP members are doing today is just the way in which they behave. It is all about electioneering—that is what is happening day in, day out. Let us deal with the arguments of principle. I should be happy to negotiate with Mr Russell. At least Mr Russell can negotiate and one feels that one is making some progress when talking to him. The truth is that when we had the discussions on committee restructuring, every time there was a decent attempt to advance involving all parties and parliamentary groups, progress came to a grinding halt when matters went back to the SNP group. Let us not hear any more about the principle. It is interesting to read the SNP amendment, because there were two amendments. The first SNP amendment said that the SNP wanted both the convenership and the deputy convenership of the committee. Where does d'Hondt fit into that? I do not see much sign of a principle there. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton established what was important—

I should be happy to give way to the leader of the Scottish National Party, if he can confirm that this is his amendment: "to allocate the Convenership and Vice Convenership of the Justice 2 Committee to the Scottish National Party".

We have the amendment.

No, I will not. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made—

This is a debate about the structure and membership of committees that should be taken in the round. If, as the Minister for Parliament has stated, all the business managers—and not, as Tricia Marwick wanted, just the SNP and Labour business managers—can negotiate over committee convenerships, there  can be negotiations if members of the Parliament so desire. Parliament has always sought to refine d'Hondt to ensure, for example, that Labour would not have six members on 11-person committees. Similarly, refining d'Hondt ensures that there are places for Tommy Sheridan, Robin Harper and Dennis Canavan on committees. Apparently, the SNP would go back on that, because if the pure d'Hondt argument—

Mr Russell says no from a sedentary position. Heaven knows what we are to believe after today.

I accept Mr Russell's remark about the SNP giving up a place. All parties had to give and take in the process. Those should be the terms of the negotiations. It is a point that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton also made. [Interruption.]

I encourage Parliament to endorse the Parliamentary Bureau motion on the basis that that would be consistent with the interpretation of the bureau's handling of these matters. I reiterate that, as the Minister for Parliament set out, if negotiations can take place among all the business managers, negotiations can happen.

Yesterday, at the request of some bureau members, we allocated time for a debate on the convenership of committees today. There are Sewel motions and a considerable body of other business this afternoon, so half an hour was considered adequate for that debate.

Before I move the motion, I intimate to Parliament three minor adjustments to next week's business. On Wednesday 17 January, two Sewel motions will be moved in the afternoon. Similarly, on Thursday 18 January, there will be a Sewel motion moved at 2 pm. The Conservative party has chosen fisheries and a route action plan as the matters for debate during the morning of Thursday 18 January. I am grateful to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for intimating that to me. I move, That the Parliament agrees (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 17 January 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill followed by Executive Debate on the Health and Social Care Bill - UK Legislation followed by Executive Debate on the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Bill - UK Legislation followed  by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1474 Janis Hughes: Acute Health Service Review in South Glasgow Thursday 18 January 2001 9.30 am Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 12.15 pm Ministerial Statement followed by Business Motion 2.00 pm Executive Debate on the International Criminal Court Bill - UK Legislation 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time  3.30 pm Executive Debate on the Scottish Strategy for Victims followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1454 Alex Neil: Hepatitis C Wednesday 24 January 2001 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Committee Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 January 2001 9.30 am Scottish National Party Business 12.15 pm Ministerial Statement followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Stage 1 Debate on the Budget (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1506 David Mundell: Robert Burns and (b) that the Rural Development Committee reports to the Health and Community Care Committee by 2 February 2001 on The Fresh Meat (Beef Controls) (No 2) Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/449) and on the Feeding Stuffs (Scotland) Regulations 2000 (SSI 2000/453)

In moving the motion, I should tell the chamber that it has been agreed by all the main political parties. It provides four and a half hours for the consideration of amendments. The purpose of the timetabling motion is to structure debate and to ensure sufficient time for the later groupings in particular. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the time for consideration of Stage 3 of the Transport (Scotland) Bill be allocated as follows, so that debate on each part of the proceedings, if not previously brought to a conclusion, shall be brought to a conclusion on the expiry of the specified period (calculated from the time when Stage 3 begins)— Group 1 to Group 2 - no later than 30 minutes Group 3 to Group 15 - no later than 1 hour 45 minutes Group 16 to Group 17 - no later than 2 hours 30 minutes Group 18 to Group 22 - no later than 3 hours 30 minutes Group 23 to Group 29 - no later than 4 hours 30 minutes Motion to pass the Bill - no later than 5 hours followed by Stage 3 Debate on the Transport (Scotland) Bill.

As the MSP for Shetland, I welcome the minister's announcement; I know that the MSP for Orkney will welcome it too. When we have the new ships, I look forward to Mr Andy Kerr and his committee arriving on one of them. When I was on the Transport and the Environment Committee, I used to suggest to Andy, Kenny MacAskill and Murray Tosh that they travel north. They should come up on the new ship, and I will meet them at the other end, having flown up earlier in the day. I welcome the minister's announcement of new ships, improved frequency and lower fares. I have a number of questions that I hope will be dealt with in the summing up. Delaying the initiation of the contract until 1 October was the sensible decision. However, I am sure that the minister recognises that some practical issues will have to be resolved. For example, 1 October is in the middle of the livestock shipping season. Will the new arrival time for the ships allow adequate time for the training of new crews? What pressure is the minister applying to ensure that we get sensible decisions on European funding for  port facilities? I know that that is also a concern of my friend and colleague Mr Jamie Stone at Scrabster. The right decisions must be taken on European moneys for causeways in the Western Isles. That applies also to the facilities that the minister is aware of at Kirkwall, Scrabster and Lerwick. I met representatives of Lerwick Port Authority last Friday, and I would like the minister to pick up on the points that they put to me. Not only is there a need for an extension to the quay because the new ships are larger, and not only is there a need for a covered walkway to allow people, especially those with disabilities, to access ships without having to go up lots of stairs, there is also the issue of the moving of the terminal. The package of measures that the port authority wishes to put in place will cost some £3 million. Given the lifeline nature of the service, what is the minister doing to ensure that that package of measures can be put in place and that the new ships can arrive and berth securely in October 2002?

I want to respond to as many points as I can in this short debate. To Kenny MacAskill, I say that remitting the matter back will take us another seven months further down the line. No one who has been involved in the give and take of the issue, to use Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's words, would suggest that the process is perfect, but we have to move on. Tricia Marwick was quite right to point out that change is necessary and that members of all parties should be involved in thinking of ways in which that change can be made. She made a fair point about work load, which was repeated by other members. Work load is the reason why this debate is taking place.

I want to make some progress. The main cause of concern today appears to be the situation with regard to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. I cannot conceive of the circumstances in which two conveners would not be able to talk about their work load. To Alasdair Morgan, I say that for the Parliamentary Bureau to  have to consider what will be the lead committee on an item is not unprecedented. That happens at the moment.

I cannot see why two committees would not be able to work out a sensible working relationship. It is somewhat bizarre to suggest that two committees in this Parliament would spend time conducting an inquiry into exactly the same issue.

No, I want to finish this point first. On work load, it has been suggested—Christine Grahame made a point about this in an intervention—that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's work load is declining considerably. I am sure that Christine—as well as Phil Gallie and others—is aware that three of the nine substantial bills in next year's programme are justice measures. The committee also has its own bill, promoted by Maureen Macmillan, and there is the Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Bill. That work is additional to any other issues that may arise. I cannot conceive that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee—or rather two justice committees—will not be extremely busy.

Let me deal with the question of the size of committees. The logic of Phil Gallie and of my colleague Donald Gorrie is that the Westminster model, in which there are reams of members sitting in the committee rooms, is the correct way of doing things. However, as a former researcher, having walked into those committee rooms to deliver pieces of paper to members, I can say that, when members are attending standing committees to scrutinise legislation, they are also doing their constituency mail. Are we suggesting that we have lots of people all sitting in  a committee room, not paying attention and not doing the work that we want them to do?

There are two ways of looking at the issue. I want that to be taken—

I think that the Deputy Presiding Officer is suggesting that I—

The primary function of a committee is to scrutinise the policies and administration of the Executive. The new arrangements being proposed today will enable committees to pursue a range of other matters besides Executive legislation. The proposals involve change, but however and wherever possible, it seems sensible to take them forward on a consensus for change. A range of options has been explored. The proposals have a wide measure of support, as well as offering the minimum that is required to achieve improvements in critical areas. As I have already pointed out, the system—

I believe that the Parliamentary Bureau's motion, without major disruption to the overall structure and roles of the committees, and without affecting the overall balance, makes a considerable change. The proposals follow careful analysis of where change is necessary. Important points were made by members through the conveners group, chaired by Mr George Reid, which has an important role in this process. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton also made that point about the effects of the proposals when he spoke. This is an evolving process. Careful reform can continue as the Parliament seeks to strengthen and build the committees of our continually evolving institution.

It is important that I intimate that the Parliamentary Bureau proposes that business this afternoon be changed to allow a debate on the draft undertaking by Scottish ministers under section 2(1) of the Highlands and Islands Shipping Services Act 1960. The undertaking deals with northern isles passenger ferry services. Parliamentary approval is urgent so that key deadlines for financing arrangements and applications for shipyard intervention funding can be met. I move, That the Parliament agrees (a) the following revision to the Business Motion agreed on 7 December 2000— Thursday 14 December 2000 after the Debate on Committee Restructuring, replace followed by Executive Debate on Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Bill - UK Legislation with followed by Debate on the Draft Undertaking by the Scottish Ministers under section 2 (1) of the Highlands and Islands Shipping Services Act 1960 (b) the following programme of business—  Wednesday 20 December 2000 9.30 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate on the Transport (Scotland) Bill 2.30 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Debate on the Transport (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1389 Cathy Jamieson: Home and Community Safety (c) that the Local Government Committee reports to the Transport and the Environment Committee by 12 January  2001 on the Financial Assistance for Environmental Purposes (Scotland) Order 2000 (SSI 2000/430) (d) that Stage 1 of the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No. 2) Bill be completed by 31 January 2001 and, (e) that Stage 1 of the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill be completed by 18 January 2001

I am bound to say that the Executive has done what I thought the SNP wanted, which is to create time for the motion that the SNP wants to debate. It is now 9.40 am; the longer that we spend discussing the timing, the less time there is to debate the motion of no confidence and the committee reports. There would have been howls of protest had the Executive not timetabled the no confidence motion that the SNP wanted. We should get on with discussing the committee reports. As Tricia Marwick said, they are important and we must treat them seriously and not waste time on a sterile argument about time. That does a disservice to the committees that Tricia Marwick mentioned. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee report has 56 recommendations. Let us get on and debate them now.

Before moving the motion on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, I should note that it is disappointing that we find ourselves debating a motion that provides the Scottish National Party with an early opportunity to debate its motion of no confidence. It is important to set out what is proposed in the business motion: it allows for the motion of no confidence that was lodged on Friday last week to be debated at the earliest opportunity. It is important that the seriousness of a motion of no confidence is recognised, and that the decision to lodge such a motion is not taken lightly. When proposing this morning's business as set out in the business motion, the Executive took into account the fact that the allegations against Mr Galbraith were linked inextricably to the Scottish Qualifications Authority issue. The points that are likely to made in the debate on the motion of no confidence will no doubt also be made in the main debate on the SQA reports. The time allocated to the SQA debate reflects that. Brian Monteith recognised that there would be a separate debate on a motion of no confidence by withdrawing his amendment to motion S1M-1446, which called for Sam Galbraith's resignation. The Parliament will have the same amount of time to debate the issues as it would have had under the motion agreed to by Parliament last week. The proposed amendment to today's business motion would simply structure the debate in a way that reflects the wishes of those who signed up to the motion of no confidence. I believe that the motion before Parliament is fair and will allow members ample time and opportunity to address issues that are raised by both committee reports. I move, That the Parliament agrees, as an addition to the Business Motion agreed on 7 December 2000: Wednesday 13 December 2000 after the first Parliamentary Bureau Motions, insert followed by Debate on Motion of No Confidence

The four business managers of the main parties agreed to the programme of business, including the timings of the debate on committee restructuring, at the Parliamentary Bureau meeting on Tuesday. Mr Gorrie was made aware of that fact at the Liberal Democrat group meeting on Tuesday night. I am not convinced by the argument that Parliament should extend its public navel-gazing. We should spend more time sorting these matters out carefully. Donald Gorrie has the opportunity to press his request-to-speak button next week. I hope that he will do so, and will speak in the debate. It does not follow from the motion that the Executive or, indeed, the front-bench members of any of the main parties will seek to dominate the debate. Therefore, I hope that Mr Gorrie will withdraw his opposition to the motion, on the basis that I am sure that he will catch the Presiding Officer's eye next week.

Before moving the business motion, I should inform the Parliament that the Executive business that is expected to be taken on Thursday of next week is a debate on a Sewel motion in respect of the tobacco advertising and promotion bill, which will be dealt with at Westminster. The proposed legislation was announced in the Queen's speech yesterday, and will shortly be introduced to Parliament. Details of how the bill affects Scotland will be made available to members in advance of the debate. Unfortunately, I am unable to inform the chamber of the topics that the Scottish National Party has chosen for debate for Thursday next week. I hope that, in future, we will be able to provide information for members as it comes up. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 13 December 2000 9.30 am Time for Reflection - The Reverend Dr. Gordon Murray, Minister, Edinburgh and Forth Methodist Circuit followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Education, Culture and Sport Committee and Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee Debate on SQA Inquiries 2.30 pm Finance Committee Debate on 2001-02 Budget Process Stage 2 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1206 Lord James Douglas-Hamilton: Abercorn Primary School, West Lothian Thursday 14 December 2000 9.30 am Scottish National Party Business followed by Ministerial Statement on the Health Plan followed by Business Motion  2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Debate on Committee Restructuring followed by Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-808 Fergus Ewing: Shinty Wednesday 20 December 2000 9.30 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate on the Transport (Scotland) Bill 2.30 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Debate on the Transport (Scotland) Bill 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business

As the constituency MSP for Shetland, I welcome the opportunity to contribute to today's debate. I would like to add my congratulations to Rhona Brankin on her first speech to the chamber as Deputy Minister for Rural Development. Other members have referred to the visitors in the public gallery. I would like to welcome the chairman and the chief executive of the Shetland Fishermen's Association. We face particular difficulties in Shetland. It has been recognised over the years  that the fishing industry pays close attention to both Westminster and Scottish Parliament debates on relevant matters; I hope that this morning's debate reflects their concerns. I met the Shetland Fishermen's Association on Friday to discuss a range of issues, not least of which was the white fish crisis. On Monday night I was in Whalsay. Whalsay is an island of 1,000 people, all of whom—man, woman and child—are connected to the sea in one way or another. The Parliament will not be surprised to hear that in our discussion about the island in general, the dominant issue was the current situation in the white fish industry. I welcome the minister's commitment to the Shetland box and her announcement on blue whiting and pelagic quotas. Those are helpful points. The current position on stocks and quota remains extremely difficult. It was to some extent mitigated by last week's European Union-Norway negotiations, but that does change the importance—several members have rightly raised this point—of getting the science right, of involving fishermen and of building a consensus on science for sensible change and reform. The SFA policy, which I was able to discuss last week, is in favour of a stock regeneration programme. It could include many of the measures that have already been outlined this morning, such as closed spawning areas including the areas in the Irish sea that, crucially, have been identified by fishermen and scientists; technical conservation measures—square-mesh panels and progress on the thickness of twine—and days at sea, but most important is a decommissioning scheme to take capacity out of the fleet. I cannot think of any other measure that would have a more profound effect on what needs to happen over the coming years. Both Jamie Stone and Jamie McGrigor made a good point about using fishermen's skills as one of the options in an integrated package of measures to investigate the most effective methods of achieving change. Shetland has been at the forefront of thinking on conservation. The approach—inshore fisheries management and the promotion of technical methods of conservation—needs to become mainstream thinking, not just in Scotland but around Europe. However, the financial impact on the industry will be great. In my view, an integrated five-year programme that ties the conservation measures that I have mentioned to financial assistance, so that there is a sustainable fishery and a sustainable fishing industry, is what the industry and the Government must develop together over the coming weeks and years. The figures for Shetland are worrying. The SFA  gave me an economic analysis of the white fish fleet for the past three years. It shows, for example, that for 87 ft boats, crew share, which is the amount of money the crew take home, has fallen by 36 per cent and gross earnings are falling while running expenses are increasing. Less money is available for crew share and loan servicing and, if the trends continue, boats will simply be unable to service their loan repayments. I met skippers last Friday, one of whom illustrated the situation by saying that his boat's gross for the previous fortnight was down £20,000 and the expenses for the same period were £14,000, of which marine diesel was £7,000. The situation is extremely difficult. I will conclude with the thought that it is important, as others have rightly mentioned, that the Minister for Rural Development and the Executive take a strong case to Brussels next week and fight for the industry. However, we need to think beyond next week. We need to think into the next year and the next five years and come up with a realistic, radical and strategic five-year plan for the future of the industry that achieves not only a sustainable fishery, but a sustainable future for fishermen.

Before I move the business motion, I would like to intimate that it is the intention to take Parliamentary Bureau motions on Wednesday 6 December at 2:30—immediately after time for reflection. I move, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 6 December 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Stage 3 Debate on the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1286 Tommy Sheridan: Glasgow Light Rail Scheme Thursday 7 December 2000 9.30 am Ministerial Statement on Local Government Settlement followed by Executive Debate on Sea Fisheries followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on Development of a National Alcohol Misuse Strategy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1363 Scott Barrie: Let's Keep It Safe Wednesday 13 December 2000 9.30 am Time for Reflection followed by Education, Culture and Sport Committee and Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee Debate on SQA Inquiries 2.30 pm Finance Committee Debate on 2001-02 Budget Process Stage 2 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions  5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1206 Lord James Douglas-Hamilton: Abercorn Primary School West Lothian Thursday 14 December 2000 9.30 am Scottish National Party Business followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business

I move motion S1M-1408 formally.

Sorry, I assumed that members knew what it said. I move, That the Parliament agrees that Rule 12.3.3 of the standing orders be suspended from 12:30 pm until 2:30 pm on Thursday 30 November to allow the Education, Culture and Sport Committee to meet.

I am grateful to Murray Tosh and to the Procedures Committee for the way in which they have set out their reports. He fairly reflected on the work that the committee's staff have done, and I also pay tribute to that. The Executive fully supports the work of the Procedures Committee in its consideration of the latest proposed changes to standing orders, which form an essential framework within which the Parliament can function and carry out its day-to-day business. The committee's report on private legislation is a thorough, sensible piece of work. I am pleased to offer the Executive's support for the approach that the committee proposes. The second report essentially recommends a Parliament-led system, operating through standing orders and guidance. The Executive would therefore not be directly involved in the private bill procedure, although it would be able to give guidance in the same way as would any other interested party. The report also proposes that the new procedures retain the essential elements of the pre-devolution arrangements for dealing with Scottish private legislation, as set out in the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act 1936, while making appropriate modifications to bring those arrangements up to date and to reflect procedures in the Scottish Parliament. It is agreed among all parties that the approach set out in the Procedures Committee's report is the right way forward, and that it will ensure that a new private bill procedure is up and running as quickly as possible. I congratulate the committee and its officials on the considerable work that clearly went into the report, on a detailed area of policy. I will pick up a point that Murray Tosh made on the second report, which calls upon the Scottish Executive to consider whether the legal aid scheme should be extended to cover legal representation at private bill committee inquiries.  We will consider that, and will write to the committee in due course, when we have reached a decision. I can give no assurance that it will be possible or appropriate to extend the legal aid scheme in the way proposed, but I note Murray Tosh's point that that area must be kept under review. The Procedures Committee has also considered a proposed change that the Subordinate Legislation Committee wishes to make to its remit. The Subordinate Legislation Committee wants to be able to consider whether proposed delegated powers that do not take the form of order-making powers ought to take that approach. It is at present unable to do so, strictly speaking. The Executive sees the logic in the change that the Subordinate Legislation Committee has suggested, and we are content with the terms of the proposed amendment. As I said, the Executive commends the work carried out by the Procedures Committee and is happy to support its recommendations. We are particularly pleased with the co-operation over many of the details. I understand that this is only the first tranche of around 30 procedural issues to be considered by the Procedures Committee over the next few months. As always, the Executive is ready to assist the work of the committee. I look forward to working with Murray Tosh and his colleagues.

I acknowledge the work that has been undertaken by the convener and members of the Procedures Committee in producing such a concise and well-balanced report, which has been presented to the Parliament this morning by Murray Tosh. The Executive welcomes the committee's keen interest in the Executive's handling and treatment of parliamentary questions. It responded to the Procedures Committee on 1 November, broadly endorsing the recommendations that are contained in its report. No one disputes the right of members to ask questions of the Executive, but that must be viewed in the context of what is both reasonable and appropriate. The Executive welcomes the committee's recognition that the monthly average of parliamentary questions that are lodged is very high. Indeed, since the committee produced its report, there has been no significant reduction in the volume of those questions. The Executive is now dealing with around six times more questions than would have been asked of Scottish ministers prior to devolution, and our latest audit of parliamentary questions, which was published on 1 November, shows that, despite that large increase, the percentage of questions that are answered on time rose from 48 per cent in the period that was covered by the previous audit to 54 per cent in the current audit. The Executive therefore welcomes the committee's recommendation of the importance of members both taking responsibility for the quality, quantity and relevance of the questions that they lodge and taking into account the availability of other sources of information. I welcome the points that Murray Tosh has just made in that context. We endorse the committee's view that the Parliament must ensure that the risk of abuse of the parliamentary questions system is avoided and that all appropriate methods of obtaining information are utilised properly. The Executive supports the objectives set out in the proposed agreement, namely, "to assist everyone responsible for parliamentary questions to match resources to demand in answering questions that  are lodged; to seek demonstrable improvements in the turnaround time for answering questions; and to monitor the number of questions that are lodged". Although we do not deny that the large volume of questions has stretched our resources, we have taken—and are taking—steps to improve the position. In particular, we have increased staffing levels within the parliamentary branch and have introduced new monitoring arrangements. Furthermore, we are in the final stages of developing a new electronic system which we expect will prove to be a useful management tool.

Mr Home Robertson makes my previous point for me. The electronic tracking system—which I can assure him has no evil intent—is designed to ensure that such situations will not arise and that the current system will be greatly improved. The Executive is happy to work constructively with the parliamentary authorities. As Murray Tosh has mentioned, at its meeting on 21 November, the Procedures Committee approved a paper setting out issues to be followed up in its forward work programme. I am pleased to say that officials from both sides have met to discuss how best to progress these matters. I am pleased to note that there has already been progress on the recommendations set out in paragraph (d) of today's motion. In its response, the Executive has proposed that the date of the holding reply should be shown instead of the date of lodging and I understand that the Procedures Committee took a similar view at its meeting on 21 November. The Executive looks forward to participating in the proposed seminars and, with the Scottish Parliament information centre, we are currently developing ways in which the Executive's staff directory can best be made electronically available to MSPs. Some other issues have been identified for further consideration, of which I might usefully mention the proposal to explore options for some limitation of questions during recess. Although we are not suggesting that questions during recess  should be barred altogether, we think that, in the light of the high volume of questions during holiday periods, there is merit in considering whether and how they can be kept to more manageable levels at that time. Some changes to the standing orders might be necessary if agreement can be reached, and we therefore suggest that the committee consider the issue at an early date. The Executive is happy to support the committee's recommendations contained in the report and particularly welcomes the recommendation that consensus between Parliament and the Executive is the proper way forward on this matter. As a result, the Executive stands ready to assist the Procedures Committee in its further consideration of those recommendations.

It is important to note that the Conservatives have yet to intimate their business for next Thursday. It would help if the bureau could hear of that business by close of play tonight, because that would allow it to be published in tomorrow's business bulletin. I move, That the Parliament agrees (a) the following revision to the Business Motion on 16 November 2000: Thursday 23 November 2000 after Stage 1 Debate on the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill, delete all for that day and insert:  followed by Financial Resolution in respect of the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1218 Margaret Jamieson: Tinnitus  2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Decision Time (b) the following programme of business: Wednesday 29 November 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Oath Taking followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Executive Debate on Domestic Abuse followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1189 Mr Adam Ingram: Mental Health Carers Thursday 30 November 2000 9.30 am Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on the Framework for Economic Development in Scotland followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1347 Mr Mike Rumbles: Access to NHS Dental Services in Grampian Wednesday 6 December 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Stage 3 Debate on the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1286 Tommy Sheridan: Glasgow Light Rail Scheme Thursday 7 December 2000 9.30 am Ministerial Statement followed by Executive Debate on Sea Fisheries followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on Development of a National Alcohol Misuse Strategy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions  5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and, (c) that the Equal Opportunities Committee reports to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee by 11 December 2000 on the Advice and Assistance (Assistance by Way of Representation) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2001 (SSI 2001/draft).

Before moving the business motion, I inform members that the Scottish National Party has indicated that its topics for the morning of Thursday 16 November are a debate on community care, followed by a debate on the housing stock transfer. The Executive business on the afternoon of Thursday 16 November will be a debate on the implications for the Scottish Executive of the pre-budget statement by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. I move, That the Parliament agrees (a)  the following programme of business— Wednesday 15 November 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Executive Debate on Social Justice followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1236 Ms Sandra White: Glasgow and West Coast of Scotland Rail Infrastructure Thursday 16 November 2000 9.30 am Scottish National Party Business followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Executive Debate on Implications of the Chancellor's Pre-budget Statement for the Scottish Executive followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S1M-1273 Mr Duncan McNeil: Compensation for Mesothelioma Sufferers Wednesday 22 November 2000 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Executive Debate on Domestic Abuse followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business Thursday 23 November 2000 9.30 am Committee Business followed by Stage 1 Debate on the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion 2.30 pm Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.30 pm Continuation of Stage 1 Debate on the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and (b) that the Transport and the Environment Committee reports to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee by 24 November 2000 on The draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) (No. 2) Order 2000; and (c) that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and the Rural Affairs Committee report to the Transport and the Environment Committee by 24 November 2000 on The draft Scotland Act 1998 (Cross-Border Public Authorities) (Adaptation of Functions etc.) (No. 2) Order 2000.  Motion agreed to.

Does Mr Davidson agree that what has come out of the Conservative party conference this week has been Euro-sceptic all the way down the line, including the shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer's speech on Tuesday? Their message has been: "We don't want to be part of Europe and we will do what we want." The Conservatives want to get out of Europe.

I thank Tricia Marwick for that warm welcome. This is an important debate; it is right that MSPs should raise issues that are so important to all parts of Scotland and the Scottish economy.  However, it is also right that MSPs should respect the fact that only the Westminster Parliament has the right to change UK tax policies. Murray Tosh's interesting speech highlighted not so much his link with the SNP on the issue, as the fact that the Scottish Tories have no MPs. They are not keen for the matter to be debated at Westminster because they have no members there. To be frank, after listening to Malcolm Rifkind on the radio this morning, I do not think that they will have any MPs after the next general election either. Murray Tosh and Kenny MacAskill also had a veritable love-in for a minute or two. The Tory party's transport policy changes every day according to which bus goes past. Although Annabel Goldie said that it was all right to cut taxes, she missed the point that was made by so many members from rural, island and remote areas. Jamie Stone, Fergus Ewing and others rightly highlighted the fact that in such areas fuel can cost 8p to 15p more per litre than the average price in Scotland. Annabel Goldie and the other Tories clearly do not give a damn about that—we will hold them to account for that attitude at the next election.

No. Jamie Stone said rightly that derogations have merit and should be considered properly and pursued. Fergus Ewing could have been more accommodating on that point.

Murray Tosh's remarks seem to be constructive until we consider the Tory attitude to Europe. Every day this week, we have seen on our television screens a Tory party that hates Europe and that would do anything to get out of Europe. The Tory party's main funder—who is to spend £20 million on the party's next general election campaign—spent money on the recent referendum in Denmark. I will take no lectures from the Tory party about Europe. In the 1993 budget, Lord Lamont of Lerwick increased fuel duty by 10 per cent, established the fuel duty escalator and increased fuel prices by a further 3 per cent above inflation—three more taxes for the consumer. That followed the Tories' election campaign in which they said, "No new taxes." We had a lot of new taxes—22 in all.  What about today's Tories?

No, I will come to Annabel Goldie in a moment. What of William Hague's Tory party—or, after the public confessional on Tuesday, I should say Michael Portillo's Tories—which, I presume, the Tory group in the Scottish Parliament signs up to? William Hague's Tories have the attention span and consistency of a tabloid news editor. The story of the day becomes the Tory policy of the day. To propose a cut in duty after last month's protests is not the action of a responsible party, in terms either of energy policy or fiscal policy—the phrase "blithering nonsense" comes to mind. William Hague's Tories are nothing but knee-jerk opportunists. As for the nationalists, how many policies do they have? I have counted their policies and today we heard about two more. Let us go through them all. "Paying for Scotland's Future" was one policy. There was no reference to the matter in the party's 1999 manifesto, "On to independence". That makes two policies. We heard John Swinney's policy on 10 July. That makes three. The party suggested a freeze on duty in a parliamentary motion. That makes four. Alex Neil suggested another 20 per cent cut. That makes five. Where is Fergus Ewing? There here is. His proposal made it six policies. Now—to top it all—Kenny MacAskill's motion represents policy number seven. We have heard seven fuel policies from the SNP. On top of that, we heard great protestations of gloom from the SNP on the radio this morning, when it criticised this debate in the Scottish Parliament. It said that the matter should undoubtedly be debated here and nowhere but here. However, the SNP is sending nobody to Westminster. That party's people are not down there, arguing where it matters. The SNP does not care about Westminster. It has given up on Westminster, but Westminster is where it matters. That is why the Liberal Democrats and Labour send people to Westminster to argue the Scottish case. The SNP is not standing up for Scotland—it has given up on Scotland in that chamber. As George Lyon rightly pointed out, 50 per cent of the SNP's Opposition time is spent on reserved matters. Duncan Hamilton always attacks George Lyon. What Duncan cannot accept is that George beat him and will beat him again and again.

No. I am just finishing. Liberal Democrats would use investment to support public transport and to support targeted measures for rural and island Scotland. The  Liberal Democrat MPs at Westminster have voted against every fuel rise since Norrie Lamont's budget. We have consistently argued for measures to deal with the problem. It is time for the taxpayer and the motorist to get a fair deal. The policies on investment in public transport and targeted measures for our rural areas will clear the way for that.

I have nothing to add.

I thank you for that pointed remark, Presiding Officer. Today sees the end of a long saga of attempts to make a minor amendment to an act and to remove an unnecessary source of friction between shellfish growers and creel fishermen. As might be expected, I would like to place on record my thanks to many people. First and foremost, I thank Doug McLeod of the Association of Scottish Shellfish Growers, who worked long and hard to achieve what I hope we will achieve today. Doug McLeod first took the matter to Westminster, where, with the help of my colleague Jim Wallace in the House of Commons and Lord MacKay of Ardbrecknish in the House of Lords, a bill very similar to the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Amendment (Scotland) Bill was introduced. Were it not for the actions of a maverick MP, that bill would have been passed successfully. Alas, that single MP blocked the bill, which fell. I am far too polite to remember of which party he was a member. Doug McLeod saw the establishment of the Scottish Parliament as a chance to try again. He was seeking help before the Queen had made her trip north to open the Parliament. I hope that the chamber will be happy to offer him that help today. Things started to move, and the list of people whom I must thank includes the MSPs from all parties who supported the bill's proposals. The bill is an excellent example of MSPs working together on a small but important measure for an important Scottish industry. I also wish to place on record my thanks to the many clerks who provided guidance on the wording of the bill and on procedural matters. I know that my parliamentary assistant is particularly grateful for the timely and tactful reminder from the clerks of the need to submit a motion for today's debate.  The lead committee for the bill was the Rural Affairs Committee and I am grateful to Alex Johnstone and his colleagues for the work that they did at stages 1 and 2, to consider the bill and to speed it on its way, particularly in the context of the difficult times that they faced when assessing more controversial bills. I also thank the Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs and the Executive for their constructive support in progressing the bill, and the many organisations that responded to the Rural Affairs Committee's consultation with supportive and constructive comments. There is not much to be said about so short a bill, so I will indeed be brief. The bill has one simple aim: to remove an unnecessary source of conflict between shellfish farmers and creel fishermen. The farming of quality shellfish already provides employment in coastal areas of the Highlands and Islands and has the potential to create further jobs. Such farming is environmentally friendly and, as demand outstrips supply from the wild, it has an important role to play. It is unfortunate that, under the act that I seek to amend, a shellfish farmer who seeks a several order to give him control over his stock on an area of the sea bed can gain that control only at the expense of creel fishermen. The fishermen lose traditional fishing grounds, despite the fact that their operations do not harm the farmer's shellfish and may even help the farmer by removing predators. My short bill provides the means by which the source of conflict is removed, and should allow farmers and fishermen to live in harmony. My only regret is that the Liberal Democrat group has yet to discuss the bill, so I have no idea which way it will vote. However, I hope that the rest of the Parliament will recognise that the bill makes a difference on an issue that is important to a small group of people and to an important Scottish industry. I ask members to give the bill their full support. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Amendment (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I thank Jamie McGrigor for the comments at the start of his speech, but my reaction to his amendment is broadly as Richard Lochhead and Elaine Murray have described. There are three objections to the amendment. First, I am not completely convinced by the argument, that the aims of the amendment are already fully dealt with by the word "knowingly" in the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967. Secondly, the argument is that with the amendment the wording would be repetitive—that is unimportant. The third objection is important: it is that the amendment inadvertently—and I believe that it is inadvertent, because I do not think that Mr McGrigor has any other purpose in moving the amendment—weakens a subsection of the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967. In his opening remarks Mr McGrigor made a point about legal advice. As is always the case, the legal advice cuts both ways. The existing act already allows fishing with nets when "so used as not to disturb or injure in any manner shellfish". My bill adds another subsection for creels or whatever, and uses exactly the same phrase: "so used as not to disturb or injure in any manner shellfish". Jamie McGrigor's amendment was drafted to add the concept of intention to cause damage so that a fisherman could not be blamed if his creels, landing on the seabed, accidentally damaged a scallop. The aim of the amendment is worthy, although it is arguable whether it is needed. If the word "intended" is added to the new subsection in my bill, it will be argued that the omission of "intended" from the subsection dealing with nets implies that intention is specifically  excluded from that subsection. A fisherman whose net accidentally drops and damages a scallop could be given that legal interpretation. Jamie McGrigor's well-meaning amendment to protect creel fishermen from a possible, but unlikely, interpretation of the wording of the bill inadvertently leaves net fishermen more vulnerable than they were before. For that reason I ask him to consider withdrawing his amendment. If he decides to put it to a vote, I ask members to oppose the amendment. I do so with some regret, because I believe that the amendment is constructive in motivation, but I regret that what is proposed is unhelpful and will cause a problem while trying to solve what is probably an imaginary problem.

I welcome the minister's statement. I also welcome Bruce Crawford to his new position—I notice that he spent even more money than Kenny MacAskill normally does in a speech on transport. I welcome the increased allocation for the public transport fund. Will the minister clarify the process through which projects such as the Glasgow crossrail and the Borders railway must go to have a chance of success? I also welcome the additional resources for local authority funding of road maintenance. How does the minister plan to allocate those additional moneys, given the technical nature of the announcement that she made in her statement? Finally, I echo Murray Tosh's welcome of the announcement on concessionary fares. However, will the minister address the issue of partially sighted people from the islands who have advocated and argued for particular assistance with air travel as an alternative? Furthermore, as the minister mentioned short sea coastal shipping she will not be surprised if I ask about long sea coastal shipping and whether there will be an announcement shortly—more quickly than shortly—on the northern isles service to Orkney and Shetland.

I am always grateful that Kenny MacAskill does not have to fly home to his constituency—the whining would carry on long after the plane engines had been switched off. The Liberal Democrats very much support the Transport (Scotland) Bill, which is a further step towards the Scottish Executive's goals of tackling social inclusion and meeting environmental responsibilities. Once again, we have heard from the SNP no credible alternative to the measures that are outlined in the bill. There is a responsibility on an Opposition—which, apparently, calls itself responsible—to present alternatives. It would help, in my humble view, if we could hear some alternatives so that we could have a serious transport debate, rather than what we have just heard. The Liberal Democrats support the congestion charging proposals—as did the SNP in its manifesto, I seem to recollect—as long as the revenue is hypothecated and ring-fenced to be put back into public transport. As the Minister for Transport and the Environment said, we will have a lively discussion on workplace parking. As David Begg, the chairman of the Commission for Integrated Transport, illustrated at a conference that I  attended, there are concerns that that measure will simply raise revenue but not deal with the specific problems of congestion. I support the calls that have been made by the Transport and the Environment Committee to see specific supporting evidence for that. The other important aspect of congestion charging relates to the concerns—which were expressed by commentators during a transport debate on the radio last night—about how, given the past week's fuel crisis, local authorities will be able to take forward that agenda in the light of public concern. Murray Tosh's point on transparency is perfectly fair. There is a clear need to illustrate transparency in local government spending on transport, because the public need to be convinced that there will be clear, identifiable gains from the legislative proposals. I hope that that point will be taken up at stage 2. It is important that the carrot comes before the stick in the form of the hypothecation of funds to provide improvements to public transport. That is the point that I was trying to make when I intervened on Mr Tosh. The minister referred to resources—resources must be considered when we hear next week's statement from the Minister for Finance and the consequential transport announcements. Lord Macdonald, writing in The Parliamentary Monitor this month, said, in the context of his responsibilities for UK transport planning: "For the first time the 10-year plan offers the framework required for the long term development and delivering of big projects. It anticipates growing public demand for better quality and more choice in transport." Two things strike me about that. First, how much will Scotland see of the spending on transport? We will hear about that next week. Secondly, there is a 10-year plan. A framework for long-term development is important in the overall context of transport planning and the Transport and the Environment Committee picked up on that in its report. The committee stated: "The majority of witnesses welcomed the Bill and supported its intent, but many felt in summary . . . in their written submission that it 'does not go far enough and does not make the necessary links with other aspects of policy'". There are important issues about integration and the framework, which need to be taken further at stage 2. In her opening remarks, the minister mentioned the overall strategy and approach of the Scottish Executive—Parliament will hear a spending statement next week. How that fits into the overall approach that will be taken is important and the clarification that was given to Kenny MacAskill during his speech was important. The way in which those aspects all fit together needs  to be worked on further. The Transport (Scotland) Bill must be strong on integration, with quantifiable target time scales and estimates of the resources that will be needed to meet the goals. I hope that that will be addressed in future statements. Links to environmental goals are needed—goals such as cutting CO 2 emissions, setting targets for modal shift and increasing public transport use, and setting targets to cut congestion, as specified in the Road Traffic Reduction (National Targets) Act 1998. If local authorities are to take the lead, as the bill advocates, the Executive should help that process by setting targets that are encapsulated in a more detailed framework. The Transport and the Environment Committee said that it "would welcome a more explicit explanation from the Executive of national and local priorities, how these priorities are determined and the Executive's role in delivering them." That would be helpful clarification as the debate proceeds. UK traffic levels are forecast to rise by 38 per cent between 1996 and 2016. In that context, the do-nothing option that is advocated by some members is not tenable. The position that the Executive has taken on change must be maintained, and the investment that is needed to support that must be provided. Further statistics—from the 2000 edition of Scottish Transport Statistics— illustrate the changes that have occurred over the past eight years. The number of journeys by car has increased by 63 per cent and the number of journeys by bus has decreased by 28 per cent. There has also been a decrease in cycling and walking. There is much to be done, and few could argue that it is desirable to avoid changing transport policy to solve these problems. I remain concerned about the lack of coherence in the environmental proposals. The frustration that people in the UK have shown over fuel prices in the past week is understandable, but politicians cannot walk away from the environmental impacts of policy; they should consider carefully how they can best meet their international obligations. Although environmental measures are hard to sell, they must be approached and considered carefully. In that context, I hope that the minister will, in her winding-up speech, be able to give further advice about the Scottish Executive's comprehensive environmental strategy, which is not yet at the stage of public consultation. The Sunday Herald recently reported that a document on waste, energy and travel, which is crucial to today's debate, has yet to be published. Some clarification of when that will be published would help, as such a document must be integrated with the overall approach that is being taken.  Giving people choice through investment in public transport must be the important theme and rail should be a central part of the overall approach. Many rail groups and others who have an interest in public transport have lobbied hard on the back of the July comprehensive spending review statement. They have provided illustrations of the improvements that could be made throughout Scotland that would give people a choice and provide opportunities to use different forms of transport. The Glasgow crossrail scheme has been mentioned and there is an unanswerable case for the Borders rail link.

I accept Euan Robson's points about the need for a Borders rail link, its integration with other forms of transport and how that should be tackled by the different local authorities in the areas through which the railway would go. There is also a difficulty with integration in that the strategic rail authority and its role in Scotland must be part of the process. We understand that Railtrack is to make an announcement tomorrow. Such things must be part of the overall approach that is taken. In that context, how will the minister ensure that Scottish needs are taken into account in decision making? The challenges that are posed by rural Scotland's transport needs must be taken up. Those needs are clearly different from those of the urban areas that we have talked about this morning. Many members talked in yesterday's debate about rural transport problems and the need to own a car in rural areas. I quote Professor Mark Shucksmith from the University of Aberdeen: "There is a fundamental contradiction at the heart of government's policies when seen in a rural context, as policies intended to reduce car ownership and use exacerbate social exclusion, and intensify barriers to employment in particular. More imaginative means of overcoming transport barriers are needed." Arguably, the Highlands and Islands transport  authority is that imaginative approach. However, in some parts of the Highlands and Islands establishing an organisation in Inverness will not be seen as appropriate. A balance needs to be struck between the local delivery of services and a central organisation. In summary, the bill fulfils many of the policies that the Liberal Democrats set out in our manifesto last year and makes a welcome contribution to addressing some of the immediate problems that face Scotland's transport system. In particular, the bill realises my party's policies on the creation of a first-class travel information service for Scottish public transport—that is particularly important—and on powers for councils. However, the bill relies on the good will and willingness of local authorities. It provides an extra set of tools, but it is vital that the Executive provides additional resources to allow the authorities to get on with it. Congestion charging should be considered only as a means of providing genuinely additional resources and will be acceptable only if the public see tangible improvements put in place first.

I take Murray Tosh's point. However, will not investment in public transport create the alternatives for the groups that he has mentioned? That is the issue. The 6 or 7 per cent cut in vehicle journeys into Edinburgh would partly be achieved through increased spending on public transport alternatives.

I welcome the First Minister's statement, particularly on the progress made in ensuring that fuel for emergency services and accident and emergency provision is available. That must be a priority. The First Minister pointed out the health service risks that are now prevalent in Scotland—that is sobering information, which surely no one will welcome. In the light of what the chamber has heard today, those who do not argue for a cessation of action are being thoroughly irresponsible. The Scottish Executive's responsibility is the safe and secure delivery of the nation's public services. That must be of paramount importance. Energy policy is a reserved matter, yet despite the constant lobbying, the debate and indeed the political heat in the Parliament over the past year and a half, we have witnessed truly worrying scenes on our television screens over the past few days. Why are haulage firms, farmers and self-employed people considered to be so in tune with public feelings? Why do people resort to direct action in the form of slow-moving convoys of vehicles, as we saw outside the chamber less than an hour ago?

I will not even dignify that pathetic question with a response. If Mr Fergus Ewing's definition of political virility is rushing round  Scotland to every demonstration, he can have it. Why is it that, barely a week after condemning the French for stopping British holidaymakers and trucks crossing the channel, many now hold up the French model as the way to get the Government to change its policy? There are concerns that air services might be disrupted throughout Scotland, and I seek assurances, particularly for those who are moving from islands for medical services in hospitals in Aberdeen and Inverness, that that will not happen. There should be infrastructure planning for such emergencies; for example, Heathrow and Gatwick airports have private pipeline facilities for aviation fuel. What thought has been given to the position of Scottish airports?

The answer to that question is, what is Andrew Wilson's policy? Does he follow Alex Neil's policy of a 20 per cent cut in the fuel duty, or John Swinney's policy? We should have fewer sanctimonious lectures from the SNP on these matters. Scotland is now facing considerable problems. Some of the fuel shortages have undoubtedly been created by panic buying over the past couple of days.

Do SNP members mind if I make a few points? They all seem very keen to interrupt. The Government cannot be surprised by the frustration felt by people and businesses. Opposition parties, professional lobbying bodies such as motoring organisations and other representative bodies have all argued against successive rises in fuel prices, given the cost to the consumer and to industry throughout the UK. OPEC wields powers that put world demand and supply in a frighteningly small collection of rich hands. Oil companies are resistant to reducing prices. When a barrel of Brent crude fell to $10, I do not remember the petrol price in Shetland falling at all. Why have the oil companies played a mysterious game in supplying fuel in Scotland and the rest of the UK? These organisations are multinational and it was not edifying to see the British Prime Minister effectively phoning around  corporate chiefs to plead for progress in supplying fuel. Such organisations have little regard for national Governments or individuals in our communities, and their actions over the past few days have been pretty questionable. Successive Governments not only have turned a deaf ear to the growing clamour over fuel prices, but have justified higher fuel prices as a mechanism to reduce vehicle congestion on the nation's roads and as helping the nation's contribution to meeting international standards on emissions—fuel prices are higher because it is the right environmental thing to do. The Liberal Democrats have consistently argued for investment in public transport and alternative measures for rural Scotland. The Scottish Parliament has rightly raised the profile of such issues and tomorrow we will debate the Transport (Scotland) Bill, which will begin the process of putting policy initiatives into legislation to tackle congestion. As he has just lucidly explained, Mr McLetchie opposes that particular policy. Rural Scotland, where vehicles are used by mums taking their kids to school or by fish-processing companies taking whiting to market, has not seen investment in desperately needed alternatives. There must be more such investment than in the past. As the mantra now goes, the car is not a luxury but a necessity, and I welcome the Scottish Executive's recognition of that.

Mr McLetchie will be interested to know that that is not the Liberal Democrats' policy position. I will tell him what our position is, so that he is quite clear on the matter. The Liberal Democrats propose to freeze the level of fuel duty in real terms for the next five years. Furthermore, we propose that any extra VAT revenues that the Government achieves from rises in fuel prices should be ring-fenced for public transport. The Liberal Democrats are concerned about congestion in our cities and helping road hauliers in their current situation.

I want to make some progress. In many parts of rural Scotland, petrol is 10p to 15p higher than in Edinburgh and Glasgow. That situation is not all down to distribution costs. Such arguments, put forward by successive Westminster Governments for higher fuel prices, are one thing; however, what has really annoyed people and has illustrated the frustration felt across the whole country is the conversion behind  that justification. People are now told that fuel price revenues are needed to create a stable economy, to invest in public services and to build new schools and hospitals. Arguably, the Prime Minister's statement on television last night was the first straight answer that people have had on that issue. He confirmed that rising fuel prices were a revenue-raising measure for the Treasury. Therefore, the Westminster Government has benefited from the windfall, as have all along the supply chain. However, Government income rises through VAT receipts as prices rise. City analysts put the windfall at £600 million in the current year. The budget red book forecasts North sea oil receipts for 2000-01 at £4.3 billion—£1.8 billion higher than the previous year. That estimate was based on the Government's projection of $22 a barrel, while $33 a barrel will mean a further £2 billion windfall for the Government. I recognise that prices can change.

On the contrary, individual MPs from Scotland would have control over those issues if they were to go down to Westminster to argue for them. However, the SNP's record on such matters is not terribly wonderful.

No. It has been stated that any measures to aid the haulage industry, freeze tax on fuel or provide rebates for all essential users would devastate public finances, but that is clearly not so. The Government could implement price stabilising mechanisms, but the right occasion on which to do so would be the budget. Liberal Democrats argue for a freeze on the tax on fuel, aid for the haulage industry and rebates for essential users, particularly those in rural areas. The argument is about carrot and stick, but there has been too much stick and, as yet, not enough carrot. It is time that the Government redressed that balance. Through their frustration, the people are sending a clear message to the Westminster Government. People are concerned about ever-increasing fuel  costs without alternatives being in place. The Government should use the autumn statement to target its financial windfall on transport spending—on essential users and those in rural Scotland, on the car and on the truck. However, people should win that argument in Parliament, not by disrupting both essential public services and basic services for all Scotland's industries. Using democracy is ultimately the way in which the argument for change in Government policy will be won.

In Mr McLetchie's earlier point on the money that the Treasury takes from motorists in Scotland, was he arguing that the money should be ring-fenced for transport services?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to name the preferred bidder for the northern isles ferry services and when a formal contract is to be issued. (S1O-2159)

In passing, I would like to welcome to the visitors' gallery today the convener of Shetland Islands Council, who has a not inconsiderable interest in this issue. Does the minister accept that there is deep concern in the northern isles over the delay in awarding this contract, and particularly among ferry staff, who at this time are uncertain about the future of their positions? Does she also accept that, if the contract is awarded from this time of year in 2002, it will lead to difficulties for a smooth transition, not least because this is the middle of the livestock season and because of the larger number of fish and salmon exports that occur at this time of year? When can we expect to hear a decision on this important matter?

In the context of the comments that he has made about the marking system, does the minister acknowledge that, when pupils are presented for exams next year, there will be more intermediate courses and advanced highers to mark? What assurances can he give that the system will improve and be able to cope with the increase in the number of courses  that will have to be marked next year?

To ask the First Minister what representations the Scottish Executive has made to encourage a speedy resolution to the dispute between P & O Scottish Ferries and the shipping officers' union, the National Union of Marine, Aviation and Shipping Transport Officers, in order to prevent industrial action disrupting the lifeline ferry services to Orkney and Shetland. (S1F-479)

I welcome the progress that is being made on the matter and I hope that there will be no disruption. Does the Deputy First Minister accept the importance of lifeline services and the Executive's commitment to supporting them financially? Given the importance of the services to the tourism industry and the fact that it is now the start of the school holidays, will he ensure that no action is taken that will disrupt those services?

I can assure Mike Rumbles that I am here. I am present. I also hope that, in future, the chamber will obey the Rumbles doctrine, "Thou shalt always be present to move thine amendments." I have therefore referred the British Airways service between Shetland and Edinburgh to the Standards Committee. In moving amendment 40, I want to refer to the wider context of fishing interests and marine national parks. When the Transport and the Environment Committee took evidence on that particular proposal, it was clear particularly from Scottish Natural Heritage, as the Government's adviser on the matter, that marine national parks were somewhat of an afterthought. They were not proposed in the first stages of consultation and members were aware that it was felt that they should be added at a later stage. However, having read the stage 2 debate, I feel that there is still a need to tighten up the measure for fishing interests, which is what my amendment seeks to do. As Murray Tosh has pointed out, there is concern about the scope of the bill's measures in the future. Although there might be considerable faith in the present ministers, no one knows who will follow. As a result, we must ensure that section 29 is appropriately tightened. One of the organisations that have provided copious evidence in support of marine national parks has said that objectives for management of our best marine areas should include matters such as "the use of zoning to deliver a different balance of objectives in different areas . . . promotion of economic development compatible with sustainable management of sensitive and valuable natural resources . . . the need for active management and proactive intervention to ensure habitat protection"  and "the judicious use of controls and incentives to support duties placed upon managers and users". Those four points illustrate the bill's need for full and adequate consultation with fishing interests if and when a marine national park is considered. The amendment simply ensures that the consultation process must always include consultation with representatives of fishermen who could fish in a potential marine national park. Having reread the Official Report of the evidence given by the minister at stage 2, I welcome his assurance "to strengthen the consultation and make very sure that all the key fishing interests were appropriately involved before moving to a designation proposal".—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs Committee , 19 June 2000; c 1008.] In that light, it is important that, having discussed the issue with fishing representatives such as the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, we ensure adequate coverage in the bill and that the measure is enshrined in the legislation. In that spirit, I move amendment 40.

Yes.  Amendment 40 agreed to.

To ask the First Minister what progress was made at the meeting of the Fisheries Council in Luxembourg on 16 June 2000. (S1F-433)

I welcome the progress made by the fisheries minister at the council. Will the acting First Minister confirm that the Scottish Executive will support the Scottish Fishermen's Federation's zonal management proposals, as a constructive proposal for fisheries, rather than the crude percentage cuts proposed by the Commission last week? Will he also confirm that the Executive is doing all that it can to obtain the agreement of the Norwegian Government to the introduction of square-mesh panels in whitefish trawls to protect the large number of immature haddock in the North sea? Will he also confirm that the fisheries minister will be able to make a statement to the chamber on those matters?

Will the fisheries minister make a statement?

I notice from the daily bulletin that the amendment in the name of Brian Monteith talks about patients rather than parents. That may be a mistake, although I imagine the whole Tory group will agree with me that it is time that he spent more time in the "institutions" he mentioned earlier. I express a personal interest in child care. As a councillor, I spent some considerable time arguing at local government level for the expansion of nursery education, long before it became a glint in Michael Forsyth's eye. We had some success in that in Shetland, as did Mr Peacock and Mr Stone in the Highlands.

I would not dispute that, but we will leave glints for another day. I want to praise the Executive for bringing forward the motion and, more to the point, the funding that Mr Galbraith announced earlier. I have a couple of points on the consultation paper "Regulation of Early Education and Childcare: The Way Ahead"—which I believe Colin Campbell also mentioned—arising from my meeting with the Shetland child care partnership in my constituency on Monday of this week, after, I may say, I had dropped my kids off at school. The premise of the consultation paper is that the current system is in need of reform. Some professionals and parent providers particularly are concerned about that suggestion. They are also concerned about the ethos of the consultation paper. Does it suggest that there is a need to move towards a more educational type of provision rather than emphasising child care? It is important that the Executive's response to the consultation includes the question of ethos—the balance between education and child care. What, too, is the role for local authorities to be in the regulation of early education and child care? In my constituency one local authority inspector currently has a very central role not only in inspecting providers but in working constructively on development and co-ordination of the service. In reading the consultation paper, I can find no relationship or relevance to that role. It would appear sensible not to dismiss that role, especially when considering the size of the authorities in the cases concerned. The role may differ according to the size of authority. Mr Monteith mentioned this in his speech: would the minister accept that not all local authorities are top-slicing the £1,200 per place? Some are  passing on all the money to the partner providers. I am concerned, however, about the regulation of early education child care. Were that child care simply to be introduced, some money might have to be top-sliced—because that is the system—in order to find mechanisms to fulfil the requirements of the regulation proposals. There is concern that playgroups are going through considerable change. There has been something of a rolling programme, and the proportionate aspect especially needs to be considered with regard to people who give up much voluntary time because they care about providing that service in small communities. I would like briefly to mention staff-pupil ratios, which Scott Barrie mentioned. Surely there should not be a blanket ratio, as the consultation paper suggests. I would be grateful if the minister could consider that in the context of the consultation period. The ratio should reflect different circumstances and different need. In Shetland, for example, the current ratio for teachers to three to five-year-old pupils is 1:6. I would not want to see that diminished because of a national regulation. We need quality care, standards and best value, but that must go hand in hand with appropriate training, budgets and support. I support the motion in Sam Galbraith's name.

I must confess that I think that Mr Monteith is speaking the biggest load of rubbish I have ever heard about nursery education. Nursery vouchers were an unmitigated disaster and caused complete chaos in certain rural areas. He simply does not know what he is talking about. He should ask some rural authorities in the Highlands, Orkney or Shetland what happened when the Conservative Government tried to introduce that policy. What he is saying is nonsense.

On the commission and the proposals for regulation that are out for consultation, will the minister go into detail about the outcomes? There is concern in different parts of Scotland that outcomes must be relevant to them.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the reasons are for its proposal to withdraw funding support to the Scottish Council for Research in Education and what its proposals are to provide an alternative source of independent research into education. (S1O-1927)

Will the minister accept that I have received representations from constituents who, as head teachers of rural schools—indeed, open and thriving rural schools—have commented that the bulletins that they receive from SCRE are informative and helpful? Does he agree that Scottish education needs research, including research that comes to conclusions that are sometimes uncomfortable for the Government? In that spirit, does he accept that there must be research from bodies outwith Government? If there is not, Her Majesty's inspectors of schools may be the only source. There is a need to maintain independent research.

That was a good fundamentalist speech from Alex Neil. It contrasted with Mike Russell's gradualist speech, which is presumably why he has gone. I thought Mike Russell had gone to sort out whether this is priority No 1, No 2 or No 3, but it is now obvious that he left because he knew what was coming next. As Murray Tosh said, this is Scotland and we need to sort this out in the context of the Scottish budget. I thought that Murray, in an uncharacteristically calm performance, put his finger on many of the important factors about the overall budget. Ian Jenkins's point about the Scottish Parliament getting on to the front foot and doing something positive and important, not only in a local or regional sense, but in a Scotland-wide sense, was important too and I hope that it will be considered. I support the motion lodged by Alex Johnstone and the Rural Affairs Committee. It is important that the Parliament has the opportunity to debate  the Borders rail link. I note also that there is a pretty good turnout, which has not always been the case for committee debates. Usually, just committee members turn up. It is good to see colleagues from across the political spectrum here to make a contribution. In an increasingly competitive world, transport and infrastructure links are important for the vibrancy and sustainability of many communities. That applies to the Borders as much as it applies to any other part of Scotland. I share the desire of the multitude of campaigners on this issue—national and local politicians and the people involved in all the campaigning efforts mentioned this morning—to see the Borders rail link reinstated. My grandparents used to live in the Yarrow valley. They were constituents of the local MP who was, as my grandmother reminded me on the phone last night, a young David Steel. It was he who intervened 30 years ago to stop a local minister in Newcastleton, who had said that he was going to block the line, being arrested. Direct action may not be the appropriate mechanism today, but in times past they have been considered. Today's politicians must work with local agencies and all involved in the process to make progress towards reinstatement of the link. My colleagues in this Parliament, Ian Jenkins and Euan Robson, have augmented the work of Michael Moore and Archy Kirkwood. John McAllion mentioned the progress of the Transport Bill at Westminster. Some important comments on the strategic rail authority and what could happen have been made there. When the bill went into committee on 21 March, Michael Moore proposed an amendment that would have added two purposes to the SRA: to identify unmet needs for railway services and to expand the railway network where appropriate. The amendment would have put the onus on the SRA to be involved in the process. That follows on from the Scott Wilson study. During the Westminster debate, Michael Moore pointed out that the SRA's director of external relations visited the Borders on 20 March to discuss the findings of the feasibility study. Considerable progress has been made as a result of the efforts of the campaign. It is worth quoting Keith Hill, the Under-Secretary of State for the Environment, Transport and the Regions. In reply to Michael Moore's amendment, he said: "The SRA will have powers to assist reopenings and will consider proposals, taking into account a range of factors including the environment, accessibility and value for money against competing demands . . . Where schemes appear to the SRA to fit its strategies for securing the development of the railway network, it will need to consider  how the new scheme could be encouraged."—[ Official Report, House of Commons, Standing Committee E , 28 March 2000; c 1193-94.] It would be helpful if the minister could give us some assurances that the Scottish Executive is applying pressure to ensure that the helpful answer given in Westminster and other such points are being pursued. The SRA is one part of the equation, but many others must be involved in the financing of the plans. The Liberal Democrats do not have any ideological opposition. We want the line to be reinstated and to ensure that the necessary finance is available. As Murray Tosh said, there is considerable pressure on the Scottish budget; all options must be considered carefully. Midlothian Council might want to consider whether the £18 million that is currently earmarked for the A701 might be better spent on an integrated transport solution including the Waverley line. Reinstating the Waverley line is a key component of local transport strategy for the Scottish Borders. If the project does not progress, the Borders will not be part of integrated transport options. The Executive and several publications support the contention that we must give people transport options. As colleagues have said, that choice is not available at present. In addition, the forthcoming Scottish transport bill may give local authorities a power to introduce city road pricing. If that happens in Edinburgh, Borders drivers will have no option, because they will be paying a charge to get into Edinburgh. It is important that options are available to people travelling from the Borders for work or leisure activities. It is important that the Parliament and the Executive take a lead on the issue by supporting the Waverley line. We must give the funding bodies the encouragement to drive the need and begin progress on the reinstatement of the Borders railway without delay.

We are curious about the time when Lord James was transport minister in the Conservative Administration. He says that re-instating the Borders railway as soon as possible is a priority. What measures did he take to do that?

Will the member give way?

Is a Borders rail link the SNP's No 1 transport spending priority? Has the member discussed that with his transport spokesman?

I shall take up Duncan McNeil's point that this is a second  division debate, because George Lyon is in his constituency today, so I have been asked to fill in. I have been impressed by the new politics approach to the debate. I can see the seamless movement of the new politics award from John Swinney and Henry McLeish to Duncan McNeil and Fergus Ewing. I can easily envisage them walking hand in hand up to the podium to collect that award next year. The Liberal Democrats welcome the general approach of the Education and Training (Scotland) Bill; we have championed for some time the general principle of individual learning accounts. I welcome the Executive's commitment in the measures today to the promotion of lifelong learning and to help to overcome the financial barriers to learning that many individuals face. I read with interest the evidence that ministers and witnesses gave to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. I will pursue a number of points on that. One of the more striking aspects is that there is some room for vision on issues such as this. On 10 May, in evidence to the committee, the minister correctly said that the measures focused on individuals and were aimed at empowering people to take greater responsibility for investing in their own learning. That was important, as were the conclusions of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. In a section of the committee report called "The Principles of the Bill", it points out: "The introduction of individual learning accounts has been welcomed by almost all organisations in the field, and has the potential to make a major contribution to the development of a culture of lifelong learning in Scotland." The committee concluded: "This willingness to learn from 'on the ground' experience and amend policy as a result is very much welcomed by the Committee." Fergus Ewing, the minister and others have made that point. I will address three issues. The first is the prescription of learning opportunities. A Liberal Democrat concern and one arising from evidence to the committee is that, to avoid prescription, local flexibility should be considered to ensure that local needs are taken into account. That is important. Instead of creating a list of acceptable learning, it would be much better to start from the position that all learning is equally acceptable and will receive support unless specified otherwise. I understand from the ministerial evidence to the committee that that is the direction in which the Executive is moving, which is very welcome. A second brief point is on the need to address provision in rural areas and particularly the issue of travel costs. I noted that point from the  questions to the minister that Fergus Ewing pursued. Improvements in access to technology and flexible delivery are a key to rural opportunities. I was struck by Elaine Murray's questions on new technology networks, which are important for developing new technologies and linking into them. In my part of the world, there is the example of the objective 1—or son of objective 1—money that will be invested in information and communications technology developments, as long as we can convince the European Commission that that is the right way to spend the money. I believe that spending money on augmenting and improving the existing provision of soft infrastructure, thereby allowing companies and individuals to move forward, is important. The digital Scotland report, about which Pauline McNeill asked in question time, is pertinent in that regard. There are concerns about geographical distance from teaching provision, which will be shared by any member who represents a rural area. I hope that the minister can give some reassurance on travel costs. My final point is on the need to target the bill at non-learners and to reach unemployed people, and part-time and low-paid workers. The excluded and the potentially excluded could be the most difficult to recruit into the scheme. I hope that measures will be taken to ensure that that is not the case. In that spirit, should not there be targets for the most socially excluded groups? It would be right to target those groups, to ensure that those who are most in need of basic learning and training opportunities are not neglected. I support the proposals.

Will the member give way?

I am not going to advertise anything, except to remind Fergus that there is a two-line bill that is even shorter. I will be grateful for his support in its later stages.

Does the minister share, as I do, the real concerns in the white fish sector about the supply of fish? Does that not illustrate the need for a co-ordinated examination of the scientific work that is being done in this area by the Government and by institutions such as the North Atlantic Fisheries College? Does he believe, as I do, that we need science that is believed by fishermen to underpin the decision on future catching effort?

In October this year I will have been married for 10 years, but I will not be asking Fergus Ewing to remind me of that fact. I broadly welcome this bill and the remarks that all members, particularly those on the front benches of all parties, have made, which were constructive. Alex Johnstone acknowledged the difficulties of the time scale for committees, but there has been broad agreement in committees on the proposed measures. That is welcome. No doubt there will be a great deal of haggling at stage 2, but there has been much agreement. There has, however, been concern about the difference between primary and secondary legislation and whether it is right to designate using secondary legislation. A balance must be struck. If there are two areas to be designated, filling up a considerable proportion of the parliamentary year designating areas that have already been through a large exercise would not be the right balance to strike with regard to the legislative programme of this Parliament. The points that were made about consultation and the mechanisms that are to be used for that are important. John Scott said that he wants a more relaxed approach, but the Conservatives will be the first to criticise the Executive if it fails to implement the measures in the time that it set out. Perhaps the Conservatives would not be the first to complain: the SNP would be the first. Linda Fabiani was right about the need for adequate consultation. Other members have rightly mentioned that as well. The Rural Affairs Committee made an important point, to which I hope the minister will return in due course, about investigating the mechanisms involving the affirmative instrument and whether it can be subject to amendment. Like other colleagues, I wish to raise the issue of marine national parks. Nicol Stephen mentioned it in his opening remarks and dealt with it to a large extent. However, concerns about the issue have been expressed by a large number of bodies. Ian Jardine of Scottish Natural Heritage, in evidence to the Transport and the Environment Committee, said that marine national parks were something of an afterthought. They were not in the original proposals and have not been considered in the round. It is therefore incumbent on the Executive to introduce some proposals to tighten up the relevant section and to ensure that it accommodates the concerns that exist.  I suspect that many people who use the sea for recreational and work purposes are unaware that we are proposing to create national parks. As there have been no suggestions about which areas should be so designated, it is not surprising that people have not woken up to that possibility. I take the example of Fair isle in my constituency, which could be a national park. There is a great desire in that community, which is an active and committed community, to set up designations that give them much more control of their local waters. However, when we consider the level of fishing regulations and the measures that apply to inshore and pelagic white fish activity, the whole purpose has to be carefully teased out and clarified. As Lewis Macdonald rightly illustrated, marine national parks could be an advantage for selling produce—shellfish and so on. He mentioned the quality mark for salmon. That links to John Scott's point. Just as for national park areas on land, there could be advantages for farmers and crofters in the affected areas, in the sale of produce linked to the designation. There is marketing potential there. I will pick up Sylvia Jackson's point about the Sandford principle, because it is important and has been slightly glossed over so far. Surely the pre-eminent concern of most in the chamber would be the social and economic needs of the people who live and work in the relevant communities. A balance must be achieved. I suspect that that is why there was a slight difference between the two committees that considered the bill. The Transport and the Environment Committee recommended that further attention be given to that issue at stage 2, while I understand the Rural Affairs Committee was generally satisfied with the proposals as they are constituted. It is all about balance, which is why the Transport and the Environment Committee considered zoning as a mechanism to deal with that point. It can achieve that balance. It can be used as a mechanism by planners and in relation to national park plans. It can ensure that local people are not disadvantaged, which is what concerns Fergus Ewing. I endorse the proposals and hope that Parliament does so this afternoon.

I welcome today's statement, particularly the measures announced on the EC controls and the £9 million that is to be invested in the future of the industry. I also welcome the measures that the rural affairs department took in regard to Skerries salmon farm. I pay tribute to the officials who were involved in that. I would like the minister to clarify some of the remarks that he made in his statement, particularly regarding the "last chance" and "any signs of backsliding". Does he recognise that the industry's joint working group and measures such as the code of practice introduced by the Shetland Salmon Farmers Association, which was launched at Fishing 2000 in Glasgow earlier this year, are exactly what the industry needs? There are signs that the industry is working with pollution bodies, such as the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, to deal with the concerns that have been raised. Does the minister recognise that there are concerns about a statutory approach to fallowing? Small independent producers do not have the option to move to other sites because they operate on only one site and might have particular difficulties because of the nature of the geography in sea areas. Will he assure me that he will consider that problem?

I would like briefly to deal with the points that members have made. I take Rhoda Grant's point about people standing up and saying, "This is a good measure," although I thought that that was what coalition back benchers had to do every day. I am grateful to all the parties, across the political spectrum, that have expressed support for this measure. In his opening remarks, the Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs not only expressed the Executive's support for the bill, for which I am grateful, but defined what a several order is, which will be helpful, at least to those who read the Official Report tomorrow, for future occasions. The minister mentioned the increased role of fisheries management in a local sense, which is an important theme in fisheries management today across Scotland. I welcome his commitment in that area. Rightly, the minister pointed out the problems of mobile and static equipment that is not addressed by the bill. I do not ignore those problems—they will have to be dealt with—but I believe that the bill goes some way towards addressing the overall issues. The point that the minister made about marketing and the quality of the product was also important. I hope that, indirectly, this measure will help in that area. In particular, the bill would bring benefits to rural and isolated areas of Scotland. In that sense, as Rhoda Grant said, it shows the relevance of this Parliament to what is happening across our community, not just in certain parts of it. I take the minister's point about retrospective legislation and welcome his commitment that the Executive will consider that point. The Rural Affairs Committee will also have a chance to consider it further. I also welcome what was said about the regulating order in Shetland, which fits in with the overall theme of local management of fisheries, to which the Executive parties are committed. I thank Richard Lochhead for the support he expressed on behalf of the SNP. Richard made a remark about salmon in my pocket. I am usually accused of being in the pocket of the salmon farmers. However, I take that point on board, as well as what he said about the ability to deal with measures quickly and effectively in this place, as  compared with Westminster. Other colleagues made the same point. Richard Lochhead referred briefly to the multi-annual guidance programme, which showed an interesting ability to move directly or indirectly off the point. The minister's response on that issue was important; I hope that Parliament will note that and take it seriously, because the issue will be important over the coming weeks. I thank Jamie McGrigor for his support—and that of his party. There is only so much to talk about on a two-line bill. Jamie McGrigor—like Richard Lochhead—managed, quite rightly, to find other issues to talk about, in particular the testing regime. Mr McGrigor had concerns about some of the wording. I recognise where he is coming from on the representations that were made by the Clyde Fishermen's Association in its evidence to the Rural Affairs Committee. The committee will come back to those points at stage 2. Consideration could be given to modern developments in fishing and aquaculture techniques—that is a fair point—but there was only one representation on that, despite the 16 other representations that were received. The committee will have to weigh that in the balance at stage 2. Jamie McGrigor also made good and relevant points about conflict resolution, in particular with regard to the summer isles, which was the example he used. I thank my colleague John Farquhar Munro for his support. He raised an important point about co-operation between the various sectors of the industry and mentioned the objections procedure that has caused so many problems in the past; he used the example of the Sound of Sleat. He also spoke of the role that can be played by the regulating orders that he sees in his part of Scotland. I also thank Rhoda Grant for pointing out, again, that the bill is not contentious and that we can make a difference in Scotland when it is not possible to do this at Westminster. The bill, although simple, can prove that the Parliament works for all the communities of Scotland. In that sense, I am very grateful for the support from across the chamber this afternoon.

I am pleased to be able to move the motion for stage 1 of the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Amendment (Scotland) Bill here in Glasgow. I would like to start by thanking all those who have assisted me in preparing and lodging this bill. In particular, I thank those in my own office and MSPs from all parties who have supported this measure, many of whom are in the chamber this afternoon, and without whom this bill would not have reached this stage. I would also like to thank the clerks, who were of great assistance in drafting the bill—although, effectively, it is but two sentences—and in providing guidance on procedure. I also appreciate the work of the members of the Rural Affairs Committee, many of whom are here. Their report helped me in my consideration of the measure. I should mention their tight schedule. The committee has a particularly heavy work load at this time, and it produced the report with minimum delay. I would like to set on record the encouragement that I have been given by the Association of Scottish Shellfish Growers and by its chairman, Doug McLeod. Its members watched with frustration when an earlier version of this bill fell in Westminster, tripped up by a procedural hurdle, despite the best efforts of Jim Wallace MP and Lord MacKay of Ardbrecknish. The association had the vision to see that our new Scottish Parliament could deal not only with the great issues of the day, but with such small, but nevertheless important, matters. My bill is a simple, straightforward measure that seeks to remove an avoidable source of conflict between shellfish farmers and creel fishermen. The two can happily exist side by side, but have been forced into a position of rivalry by the terms of the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967. Under the act, a shellfish farmer wishing to control an area of sea bed on which to farm his scallops or whatever can apply for a several fisheries order. However, the terms of the act mean that, should the farmer be successful in his application, the order issued will ban most fishing operations in his area in order to protect his stock.  The problem is that the prohibition covers such fishing activities as fishing with creels, even though that would not damage the farmer's scallops. That means that, for a farmer to be successful, creel fishermen may well be banned from fishing in areas in which they have fished for generations. Not surprisingly, that leads to conflict, and applications for several fisheries orders have met with considerable opposition. I am sure that those who drafted the 1967 act did not wish to create what is an entirely unnecessary conflict, but the drafting ensured that that happened. This bill therefore aims to amend the 1967 act to allow several fisheries orders to be drafted so that fishing with specified non-destructive equipment such as creels can continue. The problem with the 1967 act was first discovered about 10 years ago, when an application for a several fisheries order in Loch Crinan ran into opposition over exactly this problem. An examination of the act found that the secretary of state could not issue an order which permitted creeling. The result was an unnecessary public inquiry. When the order was eventually issued, the creel fishermen lost an area that they had traditionally fished. Since then, other applications have run into similar problems, once in Loch Ewe and three times in the area of sea between Skye and Raasay, in the constituency of my colleague John Farquhar Munro. Those applications were all eventually successful, but the applicants had to face the cost of arguing their case at public inquiry and the long delays in the issue of the orders. Yet again, creel fishermen lost out for no reason other than the wording of an act. That is the unnecessary conflict that this bill seeks to avoid. I welcome the Rural Affairs Committee's support for this bill in its report. I note that all 16 of the organisations that responded to the consultation exercise supported the bill. It is notable that they included fishermen's associations, which have generally not been favourably inclined towards the issuing of several orders, and which will presumably continue to oppose them in areas where their members dredge for scallops. They nevertheless recognise that this bill would remove a source of conflict for those of their members who fish with creels. I note the committee's recommendation that the Executive should consider amending existing orders if this bill is passed. I commend this recommendation to the Executive. While I am not normally in favour of retrospective legislation, I would be happy to accept at stage 2 suitable amendments permitting that, provided that any amendments to existing orders were carried out with the full agreement of the shellfish farmers  holding the orders and with the full consultation of local fishermen. I welcome the minister's views on the matter. I will set out my perspective on the role of various fishing orders in the wider area of fisheries management. I believe that fishermen recognise that our shellfish stocks need to be better managed and that this management is best controlled by those with an interest in the continued health of the stocks: the fishermen and those who buy and process their catch. I am delighted that Shetland has led the way with a successful promotion of a regulating order for fisheries that puts the control of the shellfish fishing around Shetland into the hands of local management organisations. I am pleased that the Executive has supported that and other initiatives to introduce regulating orders in Orkney and down the west coast of Scotland. I am sure that the minister will ensure that when Parliament debates the National Parks (Scotland) Bill, particularly the marine parks section of the bill, the Executive will not, on one hand, support a measure that reduces conflict and, on the other hand, establish a mechanism, albeit unwittingly, that could create difficulties. I am sure that, in the spirit of joined-up government, discussions will be going on across departments to ensure that sensitivities are recognised and that no such problems will emerge. Several fisheries orders can fit in with regulated fisheries orders by setting aside areas for controlled farming of shellfish for commercial or re-stocking purposes. The future that I want will include carefully controlled management of our seas, with a large input from the people who understand those areas—local fishermen, fish farmers and shellfish farmers. The bill aims to remove an unintentional barrier to the smooth and effective management of our coasts and seas. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Amendment (Scotland) Bill.

The minister will be aware that one of the issues that the predecessor bodies to the new one were concerned about was traceability. Is he aware of the concerns about the potential introduction of sheep tagging in the autumn of this year? A consultation paper has already come out from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in England and Wales. Does he have some information for the chamber on that issue? What situation will livestock producers face in the autumn?

I am grateful to Nick Johnston for clarifying the Conservative front-bench situation. For a terrible moment, those of us who enjoy transport and the environment debates thought Murray Tosh had been demoted to the back benches. We are gratified to hear that this is just a temporary measure for today's debate. As a member of the Transport and the Environment Committee and as a Liberal Democrat spokesman, I support the motion in Andy Kerr's name. The report is constructive, important for the Parliament's work and, as Linda Fabiani said, the result of exhaustive work by the committee and everyone who gave evidence. Furthermore, I want to echo Andy Kerr's tribute to the clerking staff, particularly to Lynn Tullis for her work as clerk team leader. However, I do not know whether maternity leave is due reward for all her work. When Andy Kerr first raised this issue in the committee, other colleagues such as Elaine Smith told us of particular concerns in their communities and asked us to undertake serious work in this area. I think that the report's publication reflects well on the Parliament's ability to adopt issues of concern to the whole country and to produce important reports on such issues. I am sure that other members heard Sir William Stewart of Tayside University Hospitals NHS Trust on BBC radio this morning. He said—if I can trust my handwriting—"In some cases, emissions from mobiles may cause biological change; in particular, a child's response time may be stimulated by exposure to radiation, which may create a short-term health effect". In his radio interview this morning he linked that to the siting of mobile phone masts. His points about health were important. The Stewart committee recommended that the  Government take a precautionary approach until more research has been completed and another review has been conducted in two years' time. It has backed up the work that has been done by the Transport and the Environment Committee. That is extremely helpful. The Stewart committee also recommended, as other members have said, that the need for planning control for mobile phone masts should be addressed. Paragraph 1.36 of its report states: "We recommend that for all base stations, including those with masts under 15 m, permitted development rights for their erection be revoked and that the siting of all new base stations should be subject to the normal planning process." That is entirely in line with what the Transport and the Environment Committee recommended. I hope that that will help to deal with concerns about different standards being applied throughout the UK. The Stewart committee report will inform the Government at Westminster and the Transport and the Environment Committee's report will inform the Executive in Scotland, so consistency can be achieved. Vodafone AirTouch Group Services Ltd wrote to members of the Transport and the Environment Committee urging "consistency between the Scottish Parliament's response to the Committee's Report and Westminster's response to the Stewart Inquiry Report." We have that consistency, and I hope that the concerns of the mobile phone companies have been dealt with. Sir William also mentioned that better information about buying and selling mobile phones should be available. That is important and relates to points that the Transport and the Environment Committee has made about people being in charge of—or, at least, involved in—the planning process. There is an opportunity for that to happen and there is consistency in the approach to that in the two reports. Sir William's report augments the work of the Transport and the Environment Committee. I encourage the Executive to pursue the precautionary approach that that report stressed and to endorse the proposals for full planning control. I would like to pick up on a couple of points in the Executive's interim response. As Linda Fabiani said, it will be useful if Sarah Boyack tells us, in her winding-up speech, when she hopes to give a final response to the two pieces of work. I represent a rural constituency. It is sometimes difficult to ensure that the highest standards of modern technological advancement are available in rural areas. Highlands and Islands Enterprise has put a lot of resources into that and the new objective 1 programme involves investment in it. I  understand that, in European Community terms, that is known as soft infrastructure. Mobile phones claim coverage only of a percentage of the UK's population. Evidence from the Department of Trade and Industry to the Transport and the Environment Committee said that about 90 per cent of the UK population would be covered by December 1999. That is not much help if one has three screaming kids in the car and the car radiator bursts on some back road in the middle of the Highlands where there is no mobile phone coverage. The Chancellor of the Exchequer made an announcement recently about mobile phone companies bidding for licences and the money that will accrue as a result of that process. I hoped that he would attach some strings that would ensure that the money that came into the Treasury would be used to provide greater coverage than the DTI is currently asking for. I hope that the Executive will be able to exert additional pressure in that regard. As the Executive's interim response says: "Supporting rural economic development is a key priority of the Executive. It is important, therefore, that the economic prospects of rural areas, where modern telecommunications infrastructure can offset the disadvantages of distance, are not frustrated." I agree absolutely, but there is an opportunity for joined-up government. There could be some strings attached to the financial return to the Government. I hope that that will be pursued with some vigour in the times ahead. Andy Kerr mentioned the importance of mobile phones to the ways in which we do business nowadays. That is true, but they are not always a godsend. At times, I am grateful for the fact that some of my constituency is not covered by mobile phone networks. There is a particular advantage when I get off the plane at Sumburgh. BT Cellnet does not cover that end of Shetland, so when the pager goes off at 20,000 ft saying that the "Lesley Riddoch Programme" wants me, I cannot respond. That is, occasionally, quite an advantage. I know that Ian Jenkins—if he can catch the electronic eye—wants to make some points about conservation, which Nick Johnston rightly mentioned. I do not think that it is good politics or a particularly good approach to say that national scenic designations and natural heritage areas are really important and that we must be careful about locating masts, if any, in such areas yet, given the health concerns, not go for full planning control to allow local people to be involved. Andy Kerr rightly pointed out that health should become a material planning concern. There must be a consistent approach to ensure that people are every bit as important as our natural heritage, birds, wildlife and all the rest of it. I hope that the final response  to the committee's report will reflect the need for such consistency. It is right that the committee should recommend tougher planning controls on the proliferation of masts through a requirement to apply for local authority planning permission. Given the reasonable doubt, which others have mentioned, about whether radiation from masts presents a health risk, it is also right to presume that masts should be located away from schools and residential areas. Local people and communities should get involved in the planning process. As the committee highlighted, the current arrangement, whereby people have no right to be informed about or object to a mobile mast proposal, is not acceptable. The Stewart committee's recommendations strengthen that point. The Transport and the Environment Committee has worked hard on the report. It is an important piece of work. I encourage the minister and the Executive to endorse the findings of the committee and to implement its recommendations.

I would like to pursue the point the minister made in response to Duncan Hamilton's question. In the northern isles, when the tender period is too short, particular difficulties are created for providing new ships. Will that be a problem for CalMac? Is the minister aware of arguments that she can put to the European Commission to try to extend the length of the tender period? Companies that are considering tendering may face problems in the provision of new ships.

I hope that my console will work properly while I deliver my speech. I begin by registering an interest. I have an environmentally sensitive area plan on my own farm at home. I also admit to a sense of guilt today. While everyone else is working hard at the lambing, I am here pontificating about a matter that is important to a number of crofters and farmers in Shetland but not, happily, to my own unit, where, as the minister will be pleased to hear, the ESA is working extremely well. Shetland's environmentally sensitive area is a success story. The current extension caused by the delay in introducing the countryside stewardship scheme creates a further welcome window of opportunity for new crofters and farmers to enter the existing ESA scheme. Some 700 producers are now part of that scheme in Shetland. Out of 1,100 agricultural units, that represents a notable step forward in recognising the importance of the principle that underlies ESAs. The scheme covers a large percentage of the Shetland flock and a large acreage of agricultural land in the islands. I wish to discuss a small factor of the ESA scheme in the chamber this afternoon—I have initiated this debate to raise the change of rules by the Scottish Executive rural affairs department  regarding the use of sheep quota by producers in Shetland under the ESA scheme. The original advice to producers, based on the department's rules when the scheme began, was that all parties understood that quota freed by the stock disposal element of the ESA scheme could be used to cover other eligible sheep on a croft or farm. Rules expressly stating that were given to producers who signed up after 22 July 1994. Indeed, the letter from the then Scottish Office agriculture, environment and fisheries department in November 1994 quite clearly states: "If you have signed and lodged an application form for an Environmentally Sensitive Areas Scheme . . . before 22 JULY 1994 you may lease out quota throughout the lifetime of your scheme." In the past year, because of reinterpretation of those rules, which Ross Finnie has explained in answer to questions from Alex Fergusson and in letters to members of all parties, the rules have been amended. Producers are now not entitled to lease out quota or claim sheep annual premium on other female sheep on the croft or farm. I am glad that the mistake has at least been recognised; that is progress. Crofting colleagues of mine who are many years older than I am have suggested that it is the first time that the department has admitted getting something wrong. That is welcome and the minister is to be congratulated on making that progress. The agriculture community recognises that. One of my constituents, a crofter who is affected by the change of circumstances, has asked me to suggest to the minister the introduction of a new scheme. He said in a recent letter to me: "If the agreed payments cannot be made under the ESA scheme, then surely—with a little bit of imaginative thinking—a way can and must be found to compensate crofters and farmers for their loss, even if no EU funding is available for such compensation". He went on to suggest that it could be called the official error compensation scheme. I do not know whether the minister would be prepared to take up that helpful suggestion from one of my constituents. Alex Fergusson has cases of this difficulty in his region; if I understand it correctly, the cases are broadly to be found in the northern isles and in south-west Scotland. In Shetland, 29 producers are affected; on the telephone last night I spoke to one who will lose approximately 90 units at £35—about £3,150. From correspondence with the minister on this matter, I understand that the industry will lose about £41,000 because of mistakes that it has to be stressed are in no way the responsibility of the crofters or farmers who have been affected. That, in a nutshell, is why those who are affected feel  especially aggrieved. I would like the minister to recognise that, as the mistake is that of the department, a mechanism should be found to ensure that producers are not financially disadvantaged. The minister will be aware of the impending case, backed by legal opinion, being sought by the National Farmers Union on behalf of one of its members. I would like to raise the actions that have been taken, because it is important to consider them. The time scale that the rural affairs department has operated under has not always helped producers to make informed decisions in pursuing this matter. The minister rightly asks for the industry to behave in a thoroughly modern, businesslike fashion. To do that, we must have consistency in the application of the department's rules and schemes. It is difficult to do that when advice has conflicted, when time scales demanded for answers to potentially difficult questions are short and when information asked for by crofters to allow those informed decisions to take place—based, for example, on advice by the Scottish Agricultural College, the Farming and Wildlife Advisory Group or other organisations who give advice in this area—takes months to arrive. Difficulties have been created by the way in which this has been handled. To illustrate the time scale, the first information letter to producers saying that there was a problem arrived on 2 July last year. It intimated that—hopefully—within eight weeks, there would be further advice to producers. Nothing happened until 25 January this year, when a letter was sent to affected producers, setting out the position. I remind members—those who are aware of the circumstances will know this—that that was only a matter of days before the Friday 4 February cut-off for the application for sheep annual premium and hill livestock compensatory allowances. The time scale given to crofters and farmers who were affected was especially short and, in some cases, very difficult. Someone said to me on the telephone last night that they received the letter on the Tuesday, but had to have their SAP and HLCA claim in on the Friday. That is demanding in anyone's estimation; in the days available, they had to make a best estimate of what they would do with their ESA. There were problems with trading, leasing in or purchasing quota to cover eligible female sheep. For Shetland, that is complicated by the fact that the nearest available place in which to trade quota is Aberdeen Northern Marts, at Thainstone. To do that, one has to exchange letters; there are practical issues there that are not easy to conclude.  The ESA is a good use of agri-environment moneys; I would like it to continue. The competitive structure being considered for future agri-environment support is not necessarily the best way forward because, as many farming and crofting organisations have pointed out, it is difficult to compare a croft in Walls in the west of Shetland with a larger farm in south-west Scotland. There are concerns about that. I suggest to the minister that, in the areas in which they have been available, ESAs have been a good, useful mechanism for providing agri-environment support for crofting and farming. The manner in which some producers are being treated is causing disquiet. Potential applicants—there are quite a number in Shetland at the moment, simply because the window has been extended—do not know what to expect. I hope that, in his summing up, the minister will give an assurance that there will be no more rule changes that will disadvantage people. That point was made when I met some union representatives and the SAC the other day, before I came south; I was asked to pursue the matter today. I press the minister for a review of the 29 outstanding cases in Shetland. I would like him to ensure that not one of those crofters or farmers is financially disadvantaged because of the treatment of their case. I welcome his announcement that the department will consider claims from producers for losses caused as a consequence of the scheme guidance issued by the department. That is an admission of the mistake and an attempt to set a solution in progress. That is welcome, but the department is still judge and jury and, given the circumstances and the history, some producers will obviously have a concern about that. I hope that that concern can be allayed. I understand the constraints and difficulties with regard to state aid rules, but I urge the minister to find a mechanism to help producers who, through no fault of their own, are in financial loss.

From the Liberal Democrat benches, I welcome the statement and the aid package. I associate myself, and the Liberal Democrats, with the remarks made by Alex Johnstone. I also welcome the minister's announcement that he will hold a conference before the Royal Highland Show rather than after it; that is eminently sensible. I have two questions on the principles that the minister outlined. Does he accept that there is concern about the complexity of the LFA payment system that is being considered? Annexe C of the discussion document makes a point about reducing bureaucracy, and it is important that we do not have conflict between those two objectives.  Secondly, on the review of the Meat Hygiene Service, does the minister accept that there is a need to look at small, low-throughput slaughterhouses in particular, because the MHS charges there are that bit higher per animal? We need to focus on that, and I hope that the minister will do so, in the context of his strategy.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the impact on the Scottish economy of sterling remaining outside the European single currency. (S1O-1498)

The minister will be aware that the international food exhibition in Glasgow finishes today. I have spent two days there, promoting Shetland and helping Shetland companies sell produce. Is the minister aware that many export companies are concerned about the need for stable exchange rates and a positive entry into the euro zone, given the right conditions? I accept that monetary policy is a reserved matter, but does the minister recognise the need for the Scottish Executive to lobby the Chancellor of the Exchequer on this issue, not least because of the need to have strong political leadership on the euro?

The First Minister will be aware that his colleagues John Home Robertson and Henry McLeish have already written letters of support for the North Atlantic Fisheries College in Scalloway. Having visited Scalloway, does the First Minister share my view that the fisheries college is a centre of excellence? It is linked to the University of the Highlands and Islands and brings together science, environmental concerns, local authorities and the variety of expertise that is needed for a national fisheries institute.

I was under the impression that this was a back-bench debate and I am disappointed that that has not been the case. We have heard front-bench speeches. I hope that that will be sorted out through the appropriate channels in due course. [MEMBERS: "Hear, hear."] I want to support the amendment that is in the name of Gordon Jackson—it takes the Holyrood project forward and asks Parliament to get on with the task of building a modern, challenging building. The amendment addresses members' concerns and gets a grip on costs. Parliament will be able to pass a motion to do that today. It establishes a rigorous mechanism for controlling costs and seeks completion of the project by the end of 2002. It gives a precise and clear go-ahead to the design. Members have given their views on the chamber, on office space and on staff space. The public want to know why the costs have escalated from the original estimates to the £195 million that has been quoted today. Parliament took responsibility for the project last June. The cost then was estimated at £109 million. Gordon Jackson has explained those increases logically. Today we have heard too many people say, "It wisnae my fault." The truth is that if members want to allocate blame, they need look no further than the chamber. Since last June it has been up to us; to argue otherwise is to avoid the logic of Gordon Jackson's argument. The debate has become a front-bench debate. I could not believe my ears when I heard David McLetchie say he was Parliament's most passionate supporter.

Ye can just haud yer wheesht. The Tories have opposed the building today and yesterday and they will do so in the future. They opposed the creation of the Parliament; they opposed the voting system that gives them all, bar John Scott, their seats in the chamber; and they now oppose the creation of a modern and dynamic building within which Parliament can operate.

No. That I can understand. At least the Conservatives are consistent. What I cannot understand so readily is the Scottish National  party. It is a party that should believe in vision, and which says much about self-determination, but unfortunately today it has turned its back on a definite future and instead favoured the blame game. Mike Russell said that there had been "far too much spin." That from Mike Russell—I ask you.

No. Mike Russell would not answer questions on the finishes, the size or the cost of the building. As usual, we get no answers from the SNP, just the blaming of someone else every day and every week. For those who say that Gordon Jackson's amendment is the cheapskate option, I refer them to paragraph 6.8.1 of the Spencely report. With regard to the MSP block, changes and reductions in cost would "reduce the frequency of maintenance, without compromising the integrity of the architectural design." So things can be done to make this building a better project for those who will use it. When Sir David Steel opened the debate, he pointed out what has happened and what has changed; for example, the need for an additional 200 people. No one can dispute that. He said that if the chamber had not changed, it would have saved three months and considerable costs. On the option of staying put, I have taken numerous school parties round, across three roads and into four different buildings, yet the supporters of that option are seriously suggesting that we should stay where we are. That is not realistic.

The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has not kept members up to date since last June but—

Donald Gorrie is behind me and I am looking out. The corporate body has accepted responsibility, and today it is right, as the Spencely report shows in paragraph 9.4 on management recommendations, to move towards a rigorous method of keeping the Holyrood project on time and within budget. That is what Gordon Jackson's amendment is all about.  Members today have picked up the fact that the corporate body is a parliamentary body, and that means that Andrew Welsh and John Young cannot be semi-detached members of the SPCB. Those gentlemen were appointed by Parliament, and they should accept that. On Donald Gorrie's amendment and changing the site, Mike Watson had it right when he made his introductory remarks. Donald Gorrie and Margo MacDonald speak with considerable conviction but, as Mike Watson said, they have opposed Holyrood all the way down the line. That is perfectly respectable. They oppose it for their own reasons, and they come from that perspective. But are the alternatives in Donald Gorrie's amendment realistic? Calton Hill has already been through the system. I certainly do not believe that the time scale is realistic. Donald Gorrie's amendment says that comparisons of alternative sites should be completed by early June, yet the Holyrood project team will have completed the scheme design by 8 June. Any alternatives could not possibly have reached anything other than the outline proposal stage with indicative budgets. If Donald's amendment were passed, we would not be comparing like with like, in design or cost. The result would be more delay as Parliament, not unreasonably, asks for briefings that would compare like with like. It would suit some members to let this matter go on and on. The full design means drawings worked up to a certain level and ready to go out to tender. I have worked in the private sector. I know what that means. To get to that point from where we are now for the other sites, which is nowhere, would take a considerable time. Neither I nor anyone else in this chamber knows how long it would take, but it would take a considerable time. In fairness to Donald Gorrie, I will not say how long it would take, because I could only speculate, but he could only speculate too. A delay would not end on 8 June. How could it possibly? It would not be fair to anticipate the length of the delay, but there are some who would like to delay and delay and delay. Today, we have to decide whether we are a Parliament that considers and acts, or a Parliament that uses every excuse to prevaricate. Do we take control and move forward, or do we run away and hide? Gordon Jackson's amendment learns from the problems of the past, and takes us forward. It puts tight controls on the project. It brings in proper professional advice. It sets us on the road to the creation of a Parliament building that we can be proud of, and more important, a Parliament building that Scotland can be proud of.

The Scottish Liberal Democrats are fully committed to the precautionary principle. Our overall approach on all GM issues is to value caution and transparency. As the minister said in her introduction, it is right to be pro-safety, pro-environment and pro-consumer choice. In his conference speech in Plymouth last weekend, Charles Kennedy said that "the Liberal Democrats have constantly urged caution. We see science as a servant, never a master. The government must now go the whole hog. Back our policy of a five-year moratorium on commercial GM crops." My party has campaigned, and is campaigning, to impose tight European international regulations on all aspects of GMOs. The European Parliament's environment committee voted only on Tuesday to toughen up the European position on the 1990 directive on the deliberative release of GMOs into the environment. The European Parliament Liberal group voted to strengthen the accountability of biotech firms that are conducting GMO trials. In particular, the environment committee of the European Parliament is calling on European member state Governments to take action, when they consent to such trials, to prevent gene transfer from GMOs to other organisms. The committee proposes that biotech firms should have strict civil liability for any damage to human health or the environment that is caused by the release of GMOs and that they should take out liability insurance prior to any release. That would be an important step forward. There is surely no more hard-headed assessment of risk than in the insurance industry. Liberal Democrats are working to strengthen the regulatory regime, and I hope that the minister will address those two points in his summing-up later this afternoon. It is important that genetically modified crops are fully tested before there is any question of commercial growing. It is vital that we know the full facts and it is right to be cautious. Much greater scientific work is needed on the threat to the environment, which is why it is right to conduct field trials under strict controls that include the appropriate buffer zones. Taking the head-in-the-sand approach is akin to saying that, when Alexander Fleming discovered mould in a test tube, he should have poured Domestos in right away. After all, there would have been—to paraphrase—"legitimate causes for concern that have not been satisfactorily addressed".  In addition to that approach, food labelling measures are extremely important. We want consumers to make informed choices. We will push for GM-free labelling throughout Europe. It is right for consumers who want to avoid GMOs to be provided with clear labelling so that they have a choice. Anyone who goes into a supermarket anywhere in Scotland today can see that they are reacting to what consumers want: that is self-evident in any Sainsbury's, Safeway or Tesco in Scotland. This debate comes at a time when the public need strong reassurance about food safety. The new Food Standards Agency, which is to be based in Aberdeen, will play an important role independently of the Government. The ethical role that the minister mentioned in her speech is particularly important. I agree with Winnie Ewing, who said that GMOs are scary. That is why the ethical points the minister mentioned about the role of the FSA in that area are extremely important.

I am completely lost by Duncan Hamilton's question. I am sure that the minister will deal with that in his summing-up; I am giving the Liberal Democrat perspective. I have talked about what Charles Kennedy said, and the Liberal Democrat minister will respond to the debate on behalf of the Executive. A more significant development is the announcement of a large-scale trial at a farm near Inverurie, in Nora Radcliffe's constituency. It will enable scientists to assess the environmental impact of GM crops in comparison with more traditional farming practices. It is right for the public to be aware of what is happening in the locality and why. For that reason, it is right that the precise location of sites where GM crops are being grown should be published. Members may have read in The Press and Journal on Saturday about the proposed designation of the Ythan estuary as a nitrate-vulnerable zone. If science can reduce fertiliser inputs, and thereby help the environment, surely it is right to undertake the research. Scientific research can be an ally of Scotland's environment, although, given public concern and the questions that surround GM technology, it is right to publish justification for each separate trial. Transparency in decision making regarding what will be found out is important.  Liberal Democrats endorse the precautionary principle. A policy on GMOs must be based on caution, safety and good science. If evidence emerged from the trials that GMOs pose a threat, Liberal Democrats would argue strongly on the basis of sound science for a legally defensible ban. A commercial moratorium in Europe remains our key aim. The right approach is not pro or anti-GMO but pro-safety, pro-environment and pro-consumer choice.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received regarding its proposals to alter the structure and operation of the General Teaching Council. (S1O-1369)

Does the minister accept that I have received representations from teachers in my constituency regarding the proposals? Does he believe that there is a need for the GTC to reflect the breadth and diversity of the Scottish teaching profession, rather than one particular group?

From the Liberal Democrat benches, I welcome the minister's statement. She mentioned the modal shift and changes in transport. Does she accept that the Executive's policies on developing transport infrastructure must include measures towards stabilising and eventually reversing traffic growth if the objectives of the Scottish climate change programme are to be achieved? Further, does the minister recognise that the use of liquid petroleum gas can be a particularly helpful measure, especially in the Highlands and Islands and rural areas, towards alleviating the high cost of fuel that is faced by people in those parts of Scotland?

Does the minister accept that there are concerns in the wider community about the fairness of the planning system? Will she consider addressing concerns about the weight that is given to evidence and advice from bodies such as Scottish Natural Heritage?

Murray Tosh has obviously had too much Ayrshire air in the past few days. He certainly needs a bit of air-conditioning now. As Mr Lochhead's only solution was to look to Westminster for sources of finance, it appears that he missed the launch of the Scottish National party's flagship policy today, which apparently ditches Westminster for ever, saying that it is totally irrelevant. That rather drove a coach and horses through his argument. Neither Mr Lochhead nor Murray Tosh had an answer to the question, "What would you do?" In a debate that reflects the concerns of all of us about water charges—everyone has had representations on the matter—it is the responsibility of those who are speaking from the front benches to come up with some clear ideas about how they would deal with the issue. I do not have a problem with any party criticising what the Executive is doing, as long as it has a reasoned way of doing it better. We have not heard that from either of the Opposition parties.

I will finish my point. Murray Tosh glossed quickly over what happened with privatisation in the past. Some of us still remember that it was the Strathclyde water referendum that ditched attempts by the Tories to privatise water in Scotland. In fairness to Murray Tosh and, I think, to Richard Lochhead, no one disputes the fact that a massive injection of capital investment is needed—they accepted that, but they did not say how they would do it. Consumers face massive  increases—

I apologise. I missed that in the wide—how would I describe it—contribution that the member made. All three water companies are calling for RPI plus 7 per cent until 2012 at least. Scottish households face significant increases—the figures show that over the 12 years to 2012, water costs could increase by 150 per cent to 200 per cent. It is feared that potentially, Scottish water and sewerage charges could be the most expensive in the UK. The Executive is right to push for progress in protecting pensioners and low-income families. We have all had representations, particularly from people in those spheres, seeking help in that area. I hope that the minister, in her summing up, can be a little clearer about what is being introduced to help people on low incomes, particularly pensioners. I have had representations at constituency surgeries from people who are concerned about the difference between what will, apparently, be given in pensions in the forthcoming budget and what they might face in increased water charges. However, there are other options for improving the current costs. There is the potential for co-operative action among the three water boards, including, for example, joint billing services, joint service centres, joint complaints systems and savings on information technology. We should look to the water commissioner to take forward such ideas. The potential for co-operative action, in line with the spirit of the announcements by the Minster for Finance last week on local government, is important.

The water commissioner's role has been in place only since last November. We need to consider how that office can deal with some of the suggestions that I have just proposed. I would like to wait and see what can be done. However, Fergus Ewing has a point, in regard to  the overall cost of that particular operation. The other matter that could be considered is the structure of the boards and whether the three boards that we have at the moment are the right way to deliver the service. Again, there must be economies of scale. To answer Fergus's point, the water commissioner should be charged with considering whether, in the context of the three boards, there is a better way to deliver the service. There are issues of accountability—I am not sure whether we have accountability today. One cannot predicate a whole argument on local accountability—that is a dubious proposition, considering the way in which most people in Scotland currently view those structures. Options for economies of scale and improving overall service delivery must be considered. Murray Tosh raised some important points about where the Competition Act 1998 impinges on water authorities. I hope that the minister will clarify that in summing up. Scotland's water industry needs investment. We must alleviate hikes and charges, especially for pensioners and those on low incomes. I encourage the minister to consider streamlining and equalising charges through the structure and organisation of the water companies.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to revise the infectious salmon anaemia (ISA) control regime in the light of the expected revised EU directive permitting national ISA regimes. (S1O-1279)

The minister will share my pleasure at today's announcement of the European Parliament. Will he be sure to be at the Fisheries Council when this matter comes up, to ensure that it goes through, as I hope it will? Will the minister also take the opportunity to pursue the ISA restart scheme that has been organised by Highlands and Islands Enterprise? Does he have any information on the implementation of the scheme?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress the Scottish Law Commission has made in its review of the law of the foreshore and sea bed and when it is expected to submit its report to the Scottish Executive. (S1O-1094)

Does the minister accept the  need for the Executive to examine the functions of the Crown Estate in Scotland and to seek to influence and control some of those activities? Does he recognise the unfairness of the Crown's role, when ports such as Lerwick in my constituency currently have to pay the Crown Estate for dredging the sea bed to improve the facilities? Furthermore, Scottish salmon farmers, in addition to paying corporation tax, are also paying a production tax to the Crown.

I welcome the minister's announcement and, in particular, the proposals for concessionary fares—which will be welcomed by the committee that Andy Kerr chairs—and for a Highlands and Islands transport authority. I would like to ask the minister about congestion charging. Does she accept that it is important that people should be offered improvements in public transport before the charges come in, so that the choice is there and high-quality public transport alternatives are in place? In other words, does she agree that income and expenditure from charging must be utterly transparent?

On the theme of merit that he mentioned earlier, does the minister recognise that there are important differences across Scotland, in the roles that different bodies play? In this process, he needs to consider carefully those regional differences, as well as what is there already. Does the minister recognise, for example, that there is no one on the current board of the Scottish Environment Protection Agency from north of the Highland line, despite the role that that body plays for industries north of that line? Does he recognise that there are well-documented concerns about the chairmanship of Caledonian MacBrayne, and that there seem to be concerns about some members of the board of Highlands and Islands Airports, in regard to the roles that they have played in the past? We must therefore make this process much better and more transparent.

Today I have found out two things—that rhetoric can be at different levels and that it can be both consensual and aggressive. The contrast between the morning and the afternoon has been interesting. I welcome what the Minister for Transport and the Environment said and much of what Kenny MacAskill and Murray Tosh said—much of their rhetoric was important in setting the tone of how the Parliament will deal with this issue. The Liberal Democrats welcome the commitment to and continued support for sustainable development and stronger environmental policies that were secured in the partnership agreement. The Scottish Executive is doing more for the environment than previous Administrations have done, but we must not be complacent. The Conservative and SNP spokesmen have illustrated how much more we need to do. In terms of giving a push to what the Executive is doing, that is important. The key requirements for the environment are strategic environmental assessment and freedom of information. Those issues underpin much of what has been said today, particularly Murray Tosh's request for the minutes of the ministerial working group. It has been difficult to define sustainable development; indeed, it may be foolish even to begin to try. I share the view of Scottish Environment Link when it argues that sustainability is a concept that policy makers should understand rather than waste time in attempting to define. I know that Sylvia Jackson is conducting a study on behalf of the European Committee into the European Community's sixth environmental action plan. That is the sort of practical work that I think will help this Parliament's understanding of the area. The question that we must pose is: "Is Scotland sustainable?" Before today's debate, I read the 1996 study carried out by Friends of the Earth and funded jointly by the Scottish Office. It estimated that Scotland would have to cut its use of non- renewable resources by 25 per cent within a decade. It suggested that we needed to address Scotland's continued reliance on fossil fuels, a point that Kenny MacAskill made—his point about renewables was also important. As the report stated, we produce less than 10 per cent of our energy from renewable resources, whereas Denmark aims to get 100 per cent of its power from such sources by 2030. It also suggested that we needed to tackle the rate of traffic growth, which is one of the highest in Europe. Those are important themes, which encapsulate the difficulty of achieving the balance that sustainable development brings. I have two practical points about renewables. I recently visited Scottish and Southern Energy in Perth—something that we in the Highlands and Islands still call the Hydro. The people whom I spoke to there said that an impediment to developing renewables is that, in those parts of Scotland where it is possible to generate wind and wave power, it is not possible to use the transmission capacity because that capacity simply does not exist. The electricity regulator's drive for cheaper power does not help generating companies to invest in increased capacity, nor does the regulator allow generators to create spare capacity in anticipation of renewable development. I think that the Executive has a role in changing that situation, and I urge the minister to consider that point in winding up. Another difficulty is that the consumer may not be interested in green power; he or she wants cheap power. There is an added complication for environmentalists, who may oppose the development of renewable options such as wind farms in national scenic areas. There are competing demands and we must all be aware of them and try to work out the problems. The programme for government document, published last September, stated that the minister was committed to providing locational guidance on renewable energy development by the summer of 2000. That will be an important aspect of the debate. My second point about renewables is this: The Herald reported on Monday that the value of glass from bottle banks is dropping to zero because the major company involved in recycling glass has found that the bottom has fallen out of the market, as the price of new glass is falling all the time. Local authorities face increasing difficulties because of such factors. The progress that the Scottish Executive is making is important. When he winds up today, I would like the minister to outline the steps that have been taken to introduce the strategic environmental assessment in Scotland and what progress has been made. Parliament must strike a  practical balance between the increases that are needed in water quality and water charges for consumers, between increased power from renewables and the cost of electricity for consumers, and, as Robin Harper has said, between growing more organic food to satisfy consumer demand and the need for cheaper food. We must all toy with those balances and, irrespective of political boundaries, we must wrestle with those choices.

Here we go.

I will read from the motion in my name. It says that "the Liberal Democrats are opposed to the development of  the air traffic control system by public private partnership". It could not be clearer, Mr Russell.

I was just thinking that I go home on a Saab 340 turboprop every week, and at least I know now that there are more than two things that are wound up on an average morning. I will speak to the Liberal Democrat amendment in my name—and I say this for Murray Tosh's benefit—which sets out the Liberal Democrat position that: "the Liberal Democrats are opposed to the development of the air traffic control system by public private partnership".  That is clear, even if Mr Tosh is having some difficulty with comprehension this morning.

No, he can hold his horses. I would welcome a serious debate about external transport links and our air infrastructure but, unfortunately, we have not had that this morning. This debate is not about air links, freight to and from Scotland, air passenger duty or the Scottish airports and air services study—matters that we should discuss, but have not had the chance to discuss this morning. This debate is about the Ayr by-election. There are no two ways about it. The SNP's apparent diminishing popularity obviously has called for desperate measures. The BBC reported yesterday morning that the SNP had launched a premier chatline. Members may have heard that story on "Good Morning Scotland". Apparently, callers press 1 for a chat with Alex Salmond, 2 for a chat with Dorothy-Grace Elder, and, obviously, they press 999 for a chat with Kenny MacAskill. I want to concentrate briefly on air traffic control, because it is an important issue. I agree with Murray Tosh when he says that there is a need for more investment—no one doubts that—but we disagree on how that investment should come about. It is predicted that the number of flights will increase by 15 per cent in the coming 15 years. The question is how we make the investment.

I wish to make some progress, Mr Salmond. I visited Prestwick airport with my Westminster colleague Mike Moore in December. We met the chief executive of NATS and the general manager of Prestwick. We listened to the concerns about the need for £350 million of investment in Prestwick. We saw controllers at work. I fly every week, and along with many people I feel literally that our lives are in their hands. I was impressed by the dedication, professionalism and coolness of those staff in difficult circumstances. There is no doubt about the need for investment. We discussed with the union and staff representatives at Prestwick their concerns about the proposed part privatisation. Why are there so many concerns about those proposals? Air traffic controllers, who have a strong public sector ethos, believe—and made the point forcefully to us—that that will be undermined by commercial pressures. The point was made at Prestwick that the prevailing culture should be one of safety, not profit.

The Liberal Democrats do not agree with PFI, as Mr Salmond is well aware. The partnership Government has introduced a form of finance for those methods that makes progress on all the concerns that we had at the time of the election. This debate is on a reserved matter, and I will deal with the issues. Why are pilots also worried about those proposals? Why do the trade unions and operators oppose part privatisation? Those are not irrational, emotive people taking a short-term political view; they are pilots and air traffic controllers who make a cool, professional judgment about those decisions.

I will make some progress, Mr Tosh. I have only five minutes. The Government states that the public-private partnership model is the only method of making the necessary investment. There are two important points here. First, National Air Traffic Services does not cost the taxpayer one penny. The chairman of the Civil Aviation Authority confirmed that in a recent speech. NATS recovers all its cost because of the structure and the way in which it is financed, and indeed made a profit. Secondly, there are alternatives. The Liberal Democrats favour an independent, publicly owned company. Those alternatives were outlined in the speech that my colleague Mike Moore made in the House of Commons on 20 December. The Environment, Transport and Regional Affairs Select Committee of the House of Commons also produced many viable alternatives. The Institution of Professionals, Managers and Specialists, the union that represents more than 3,000 air traffic controllers in the United Kingdom, illustrated that an independent, publicly owned company would protect the NATS safety culture, it would promote investment and it would, above all, allow NATS to remain a publicly accountable organisation. Last Friday, the Government gave the Post Office the commercial freedom to act, while remaining in the public sector. I am sure that I am not the only member who has received a letter from the chairman of the Post Office in Scotland illustrating the benefits and extolling the virtues of commercial freedom in the public sector. There are sensible and viable options that could  mean the investment that everybody is agreed on, while reconciling the potential difficulty between safety and profit. I will not take lectures from the Tories on this. NATS explained to me at Prestwick that the Conservatives' ideological pursuit of their policies on Prestwick meant that the Scottish centre has been subject to delay after delay.

No. It is interesting that the Tories' Westminster transport spokesman, Bernard Jenkin, advocated complete privatisation. I see today that Murray Tosh has joined the Hague Conservatives, just in time for the visit this afternoon. The Tories' approach is to flog it and forget it. It is understandable, given the Ayr by-election, that the SNP has suddenly become interested in this issue. However, for example, the standing committee on the Transport Bill is debating this matter today, but the SNP could not care less. SNP members are not at Westminster, where it matters and where they could change the bill. Where was the SNP on 20 December when the Transport Bill was debated in the House of Commons? Not one SNP member spoke in that debate, when they had the chance to oppose it. They did not bother to turn up. What does the SNP do? It raises this matter in the Scottish Parliament, where members can debate it all day and cannot change anything.

The SNP can no longer be trusted to fight for Scotland on reserved matters. It is never, ever there; it does not care. I move amendment S1M-483.2, to leave out from "in the 21st century" to end and insert: "and acknowledges the potential for economic growth through improved air links; notes that the future of air traffic control and associated issues are a reserved matter outwith the remit of the Parliament, but recognises that there are concerns and that the Liberal Democrats are opposed to the development of the air traffic control system by public private partnership; strongly supports a two centre strategy to protect jobs at Prestwick; underlines the need to give the highest possible priority to air safety, and further notes that during the second reading of the Transport Bill in the House of Commons on 20 December 1999, no Scottish National Party MP spoke in the debate, and only one voted against the second reading of the Bill."

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has to ensure that water authorities are accountable to both businesses and domestic users for their water charges. (S1F-33)

Does the First Minister recognise that the water commissioner's role is extremely important and that, with the impending announcement of water charges for businesses, there is real concern, particularly in fish-processing and salmon-processing businesses, about possible increases in water and waste water charges? Will he ensure that the Executive keeps a close eye on that, so that businesses are not damaged by those charges?

The temptation to break this consensual approach is nearly too much for me. Has the minister considered the evidence that was presented by Friends of the Earth on Monday? Its head of research said:  "Most pollution comes from road traffic and improved technology will not be enough—we must have fewer vehicles on the road."  Does the minister accept the evidence that unless reductions in vehicle emissions are tied to road traffic reductions—which are opposed by both the Tories and the SNP—we will not meet these air quality standards?

I have very much enjoyed listening to this debate, in which there have been some extremely good speeches from members in all parts of the chamber. I have learned much. The Liberal Democrats agree that the priority that the Scottish Executive gives to housing in the first major piece of proposed social legislation in this Parliament is the right approach. Such an approach is long overdue. Speeches from members of all parties have reflected the need for such legislation. It is right that a right to high-quality housing is regarded as an integral part of social inclusion. The approach will try to provide decent and affordable housing. The aspiration linked to the homelessness initiative that has been discussed today—that by 2003 no one will sleep rough—is important. As the minister said, this Parliament needs to do something about the 0.5 million damp houses in Scotland. Much of what has been said today has  been about that. As Patricia Ferguson said, cold, damp and cramped homes affect health, education and job opportunities. Scottish people need greater security from bad landlords and more power to make decisions about their homes. The minister and other members pointed out that £300 million of new money is being invested in housing regeneration. It was noticeable from Fiona Hyslop's combative performance giving the SNP's perspective on these proposals that Andrew Wilson has had a busy Christmas, as spending commitments have certainly been reined in. However, Fiona could not resist suggesting that local authorities should spend money—a spending commitment is still a spending commitment, so the SNP has not quite kicked the habit it had before Christmas. The Liberal Democrats support many proposals in the bill, such as the introduction of probationary tenancies to tackle anti-social behaviour, and the strengthening of the role of local authorities in housing. Local authorities will be responsible for determining the priorities for all funding of housing in their area. It is important that they have that strategic role, as they are surely in the right position to judge local needs. Therefore, I do not believe that it is a good policy to aim for a specific percentage target of socially rented housing—surely circumstances will vary across the country. For example, as John Farquhar Munro said this morning, the Highlands need Highland solutions. The minister announced in December that Scottish Homes will be converted into an agency of the Scottish Executive. The new Scottish Homes will assume responsibility for the regulation and monitoring of all registered social landlords. As the minister pointed out in December, that is the end of a quango and a progressive change that Liberal Democrats support. It will put people—especially local people—back in control over the direction of their housing investment, and will ensure that standards are not just maintained, but improved. Liberal Democrats have reservations about the right-to-buy proposals, but I note that such reservations were not confined to members of my party: John McAllion, Malcolm Chisholm and Margaret Curran, the convener of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, all expressed concern about that. The important point is that Parliament will have the opportunity, through the committee, to assess the minister's proposals and to assess the evidence that housing associations and organisations will present. It is surely right to tackle the question of the right to buy in an appropriate setting. John McAllion and others said that a single social tenancy is an admirable principle, but as was made clear in an answer the minister gave  him this morning, at least a third of tenants will not have the right to buy under these proposals. It cannot, therefore, be regarded as the central feature of the overall package that is the single social tenancy. Members have illustrated the difficulties that could be created by right to buy in urban Scotland. The varied circumstances in Scotland's cities are exactly that. The variety of views on urban housing is illustrated by the fact that a single model for Glasgow will not be the best option for all parts of that city, let alone for other cities too. The committee has an important role in assessing whether that is the right way to go or whether there are better ways to tackle housing issues, particularly in terms of stock transfer. In that context, Mike Watson mentioned the extent of the proposed house building programme and asked whether it would be adequate. Many colleagues have also highlighted the difficulties that rural housing associations foresee in the particular form of right to buy that is proposed. It was disappointing that the Conservatives chose this morning to dismiss with such ease the concerns of rural housing associations. Murray Tosh, who has now left the chamber, could not quite decide whether he wanted a strategic right to buy or an absolute right to buy. In my constituency, housing professionals from Shetland Islands Council have pointed out that the key aim of the new housing partnership is to protect housing stock from right to buy and to retain the rented social sector. In addition, the greatest number of housing association right-to-buy sales are likely to be in Lerwick—the place in which there is most demand for housing. I reiterate a point that many rural members made this morning: replacing those houses is bound up with the problem of the availability of land. In that area, the housing strategy for Shetland identifies the need for social housing for rent. I have two further points about the rural perspective on housing and about my constituency. The replacement costs of building are important. Shetland Islands Council's housing plan points out that design specification, transport and climate add 20 to 50 per cent to construction costs in the central belt. That has implications for replacement costs and, even if discounts are capped, the disparity between the figures becomes ever bigger in such a scenario. The director of Hjaltland Housing Association wrote to me saying that, under the proposals, his organisation would be unlikely to be able to replace stock even at market value, never mind discounted value, as the market price falls considerably short of the replacement cost. Shelter and other organisations have expressed  concern about the figures for likely sales that the Executive has announced. I understand that Shelter has been involved in discussions with the minister and her officials. It suggests that the right-to-buy figures underestimate the number of properties that would be sold. My local council has sold 108 properties in the past year and that background gives rise to real concern for the housing association. Those points must be carefully considered and the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee will be the forum in which that can be done. If we do what we promised to do when we set up this Parliament—conduct proper scrutiny of proposed legislation—we will be able to have a proper debate about the matter and ensure that all concerns are addressed. Just as urban areas should not be seen as exactly the same throughout Scotland, neither should rural areas. There are apparently 42 different definitions of rural Scotland. Lumping Inverness and Perth together as rural in terms of housing policy is unhelpful and somewhat misleading, as it must skew the figures. Alternatives have been proposed. I hope that the options will be considered when the bill comes before the appropriate committee. For rural Scotland, improvements have been suggested to the tenant incentive scheme currently run by Scottish Homes. Extended rural home ownership grants have also been suggested. Both measures would encourage social tenants into the private sector while maintaining the socially rented sector. Other groups have proposed a strategic right to buy. I am advised that Shelter does not oppose right to buy, but sees the attraction of extending it to all tenants of social landlords. A truly strategic right to buy would allow landlords to vary discounts in priority areas. As John McAllion mentioned this morning, the Chartered Institute of Housing has suggested that there could be higher discounts in areas in which there is a shortage of owner-occupied housing or where rented housing is in low demand. Lower discounts would be needed where there is a shortage of rented housing to meet identified needs. In other words, some positive alternatives have been suggested and deserve careful consideration. Robin Harper made some good points about the healthy homes initiative. More can always be done, but I looked up the written answer that was prepared last year on the subject. It said: "The budget for improving home energy efficiency for low-income households in Scotland is £12 million for 1999-2000."—[ Official Report, Written Answers, 21 December 1999; Vol 4, p 12.] Some £4.5 million of that—

I shall be very brief. A considerable amount of money is being put into housing and I recognise the points that were made about progress. In housing policy terms, the Liberal Democrats support much of the bill's proposals. There are reservations about right to buy, which I hope can be addressed in committee, but a constructive debate about finding ways to improve and strengthen measures proposed by the Executive is surely what this Parliament is about. This debate has been progress toward that end.

I thank the minister for his statement—he will be aware that the words that he utters in the chamber are important to the industry in terms of the commercial decisions that it takes every day.  The minister mentioned Norway and Canada. In his discussions with the Norwegians and the Canadians, would he reflect on the control regimes that they have in place? If implemented here, such a regime would allow the Scottish industry to compete on a level playing field in an international commodity market. Will the minister clarify the terms of the adjustments to the requirements that apply to non-infected farms in the zones around confirmed and suspected sites? Will farms in such areas be able to take commercial decisions on restocking without restrictions, or will restrictions still be in place? If so, what will they be? Will the minister accept that terminology is important? Words such as "suspicious" are extremely market unfriendly for the industry in terms of supermarkets and consumers in general. Will he consider the terminology when, as he intimated, he makes a further report to the chamber?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made towards introducing flexibility into the postgraduate education allowance to address the travel costs faced by island-based general practitioners who wish to update their training. (S1O-831)

Will the minister accept that while distance learning has its place, island GPs depend for maintaining their professional role on a training regime that includes personal contact between GPs? Will she investigate the concerns of GPs in Shetland that the time being taken to come to a decision on this matter is over years, not months?

From the Liberal Democrat benches, I welcome the strategy that has been announced this morning, particularly the move towards Liberal Democrat targets for recycling and waste minimisation. Does the minister accept that Scotland's record on recycling is pretty woeful: 5.48 per cent in Scotland compared with 34 per cent in Norway and 58 per cent in Switzerland? How will the minister ensure that the plans that emerge from the strategy will be implemented and benchmarked against the performance of other comparable European nations? Will the minister consider the strategy when she assesses the varying performance of local government throughout Scotland, the need to  develop integrated waste management strategies and the setting of a timetable for the finalisation of those strategies?

Look back.

I know that you, Presiding Officer, have some personal interest in fisheries and that you know some of the leading lights in Shetland—my part of the world. I was reflecting on that last night as I went through fisheries papers. The fishing industry in Shetland is crucial and is worth some £160 million. The December Fisheries Council is seen by many people in Shetland as a necessary and anticipated evil. The secretary of the Shetland Fishermen's Association is on local radio more than the local MSP—which is, of course, a great relief to the people of Shetland. The council is an important time and we should go forward in the constructive manner that has, on the whole, been suggested by what we have heard today. I wish that people had concentrated on the fact that we are debating the Fisheries Council, rather than some of the other—more necessary, as some would see it—political items. I would like to pick up on a number of points that have been raised. When the European Committee discussed fisheries briefly yesterday, the view that was expressed—a view that comes across strongly in the representations that we receive from the industry—was that an annual ritualistic cycle is no way to run a business. Fishing and fishermen with their boats are a business and should be seen as such. They must plan and invest year to year, but trying to do that  when it is not clear what will happen and when there are rises and falls in planning quotas is not an appropriate way to run an industry. I agree with what Richard Lochhead and others have said about continuous assessment of quotas. I hope the Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs will support that. The principle that fishermen should be involved in industry decision-making processes leading to stock assessments is crucial. I encourage the minister to take that forward in every way he can. Elaine Thomson mentioned the relationship between scientists and fishermen. The way in which the North Atlantic Fisheries College in Shetland works is an excellent example of that. I read the Hansard report of the recent Westminster debate that Alex Salmond mentioned and noticed that the MP for Great Grimsby, Mr Mitchell, suggested Grimsby as the location for the national institute of fisheries, recommended by a recent House of Commons select committee report. Andrew George, speaking for the Liberal Democrats, pointed out that in an age of information technology a national institute could be spread round institutes and sites of scientific skills around the whole of the UK. The North Atlantic Fisheries College in Shetland is the premier example in Scotland and I hope that all parties will support a role for it in such a concept. Important points were made today about measures to conserve fish. They should be supported by all parties. Lewis Macdonald made those points well. I tried to demonstrate to the European Committee yesterday—rather badly, I may say—the benefits of different styles of net. I will not go into that again. The Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs knows the arguments; there is a real mood for conservation changes in the haddock fishery. Murray Tosh did not seem quite to pick up that point—we are talking about haddock, not all species. If he had read the Scottish Fishermen's Federation brief, he would have seen, on haddock: "The Federation's objective is to restore the quota by adopting, unilaterally, additional technical conservation measures." That is a legitimate and very important point for the future of sustainable fishing of that species. The minister's announcement on safety was good. Since he mentioned horsepower, will he in his winding-up speech consider that the really important issue there is dealing with the different regimes that apply across Europe? Our fishermen must not be disadvantaged by a horsepower regime that is different from that in the rest of Europe.

Thank you. Fishing is a hugely important Scottish industry, it is right for us to have a debate on it now, and I hope the Parliament will support the motion in the name of the minister.

To ask the Scottish Executive when ministers last met the North of Scotland Water Authority and what matters were discussed. (S1O-630)

Will the minister investigate the authority's reported intention to levy the highest water charges in Scotland yet also reward its senior staff with performance bonuses? Does not the current situation illustrate the need for a root-and-branch reform of that quango, so that it becomes more responsive to customer needs?

I am grateful for that advice, Presiding Officer. I want to pick up on a couple of points on transport that Murray Tosh, Cathy Jamieson and Kenny Gibson made earlier. On modernisation—that sometimes despised word—it is important to recognise that public moneys, carefully targeted on a variety of modes of public transport, are an important investment in the future of the Scottish economy. Investment in transport unblocks the arteries of our economy and is especially needed. We need a modern, efficient and affordable transport system to move both people and goods. We must be prepared to address those needs and target our spending to meet them. Professor McKinnon of Heriot-Watt University argued, at a transport conference in Glasgow a  couple of weeks ago, that average transport costs comprise 2 to 3 per cent of Scottish companies' sales revenues. He pointed to the importance of minimising the impact of congestion to improve economic output by rescheduling deliveries. He quoted the figure of "15% of lorry traffic between 8pm and 6am" and mentioned the need to use "Alternative modes and routes - north sea ro-ro links and railfreight services". Other members mentioned those matters earlier.

I will come back to Murray. We have had this discussion before, and those issues have been considerably debated. I have a minute and a half and I want to make two or three other points. The Highlands and Islands and the Borders lack the basic transport infrastructure necessary for their economies. Airports could modernise our economy, and investment in them, to which we do not currently pay enough attention, is particularly important. Tourists can be brought in and businesses can export through them. An extension to the runway of Sumburgh airport in Shetland, for example, would allow airlines to make better decisions. If instrument landing systems—ILS—were introduced at Kirkwall airport, that would improve the service to the Orkney tourism industry. At Inverness, passenger service charges handicap the development of the local economy. That point was made by the local chamber of commerce. Representatives of a local aviation company at Wick wrote to me recently. They claim to be handicapped by the restriction on hours of operation. Investments in the examples that I have mentioned would improve the economies in those areas. We need to invest in air transport for the future. The Scottish Executive must reject the short-term lead of Westminster, with its ill-considered plans to sell off the National Air Traffic Services, and instead show what can be done by wise, targeted investment in our public transport systems, especially in air transport.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in discussions with the European Commission to relax or modify the regulations relating to the control of infectious salmon anaemia and what further meetings with the Commission are currently proposed. (S1O-552)

Does the minister accept that the discovery of ISA as far afield as the River Tweed shows that it is a wild disease and that therefore the outcome of the current eradication policy will be simply to eradicate the whole Scottish salmon industry?

I was thinking about which government handed over most sovereignty to the European Union in the past. Never have so many Tories been misunderstood as today. The Liberal Democrats support the motion in the name of the First Minister because it is positive about Scotland's engagement with Europe. An outward-looking Parliament is part of a positive approach to promoting peace, to protecting the environment, to opening up trade opportunities and to assisting the stable development of less fortunate regions. We oppose the SNP and Tory amendments. The SNP calls for an independent Scotland. People voted for devolution and rejected independence and want Scotland to play a constructive role in Europe as part of the United Kingdom. We oppose the Tory amendment because it is a contradiction in terms: is it never, or never say never again, on the euro? A party with an objective that would damage our economy, fishing and farming, which created the beef war and which now wants a European opt-out on anything they do not like, is not a party fit to  take forward our engagement with Europe. The only thing the Tories like less than Europe is themselves. On the BBC recently Chris Patten warned his party that it is "making no sense on Europe, and risks losing mainstream support through its policies". I further quote: "Let me be quite clear. Britain does not dream of some cosy, isolated existence on the fringes of the European Community. Our destiny lies in Europe, as part of the Community." That was Margaret Thatcher, in Bruges in 1988. That is still true. Scotland needs to benefit from the European drive to create opportunities to secure new jobs, ensure stable prices—

If I must.

Someone who is dear to you, Brian.

Mr Monteith gets so many things wrong. The constituency is Orkney and Shetland. Scotland needs to benefit from the European drive—I know that the Tories do not like it, but that is what happens in the real world, not in the world that they live in—towards opportunities to create jobs. Presumably, the Tories are against that as well. Scotland needs to benefit from the drive towards stable prices, greater wealth creation prospects, increased security, an extension of democracy and a clean environment. However, we need a better debate, which raises the stakes on the euro. The Liberal Democrats are committed to joining the single currency to prevent Scotland and the United Kingdom being marginalised by an unstable and uncompetitive currency, to prevent even higher costs to business and to prevent risks to investment.

Forgive me, but I must move on. Adopting the euro will improve trade with our nearest neighbours, reduce costs and deliver lower interest rates. As a farmer who exports lambs to southern Mediterranean countries, I  appreciate from a business perspective, which may be alien to some Tory members, the need for stable exchange rates. Scotland's agricultural organisations, particularly the National Farmers Union, have argued for and supported the euro. Liberal Democrats are taking a positive approach—

The NFU has supported the euro for a considerable time. Its aspiration is to ensure stable exchange rates so that we can export to markets that are the future for Scotland's agricultural industry. I support that position. Liberal Democrats are taking forward a positive approach and setting a positive agenda to reform the EU, confront the concerns about fraud, reduce the democratic deficit and diminish our people's intransigence about what goes on in Brussels and Strasbourg. Liberal Democrat MEPs are demanding the creation of a European anti-fraud office, which is independent of the Commission, to be the European citizens' champion to tackle fraud and incompetence. Tory MEPs are opposing that measure. Liberal Democrats also have called for a constitution for Europe to help tackle waste and inefficiency. A constitution would define and limit the powers of Brussels. MSPs such as myself who represent constituencies in the Highlands and Islands seek co-operation from Europe on the problem of infectious salmon anaemia, which is a viral disease that is causing severe damage to a Scottish industry that employs 6,000 people, mostly in the Highlands and Islands. In Norway, the disease is managed in a sensitive way, to keep it under control while maintaining the industry. Within the EU, ISA is classed as exotic and as a list 1 disease. Attempts have been made to eradicate ISA, but recent news of the spread of the disease to new areas shows that that attempt is not working. However, the controls that have been imposed have been so draconian that, if left in place, the eradication policy may eradicate the salmon farming industry. The UK Government, led by the Scottish Executive, has been working in Europe for a relaxation of ISA controls. Now the Executive has clear grounds to push for the end to list 1 status, and for a move to follow the more realistic Norwegian practice. That must happen, because the industry cannot afford to wait. At times like these we need a co-operative relationship with Europe. We cannot expect to be given a sympathetic hearing if, like the Tories, we use the EU as a punch-bag. The UK's 10 votes gives us a  Scottish voice backed by Westminster, which speaks louder than Scotland's voice on its own on vital Scottish interests. Europe has given stability to formerly unstable countries, democracy where there was none and prosperity where once there was poverty, but greater than all those achievements must be peace. Europe must make up for its failure to respond adequately to the Balkan crisis by building a stronger, wider, peaceful Europe. When so many people in the world are stateless, I want a Europe where I, as a Shetlander, a Scot and a Briton, can also be a European.

Murray Tosh's speech was entertaining, but I think that someone must have slipped something into his water before he started because he was much more animated than he usually is. It is clear that the Tories care about roads, but it is also clear that they care about nothing else to do with transport. Scotland needs a strategic and sustainable transport infrastructure and that  involves roads. Roads are not the be-all and end-all of a strategic and sustainable infrastructure, but it is right to consider roads as part of an integrated network. Today's announcement of further investment in Scotland's strategic road network, although limited, is welcome. I particularly welcome the investment in the Mallaig road in the light of the members' business debate that was held recently on that subject. I am sure that all who have campaigned on that issue will also welcome the announcement. Choices in government are about priorities. When the Conservatives were in government, the UK and Scotland had a roads policy and nothing else. We have moved away from that and on to the new politics, which involves considering all forms of transport as part of an integrated structure. In my view, and in the view of the Liberal Democrats, that is the right way to approach the problem of moving people and businesses around the country. It is unfortunate that Murray Tosh does not share that view. The far right has an ideological obsession with the market, the market and nothing but the market. When buses and trains were deregulated and privatised, we saw the results of that obsession. Last night, to remind myself of previous debates, I re-read the Official Report for 16 September 1999—a Conservative Opposition day on which there was a debate on transport—just before I watched "Newsnight Scotland". Mr Tosh is, apparently, a politician to watch—but not on television, to judge by last night's performance.

Mr Tosh may feel rather contrite about what he said about Railtrack. Given subsequent events, he may want to revisit the comments that he made at that earlier debate. The coalition's approach is clear: we seek to build an integrated transport strategy for Scotland, and strategic roads investment has a vital role to play in that. The Tories do not want that, as has been explained again today, and it appears that the nationalists do not want it either. The Scottish National party wants to complete the strategic network in full, and Mr MacAskill confirmed that in The Scotsman this morning and on "Good Morning Scotland". Yet what did the SNP manifesto say? It said: "we will undertake a full review of all planned existing road development schemes to ensure that road developments are prioritised to deliver the maximum safety, social and environmental benefits." Quite. Absolutely. That is exactly the right approach and that is what the roads review is all about. However, the SNP's position has now changed and another chunk of the manifesto has  gone up in smoke. Given that the SNP is now committed to the full strategic roads network, Mr MacAskill has committed his party to the M74 extension, too. What did the SNP's Glasgow local government manifesto say in the 1999 election? "SNP councillors will oppose granting of planning permission for this motorway. Nationally, the SNP will oppose wasting Holyrood's too little money on what would be the most expensive motorway in Europe". I wonder when Kenny MacAskill plans to next meet his colleagues on Glasgow City Council. How would the SNP fund the entire programme? Mr MacAskill would not say. How will the SNP pay for the extra spending? Where will it find £800 million? Will Mr MacAskill cut other programmes or raise taxes? What time scale is envisaged for that £800 million spending commitment? There were no answers to any of those questions, and I do not see why members in this chamber should not hear those answers.

If Mr MacAskill answers the questions, I will be delighted to give way.

It is taxation, but the point about the fuel tax escalator is that the money that comes from it goes into the general taxation pot at Westminster and is then apportioned to priority areas as the Government sees fit. The priority area that has been identified in Scotland—as set out in the partnership document—is an integrated transport system. The SNP does not want that, the Tories do not want that, but this partnership Government does. That is the right approach for the future of Scotland. This is a devolved Parliament in the context of the money that is available to us. The people voted for it and rejected independence. Let us deal constructively with what we have: a transport policy with a significant roads element, not the fantasy fairyland that we have heard about from the Opposition.

Will Mr MacAskill give way?

On "Good Morning Scotland" today, Mr MacAskill said that he wanted to implement the strategic roads review in full. Is that the SNP's position? What is its time scale for implementation?

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S1W-385 by the Minister for Transport and the Environment on 9 August 1999, whether it has yet received advice from its nature conservation advisers and whether Scottish Natural Heritage has any plans to designate the seas around Fair isle as a marine special protection area under the birds directive. (S1O-523)

Does the minister accept that the local community and fishing and environmental organisations are working towards the designation of Fair isle as a marine SPA? Will she support the island's application to be awarded a European diploma by the Council of Europe on the basis of the island being declared a special marine area?

I assure the minister that those of us who come from fishing constituencies will not find speeches on fisheries boring. Indeed, we will look forward to them. Is the aid for new build that the minister mentioned in the context of FIFG available to all parts of the catching sector, or will the multi-annual guidance programme requirements prevent some sectors from taking it up? On the minister's point about closer dialogue with the fishing industry, I understand that the committee that has existed since 1971 has not achieved a heck of a lot. The important principles are that the new structures take into account the views of Scottish fishing organisations and, perhaps more important, that in the context of developing regional management of fisheries, the new committee and new structures of dialogue can be adaptable to those changes. Will the minister consider those points?

I thought that Mr Davidson illustrated rather well the difficulties that the Conservatives have on Europe, although his speech was rather long. In his opening remarks, Mr Crawford introduced an important context—that of the wider and enlarging Europe. We need to take that into account, particularly with regard to what may happen a number of years down the line. However, this is a devolutionary settlement, not an independence settlement. We need to be positive about what we can achieve with European funds in that context, rather than in a context that does not and will not exist. Mr Crawford did not speak much to his amendment and, in particular, to the point about unsatisfactory consultation. I have done some research and tried to consult organisations, particularly in the Highlands and Islands, which have concerns of which I want to be aware. The consultation has been very full: it has involved partners and the plan team, which includes local enterprise companies and local authorities. In general, I do not recognise the problem that is described in this amendment. Clearly, different sectors want more. That will always be the case. However, Bruce Crawford was present at the meeting of the European  Committee last week at which the minister asked the committee to identify areas where it wanted there to be more investment; in other words, to make a pitch for increased funding where the committee considered that important. David Mundell raised agricultural diversification, Winnie Ewing raised fisheries and Allan Wilson made the case for more transport infrastructure. In other words, members had an opportunity to put their case.

If Bruce Crawford had made that point in his speech, it might be a fair comment, but he did not say anything about that. I thought that members were supposed to speak to their amendments. I take the point about the European Committee, but what is important is how the plan team put its proposals together, how it introduced its ideas and how it came up with what it considered to be the best use of the moneys that were available. Having been given some information about the benefits of the devolution settlement in the context of European funding, it seems to me that we need to be aware of the wider context. I understand that, earlier this autumn, Stephen Boyle of the Royal Bank of Scotland gave evidence to the Finance Committee. He said that "Identifiable spending per capita in Scotland was 19% higher than the UK average" and that "Per capita spending in Scotland" was "higher in all programmes than in UK". He also said that what he called the "Scottish 'premium'" was "greatest in agriculture, housing, environmental services & 'economic development'". Those statements were illustrated in a table. Current spending on structural funds amounts to some £150 million per year—1 per cent of the assigned budget. In that context, surely structural funds complement national and local social and economic development programmes. The other issue that I would ask Mr Crawford to consider is the additionality point. If the additionality point is so much at odds with what  these plans are doing and with the submission that the Executive is making, the Commission will say that and find difficulties with the plans. However, that has not been the experience in the past. We will see the proof of the pudding in what happens when the plans are put forward. I was never happy about arguing that the Highlands and Islands was a desperately poor area. To rabbit on about that demeans the work that many local authorities and local enterprise companies did when seeking the son of objective 1 funding—the transitional support. Sparsity of population was the key to that. We should pay credit to the work that those people did rather than pour scorn on their efforts. I believe that more money from the Highlands and Islands programme could be allocated to fisheries. Because the programme is shorter, we need more time. The moneys will be cut unless we can increase the allocation. I want to finish by reiterating Mr Davidson's point about the role of the European Committee. Like the other committees of the Parliament, the European Committee has a role in monitoring and putting in place mechanisms to ensure that these programmes achieve their objectives.

I am not the only person who has had to go out to do a TV interview and has then spoken. Mr Sheridan speaks with considerable eloquence on the areas he is deeply concerned about, but I still think the £17.4 billion is not just a small morsel and, although we can differ on how we might spend it, it is a considerable sum of public money. For the Liberal Democrats I wish to recognise the investment that is going into transport and the environment in the increase from £570 million to £587 million over three years. I also welcome the additional money in relation to the strategic roads review. Thirty-five million pounds will not deal with all the concerns and requirements of communities around Scotland but, as was said earlier, might be able to deal with the Mallaig road, for example. That is an important step forward and shows that the partnership  Government is listening to a particularly important area of concern in Scotland. While the broad sums are important, some of the more minor details are also important. The former chief executive of a council I worked in told me that, as a councillor, I should worry about only the vision and not the small details, but the detail is what builds the vision and we should concern ourselves with it. The Minister for Finance mentioned the Scotland Office and its £5.7 million budget and 130 civil servants. I would like to understand what that money is being used for and our role in ensuring accountability for it. In an article by Mr John Reid I read in The  Parliamentary Monitor this week he explains the secretary of state's role. He said: "it is my job to ensure that Scotland's voice continues to be heard at Cabinet" and, when drawing up the assisted areas map, "in consultation with my Cabinet colleagues I was able to ensure that the UK government's decision was fair to Scotland." In the longer term, in the federal Britain that Liberal Democrats seek, there would be no role for the Secretary of State for Scotland. I accept, for now, as the Minister for Finance made clear, that there is a need for a secretary of state looking after Scotland's interests in Cabinet. I have concerns about the scale of the operation, however. There are questions that should be asked about accountability and scale: what do all 130 civil servants do and how does this Parliament ensure that the secretary of state represents our views? Kenny MacAskill expressed concern at a Transport and the Environment Committee meeting about how we would be able to make representations to the UK Government on the fuel escalator. That is an obvious role for the secretary of state. I am interested in how we as a Parliament make sure our representations are fed into that process. While today there has been an important step forward in terms of financial accountability—

Mr Swinney is talking about a Government in which I was not involved. I am  interested in what is happening now. I want the representations that the Parliament makes on particular issues to be taken forward in the most active way possible. That is what I am trying to allude to and tease out today. While the Parliament creates an opportunity to be accountable over finances, in this case it is, to some extent, not matched by any accountability over that aspect of our democratic life. It should be, and I look forward to finding ways in which that can be taken forward.

I am grateful to Mr Stone for pointing out so quickly that it is my turn. I congratulate Fergus on securing today's debate. I am also grateful to him for clarifying two points. The first is that we each get only two members' debates a year—a fact of which I was unaware. It will be difficult to think of a subject for my second one, and Duncan Hamilton will probably have the same problem. Fergus's second point was that he intended to keep his remarks short. I am conscious that some of us, when taking an opportunity such as this, tend to waffle on for longer than we might otherwise.

Thank you. Highlands and Islands issues generally play a significant role in this chamber, and it is important that ministers are here to respond to the points that are raised. To some extent, that allays many people's fears that issues that are important in our part of the world will not get a full and proper airing in a Parliament in the centre of Edinburgh. As my constituency is dependent on fisheries, I want to follow Fergus's lead in speaking of fishing ports and his use of statistics in showing the importance of those ports. That is the key  argument in justifying the need for the changes that he is seeking to make as a constituency MSP. I understand, from figures that I pursued today, that Mallaig is the second most important port in the UK for landings of prawns and shellfish, of which it handles nearly £11 million-worth annually. Mallaig is important in a European context, as it handles 13 per cent of the European prawn catch and it is a major supplier to European markets. It goes without saying, therefore, that the links that companies and individuals can make with the European markets is an essential part of running successful businesses on the periphery of the European Union. We need to invest in the transport links, as they are hugely important. That is especially so in the context of fisheries. There are many roads throughout Scotland about which community groups can make strong cases for investment and infrastructure improvements. Having talked to colleagues and having seen it with my own eyes, I suggest that the strong case that Fergus Ewing is putting to the Parliament today is such an example. I saw Malcolm Chisholm. John Munro was telling me earlier that, when he was the convener of Highland Council's transport committee, Malcolm Chisholm—who was sitting at the back of the chamber a minute or two ago—was, as the Scottish Office transport minister, taken down the road in a 40 ft refrigerated articulated lorry. The council had stitched it up to arrange for bottlenecks all the way down, so that he saw the traffic problems at their worst. Perhaps we should arrange that sort of subtle investigation for Mr Morrison, so that he can truly appreciate the situation. I support Fergus Ewing's motion and I hope that the minister, in summing up, can give him some comfort.

Does the minister recognise that one of the reasons Ollaberry in Shetland won the crofting township of the year award is that it is an active and vibrant community? A crofting outgoers scheme, which would free up crofts for new entrants, would be a helpful reform. Does the minister agree that that would help to revitalise crofting communities?

One of the joys of living in Shetland is that one cannot rush for a train at this time of night. I am stuck here in Edinburgh until Friday morning, but that creates time to speak on this subject, which is important for my constituency and, I would argue, for Scotland as a whole. I am grateful to the Parliamentary Bureau for allocating time in the busy parliamentary day for this debate and I would like to bring a number of issues to do with the salmon farming industry to the attention of the Parliament. I will give the example of the island of Skerries, which is 10 miles off the east coast of Shetland and is home to some 80 people. The island has white fish trawlers, inshore fishing boats, a fish farm processing factory, and—of course—a salmon farm. The salmon farm is not owned by a multinational, nor is it owned from outwith the island—it is owned and managed from within the island of Skerries. It is the community—more than half the jobs on the island rely on it. The community grows, harvests and packs its own fish. Skerries salmon farm had a suspected case of infectious salmon anaemia—ISA—in May, which could lead to the forced slaughter of the fish and a six-month fallow period on the farm, during which there can be no restocking. The regime that now dictates the future of the farm puts the community in jeopardy. Along with the rest of the industry in Shetland, the Skerries salmon farm needs solutions, urgent action and a Government that cares about peripheral communities. Skerries epitomises all that is best about a go-ahead determined community that is living, literally, on the edge of the world. Failing the people there, and many others like them, is not an option. Skerries is a microcosm of Shetland.  Aquaculture has kept communities alive: it means new houses, rural schools growing and not closing, active public hall committees, and active communities throughout Shetland. Turnover in the industry in the islands has grown from some £220,000 in 1984 to some £57 million last year. The industry produces 35,000 tonnes of salmon. A total of 46 farms employ more than 400 people directly and 900 in total, representing 8 per cent of the working population in Shetland. That is how important salmon farming is to the community I live in. Those of us who are aware of ISA know that it is a naturally occurring viral disease that cannot affect humans. It is simply the fish equivalent of the common cold. The advice of the Advisory Committee on the Microbiological Safety of Food is that the disease poses no threat to humans. The disease was first formally recorded in Norway in 1984. Incidents were then reported in Canada. Today, we must discuss how the Executive's policy of ISA eradication can be adapted to give the industry some hope for a sustainable future. Last Monday, in a statement released to the salmon industry, Mr Home Robertson said: "There is no room for complacency, but I believe some adjustments to the current policy would be appropriate. This would lessen the burden the disease is imposing on the industry and discussions to that end are underway with the EC". I welcome that statement and I hope that the minister can add to it by announcing what adjustments will be made. The minister's view that the industry must act is acknowledged in Shetland. Many positive measures have already been—or are in the process of being—introduced. In Shetland, salmon farmers have been proactive in improving procedures, in ever tightening their hygiene standards and in working towards a sustainable future. The industry is setting up a series of blood water treatment plants, which amounts to £600,000-worth of future investment from a variety of financial sources and which includes input from the Shetland salmon industry. The industry is also working towards a fundamental reform of the works licence policy, which is happening with the co-operation of environmental organisations, the local authority and the industry, and a code of best practice that will cover all aspects of salmon farming, including husbandry, stocking and hygiene. Shetland has its own independent quality control mechanisms and individual farms are completing accreditation and proceeding through to the Scottish food quality certification status which, as Mr Home Robertson and Mr Finnie know, covers  not just salmon but all of Scotland's food output. Although the industry is making progress, it needs the support of the Government. I welcome the minister's announcement on 6 September of £3 million a year in a reinvestment package through Highlands and Islands Enterprise. That is a step forward, as is dropping the matching funding requirement in light of the PricewaterhouseCoopers report. However, the industry needs to have details worked out quickly and I am hoping for such a commitment from the minister today. It took from February to September to get the reinvestment package right. The relaxation sought by the industry must happen. I hope that the minister will accept the urgency of the situation and that he will pass that urgency on to his officials to get them out to farms to work with practical people in order to get the situation right quickly. I hope that, for example, he can send his officials to Shetland to work with the Shetland salmon industry towards practical solutions, because people there want to work through the problems quickly so that the industry knows where it is going. Mr Home Robertson's statement rejects the industry's call for a Government-funded insurance scheme. The minister knows that commercial insurers will consider insuring against ISA only if the European Union's regime moves towards a set of control measures as used in Norway, which includes a cage-by-cage slaughter regime. The time scale by which fish must be removed is also hugely important. I ask that the minister, after his statement last week, update the industry on those changes with considerable urgency so that commercial insurance—the big step forward—can be included in the equation as soon as possible. Such changes will mean adaptation or interpretation of the EU rules. In his closing remarks, will the minister describe what stage discussions on the matter are at and what progress the department is making in Brussels? Will he also set out the time scale within the EU for approving a vaccine as part of the eradication plan? The costs of ISA to Shetland salmon farming are huge. Losses between September 1998 and June 1999 have been calculated at £1.9 million. Forecast losses due to the deferral of smolts—baby salmon—that have been put in cages as part of the eradication regime are estimated at £5 million, which amounts to 20,000 tonnes of farmed salmon and 900 jobs. What happens to those jobs if production is cut in half? In the past six to eight months, some 36 jobs have gone. I want that process to stop. I want the industry, which is the future of the island in so  many ways, to stop haemorrhaging. The final issue I ask the minister to address is the production tax levied by the Crown Estate. Skerries Salmon—a small farm—pays corporation tax; it does not need to pay yet another tax. It pays £19.50 a tonne to the Crown Estate. For what? Members may well ask. In the past year, £650,000 was removed from an industry in Shetland that was in crisis. I am sure that colleagues from other parts of the Highlands and Islands could give similar figures. I want that £650,000 to be reinvested, for example in research, and not used for a little help here or a little research project there. We need a real long-lasting worthwhile project that benefits not just the current generation of salmon farmers but future generations. I want to suggest that the Crown Estate tax is put back into the industry using, for example, the highly skilled educational and research facilities at the North Atlantic Fisheries College in Scalloway, which I know the minister visited on his recent trip to Shetland. The industry must have a sustainable and viable future and we must build that future. The Executive should tell the Crown Estate, which has for so long taken money out of the industry, that its time is up and that it is time to put the money back into building the future. Building a new future must be the Parliament's commitment in support of a hugely important Shetland and Scottish industry. I ask the minister to consider some of those points in his reply.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Tourism Strategy to be published in January 2000 will address the problem of high transport costs faced by the tourism industry in island areas. (S1O-308)

Can the minister confirm that the tendering requirements for the new vessels of the northern isles ferry service, a vital service for tourists coming to Shetland, will specify that two passenger vessels must be provided to maintain a regular overnight service between Lerwick and Aberdeen?

Is David McLetchie aware that the Liberal Democrat members of the Westminster Parliament voted against the fuel tax escalator at every opportunity when it came up as a budget measure? Their principal argument was that it would harm rural areas unless compensating measures were introduced. That is the position, and David McLetchie should try to get it right.

I have heard it all now; the answer to the SNP's fiscal problems is that oil prices will go up and up and up. We really have heard it all today. I welcome Mr Tosh's opening sentiments. Indeed, it is good to debate transport and Scotland's transport needs. However, in terms of policy development in Scotland, the motion is deficient for several reasons, not least of which is that it would achieve nothing and add to congestion on our roads. Further, a significant dose of hypocrisy underpins Conservative policy. The motion fails to provide the leadership, vision and honesty that we need in relation to investment in Scotland's future transport needs. To propose, as the motion does, to increase current spending on Scotland's roads while, on the other hand, opposing congestion charging is inconsistent and illogical. It is a typical Tory policy of mutual contradictions. To then demand that the Westminster Government increase spending on transport is fine, but then—typically of the Tories—Mr Tosh somewhat missed the point. The motion does not mention public transport; the implication is clear: buses and trains are not a factor in moving people round Scotland's roads and cities.

The Tory policy is that the car is king; nothing has changed about that. The Tory approach in Scotland today has a discreet whiff of former Tory ministers—something of the Steve Norris approach—and the car is king. Scotland has been down that Tory single-track road and has said no; there must be a better way of approaching our needs. Look at what happened to public transport when the Conservatives were in power. Between 1992 and 1997, there was a 12.2 per cent decrease in the number of passenger journeys on local bus services, or 65 million fewer bus trips by Scots. The number of passenger journeys by rail fell to its lowest in 1995. The Tories see the car as the only solution. That is narrow—

No, Mr Tosh has already had one go; he has been up and down faster than a number of things I could mention. [Laughter.]  To ignore public transport is one thing, but to oppose congestion charging is another. The former is confirmation that the Tories have lost none of their prejudices; the latter illustrates a degree of hypocrisy. How Lord James can sign the motion—in particular paragraph (b), which opposes tolls—when he was the Scottish transport minister who introduced the Skye bridge tolls, is quite beyond my humble comprehension. However, it is not fair to mention only Lord James. I will quote Ian Lang, then Secretary of State for Scotland, from the document "Paying for Better Motorways". Last week, the Tories made much of the colour of documents; the cover of this one is a nice tone of blue. "Charging could provide another source of financing for improving roads. This would improve the service to road users . . . and ensure that we make more effective use of the existing network."

Mr Lang concluded: "Direct charging would . . . secure the efficiency and value for money that a market approach would bring." This year David McLetchie said in "Stop Labour's Road Tolls": "Labour accused the Tories of planning to introduce motorway tolls. This was simply not true." It is interesting that this time the Tories have gone for a black cover showing a no-entry sign; that sign certainly illustrates their approach to such matters.

What did Mr Lang's document say? The Conservative party has a selective memory. No wonder Ian Lang was not invited to the state opening; he would not exactly have been among friends with the Conservatives in the chamber. Mr Tosh referred to the Tories' introduction of the fuel price escalator, but the motion does not mention that. Presumably, the Tories are now rejecting their own policy. This debate should be about illustrating the fact that the fuel price escalator is simply one blunt instrument in the wider pursuit of the UK's international emission reduction obligations. No other European country uses just fuel prices as a single fiscal measure to meet CO 2 targets. Our European partners' policy instruments are improvements in public transport—which the Tories have dismissed—better vehicle energy efficiency and financial support for clean vehicles. That is the task for us.

The partnership agreement makes it quite clear what is happening. Mrs Scanlon should ask my colleague John Farquhar Munro, who has pursued the matter time and again. He is still pursuing it with all the relevant authorities and is taking action in the chamber to achieve progress. Perhaps Mrs Scanlon should help him rather than whingeing from the sidelines. We need an informed debate with Westminster about the need to use a variety of policy measures, especially to alleviate the costs in Scotland's rural and island areas where the car is not an option but a necessity. That is why Liberal Democrat back benchers went to Westminster yesterday to petition the Treasury. We were seeking a fair deal for Scotland's rural motorists; we also looked at the policy instruments available to the chancellor as he considers strategy for the next budget. The SNP's public position, as outlined on the radio, is that it opposes all congestion charging. Kenny MacAskill may shake his head, but I heard it on the radio at 7 o'clock this morning and the line was that the Tories and the SNP together oppose congestion charging. Interestingly, today we heard some qualification of that—

I am just winding up. I hope that Mr McLetchie will forgive me if I do not allow him in to support the SNP. The crucial question for the SNP, which it did not answer last week, is how it will put more money into Scotland's transport needs. The money that the SNP raised from its "penny for Scotland" campaign was intended specifically for health, education and housing. There is nothing wrong with that, but the money was not intended for transport. We have yet to hear how the SNP would put more money into transport, and I am keen to hear clarification of that.

It is useful to know that it is one of the SNP's aspirations to create such links.

As is so often the case, the SNP and the Conservatives are united in their affliction—short-term memory loss. Under Ian Lang, the Tories suggested road charging. They have now forgotten that. The SNP proposed city centre congestion charging, but it has forgotten that, too. The Liberal Democrats in Scotland support an honest debate about our transport needs. We support the amendment in the name of Sarah Boyack to implement lasting improvements to meet the transport needs of our cities and towns and our island and rural communities. There is work to be done on behalf of the people of Scotland to achieve those aims. From today's debate, it is clear that the Tory-SNP Opposition simply does not match up to the challenge.

Is Mr Tosh saying that the Conservatives are against the principle of tolling or just against the practice of tolling?

It was 5 per cent.

The purpose of the Parliament is to hold the Executive to account. The programme for government does exactly that. As John McAllion and Hugh Henry said this morning, a timetabled programme, especially with a regular monitoring debate—as John McAllion in particular mentioned—gives the Opposition the opportunity to scrutinise progress.  In June, we had a debate on the legislative programme; today, we are having a debate on the programme for government. Both debates have given the Opposition an opportunity to scrutinise progress. The Tories and the SNP have been entertaining at times today, but their front benchers' concentration on the size of the booklet and the quality of the photographs could not be described as the Opposition in scrutiny mode. The programme for government includes many important transport and environment policies, which I will talk about briefly. Parliament has the opportunity to set those policies in action. When addressing transport policy, there is no point in ignoring financial realities. According to the press this morning, the Confederation of British Industry will be told that there is a huge need for public investment in transport. Where will the resources come from? Changing political priorities—across the parties—are reflected in funding for transport. The Scottish Office trunk road capital programme fell from £208 million in 1995 to £104 million in 1998. What are the options for getting funding into transport, which it is broadly agreed is necessary to improve public services? One option is to invest through taxation, but the Tories have demonised tax over the years, so we cannot have a debate on using tax to invest in public services without the kind of advertising campaigns that have appeared at general elections. This morning, the First Minister mentioned the public's cynicism about the political process; it has certainly not been helped by those campaigns. By implication, the SNP and the Conservatives have said that they will cut transport funding. If they are to find funds for transport, they should explain from where in the Scottish block they will take it.

This debate is about public services in Scotland. Submissions on public services will no doubt go forward, so Scotland will receive its share of that funding. It is very important that we make our arguments as strong and as clear as possible; I hope that the SNP will join us in that. Mr Salmond called congestion charging taxation by the back door. The SNP's spending commitments in its penny for Scotland campaign were for health, housing and education—there was no mention of transport. The SNP cannot  argue that it will increase investment in transport—it was not included in that campaign. That is opposition for the sake of opposition. The SNP's manifesto was in favour of congestion charging, but now a campaign has been mounted against it—that is having it both ways. We would be very grateful for an explanation of how the Conservatives and the SNP would provide funding for transport if they will not do so through taxation or congestion charging. The Executive, at least, is illustrating in this programme potential routes to investment in affordable public transport. It is right to consult on urban road charging, as the Executive is doing. It is hard to argue against the case for congestion charging in our cities. Working in Edinburgh, we are made aware daily of the disbenefits of congestion: CO 2 emissions, pollutants in the air, frustration and lost time.

David Begg made a very interesting presentation to the Transport and the Environment Committee about how we should take congestion planning forward. It is quite clear that the current policies cannot continue. We must improve public transport so that we can achieve the reductions in pollution and CO 2  emissions that we need to achieve now. Offering arguments against that is bizarre and goes against what we need to do. Motorway charging is different from urban charging. The Executive's proposal is certainly right in seeking to find whether there is merit in motorway charging, but there are justified concerns about it. The key questions for the Executive in responding to the consultation are: where the revenue goes; what the objective underpinning the approach is; and, perhaps most important—particularly for local people—what the effect of diverted traffic will be. Those issues need to be addressed when the responses come in, but it is important that we take those ideas forward. Transport is the main issue.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is working with the Ministry of Defence in preparing a plan for economic aid to the island of Unst to help replace the jobs to be lost at the RAF Saxa Vord base, and when an announcement on the plan will be made to the people of Unst. (S1O-191)

I am grateful for that reply. I further ask the minister if he will recognise what effect the job losses will have on the economy of a community of 1,000 people in the north of Scotland. The loss of those jobs will mean that 30 per cent of the population, more than 50 per cent of the work force and two thirds of the school roll will potentially go. Therefore, the current 42-day consultation period is not adequate. Will the minister make representations to the Ministry of Defence on the length of the consultation period, and will he consider the designation of the area as initiative on the edge? That could give much-needed stimulus to the area.

I congratulate Mr Davidson on raising this important issue, which many members have expressed concern about over the past few weeks since we came to the Parliament. The minister's response today is important in the context of those concerns.  I thank Mr Davidson for recognising that this is not just a problem for the north-east of Scotland. In Shetland, there are 603 direct and indirect jobs in the fish processing industry, which is worth about £57 million to the Shetland economy. It is a considerable factor in our economy and, in that sense, we have the same interests, although on a different scale.  Mr Davidson made an important point about the  manner of the directive's implementation. In future, the Parliament's committees, such as the European Committee, the Transport and the Environment Committee and other appropriate committees, will have a crucial role in considering that.  We need to think a little about the strata of the industry. It is not just a question of the fish processors-who can be seen as the middlemen-as it reaches both up and down the line. The control and power that supermarkets have today mean that the price of the product in the shop will not change. Down at the bottom level, it is the primary producer who may ultimately see the price of his or her product fall. In that context, it affects salmon farmers, pelagic boats and white-fish boats.  Lewis Macdonald made a good point about waste water treatment plants. In Shetland we have tried to tackle investment with the local enterprise company and the council. However, the trouble is that the scale of the increases that NOSWA is looking to put into place is much more than can be offset by the improvements that the processing factories in Shetland are trying to implement.  The briefing that came from the library was useful. The group treatment process that will be established in Aberdeen, if successful, is important, but there are advantages of economies of scale there which are not available in many parts of the Highlands and Islands, where factories may not be geographically close to one another or where there may be other disadvantages of scale. It is important that we consider what will have to be done in parts of the Highlands and Islands to implement the directive. There may not be the opportunity-if that is the right way of describing it-that exists in Aberdeen to deal with this particular problem. As Richard Lochhead said, it is important to ask questions and to ensure that the minister responds to these needs, and that she uses her office in an imaginative way to tackle these problems.  As regards NOSWA, will the minister also bear in mind that water and sewage services should be given back to local control, in the circumstances where they can be administratively and economically delivered in a more efficient manner? That could be a solution that would help the situation in the northern isles.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has, within the context of negotiations on the reform of the common fisheries policy, to argue for the implementation of regional fisheries management regimes. (S1O-167)

Given the widespread support from Scottish fishermen for the regionalisation of the common fisheries policy, does the minister accept that the proposals of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation constitute an important step forward and provide a basis for the Executive's policy position on this important matter?

I have thought about a number of comments made today regarding what has to be scrutinised, and then I thought back to the consultative steering group debate that we had last week. That debate was important and useful with regard to committees-how important they are and what they need to do.  It seems that some people do not believe in the committee structure that we are going to set up, its importance and the ability of the committee structure to be different from Westminster. They do not believe in its ability to make a difference in this place. Apart from anything else, committees have the power to initiate legislation and to make a difference in the subject areas that they are responsible for.  In many of the areas in which members have said that they want to see more action, committees could play an active part by dealing  with interest groups that bring forward ideas and by working these ideas up into legislation. There are two routes into that process: not just through the Executive programme but through the ability of committees to bring forward programmes of action. Members who sit on those committees should address that and face up to the challenges of the committee structure.  I will make brief points on two bills that I think are particularly important: the transport bill and the land reform bill. The transport bill needs to focus on a number of key issues, including the difference in transport issues for those of us who live in rural areas, as opposed to focusing on the congestion in Scotland's cities. We should face and focus on the question of air pollution, which causes health problems, and the related costs to society and to business, which Ms Goldie mentioned this morning in the context of the Confederation of British Industry report. We need to consider those issues in the context of the bill.  It is widely accepted that there is a need for a strategic transport rethink. Investment is needed to improve our public transport and to encourage the transfer of freight from road to rail. This morning I listened to the director-general of the CBI on the radio. In a useful contribution that illustrated the organisation's thinking, he argued that in a tight public expenditure round progress can be made if, where there is road charging and where local authorities can consider charging for workplace parking, revenue from those charges is used to improve public transport and facilitate the movement of freight from rail to road. I hope that those issues will be addressed when the bill is discussed in committee.  Earlier, Mrs Ewing mentioned the importance of this Parliament being able to discuss other matters. In the part of the world that I represent and, I know, the whole of the Highlands and Islands, petrol prices were a huge issue in the election campaign. I see nothing wrong with the Transport and the Environment Committee or another appropriate committee considering all measures that impinge on car use in the Highlands and Islands. The committee should accept that the car is a lifeline, just as shipping and air services are, rather than a luxury. It should be able to consider not only the introduction of rate relief for petrol stations or infrastructure improvements such as grants for petrol tanks, but measures such as differential VAT rates. It should carry out a proper investigation of those issues to see where matters can be improved for the rural and island areas of Scotland.

Mr Ewing may be aware that the European Union has examined this question several times, and that member states have the right to argue the case for varying the rate of VAT for individual parts of the EU that are recognised as peripheral. If he is saying that we as the Scottish Parliament should take a view on that and make a strong case for such variation, I agree. I will certainly be doing so, as it is very important.  I want to finish by commenting on the land reform bill. The debate should be not only about land, but about the sea bed and its ownership. Those of us who represent areas where the salmon industry is extremely important should recognise that the land reform policy group document "Recommendations for Action" includes the sentence:  "The Scottish Law Commission should be invited to undertake a comprehensive review of the law of the foreshore and seabed, with a view to reform."  That is very welcome and I hope that it can be taken forward. The industry is losing £1.4 million from its kitty-£1.4 million out of its ability to invest. That is a production tax that an industry in great need of restructuring and reinvestment should not have to pay. I hope, therefore, that the ownership of the sea bed can be considered in the context of the land reform bill.

I shall speak on the section of the CSG report that deals with the sharing of power and the role of civic society. Paragraph 19 says:  "The development and implementation of legislation needs to take account of the diversity which exists across Scotland. Specifically, we recognise that well intentioned legislation cannot always be implemented in an Islands context without practical difficulties arising."  There is still concern in areas such as Shetland that the Parliament will concentrate on the needs of the central belt, not on those of peripheral, rural and island areas. It is up to the Parliament to demonstrate that that is not the case and that there are ways in which peripheral, rural and island areas can be at the heart of what goes on in here-most importantly, in the committees. We have it in our hands to choose between a Parliament that is only for the central belt and one that is for all of Scotland's diverse regions. That is the broad context in which I enthusiastically welcome the CSG report.  Right from the early days of the Scottish constitutional convention, representatives of the island areas-Shetland, Orkney and the Western Isles-have argued constructively for the special needs of those areas to be recognised. I pay  tribute to those who worked on such bodies as the islands working group of the SCC. Their ideas are coming to fruition in the CSG report and the standing orders.  Islands representatives have pointed out-right across the spectrum of policy issues-that they live in a different environment: a fresh wind in Edinburgh is but a gentle breeze at home in Lerwick. They have also drawn attention to the problems that we face day in, day out. A short journey to an out-patient clinic in a Glasgow hospital contrasts with the experience of someone who lives on Unst, who must take a ferry, a car, a ferry, a car, a plane and a taxi to get to the middle of Aberdeen, and must spend two nights away from home.  There are differences in perspective and of practical considerations. Any member here could listen to a representative of the Hjaltland Housing Association for a spare hour or two, who would illustrate the problems of trying to make warm and draught-free houses that are built to a standard Scottish Homes will fund. There are big differences between the Scottish regions in such practical matters. That is one of the great strengths and delights of Scotland. The islands are different and they deserve to be given special consideration.  Page 6 of the CSG report says:  "We recommend that committees engaged in pre-legislative scrutiny should specifically address the issue of implementation in Island areas and where appropriate make recommendations for suitable amendments or derogations."  That is a particularly important sentence. We should ensure that legislation that would not work in the Western Isles, or which would damage a business in Orkney, is not introduced. Such problems were recognised by the Scottish constitutional convention, and here we have the mechanisms to provide practical safeguards for island areas.  In our representation of issues in the islands, we do not seek to clog up the business of the Parliament; we seek to ensure that the interests of those areas will be looked into by the Parliament as a matter of routine. The simplest way forward would be to put in place a requirement for each item of legislation to be accompanied by a memorandum that examines its implications for island areas and proposes exemptions or special provisions for the islands, if necessary. That is what I ask the minister to consider in his concluding remarks.

As we are restricted to three minutes, I shall probably make only three points. First, I associate myself with the remarks made by Mr Lochhead and Mr Salmond in their introductions. They emphasised the importance of fisheries in Scotland and the opportunity that this Parliament will give the industry to raise issues that are crucial to my part of the world, Shetland, and to many other constituencies. It offers a chance for fisheries to get their point across and a chance for members to work with the industry to make a positive contribution to the future of a crucial Shetland and Scottish industry.  I was intrigued by Mr Gallie's earlier intervention about Westminster. When I worked there as a humble researcher to my colleague Jim Wallace, I sat on the researchers' bench in the public gallery and watched that same Tuesday night debate at half-past 10, when only 20 members were present. It was not edifying stuff, and it did not do much for the way in which fisheries was presented. There were fishermen there from all over Scotland on that night, and they werenae very impressed by it either. We need to do a heck of a lot better than that, and I welcome the fact that so many members are still here.  I understand and sympathise with the utter frustration that the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and the fishing organisations feel at the lack of consultation on this issue. I welcome the principle of full and proper consultation before processes such as proposed works and proposed legislation come into the public domain. I encourage the minister to maintain that principle. It is extremely important that that happens.  I agree with Mr Robson's case for the need to  re-establish the east coast boundary in terms of custom and practice, and I will not rehearse his arguments or those of other members. I too heard the chief executive of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation on "Good Morning Scotland" today. He raised the important point that the UK Government proposals establish a position where a Scottish fishing boat on oil contract work is under Scottish jurisdiction, but as soon as it shoots its nets it is under English jurisdiction. The suggestion was also made that if a Scottish boat were prosecuted while it was south of the new line but north of the old, it would be under a Scottish court's jurisdiction. That drives a proverbial trawler through a square mesh panel. Why bother with the line at all? I do not see the need for it in that context.  The suggestion was also made that this does not diminish Scottish fishing interests. Zonal regional management is a principle of Liberal Democrat fishing policy and that includes inshore regulating orders. It may be appropriate for other parts of Scotland to follow the good example of Shetland, where fishermen are working with conservation groups, environmental organisations and the local authority to build an inshore management regime. I hope that that model will be passed on to other parts of Scotland. In particular, that kind of regime might be appropriate to the part of Scotland that we are talking about today.  I support Mr Robson's amendment because it provides fishermen with an opportunity to be consulted and for progress to be made on this important issue.