Is the member aware of the fact that the guidance that was issued on the quality outcomes framework in May this year, one month after it came in, ran to 224 pages?

We passed an excellent Patient Rights (Scotland) Act 2011 with a new complaints system that includes the four Cs: compliments, comments, concerns and complaints. Why are we not getting reports, both to health boards and from health boards to the cabinet secretary, that are a composite of all those things? Without that, we cannot get a balanced view such as Mr McDonald seeks.

I thank the minister for his comprehensive replies on tackling medicine waste. Will he say how the registration of patients with pharmacists for the chronic medication service is progressing? If I buy paracetamol over the counter, it costs 25p; a free prescription for paracetamol costs the national health service £3.10. The total cost of free paracetamol prescriptions was £7.2 million. In a time of austerity, is it not time for a radical rethink, or is the minister happy to continue to spend taxpayers’ money in that way?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in today’s debate, as two of the courts in the consultation fall in my region of Mid Scotland and Fife. One court—Alloa—has been saved, albeit temporarily, pending the creation of room at Falkirk and Stirling. That will allow it to be closed in due course, once the cabinet secretary is ready. The court in Cupar, on the other hand, faces the axe almost immediately. The ill-thought-out plans to close the court in Cupar will first and foremost affect people’s ability to see justice done locally, but the effects of the closure go much further. The effect on the local economy has not been taken into account and includes the potential loss of local businesses that are directly and indirectly connected to the court system, which will inevitably lead to the loss of local jobs. Furthermore, the court’s relocation will hit local business footfall. In particular, local law firms have told me that they may be forced to relocate their business nearer Dundee to keep staff costs down—if, of course, they are financially able to make such a move. I say that the analysis has been ill thought out because the Scottish Court Service has looked only at matters that affect the service. It is the cabinet secretary’s responsibility to look at the global effects, such as the potential effects on legal businesses and the local economy; the potential job losses; and the potential upkeep costs for buildings that may well not be sold given that there are other unsold buildings in the area. What will the unoccupied property rates be? None of those broader issues has been taken into account, and it is the cabinet secretary’s responsibility to take them into account. Over the past few days, he has singularly failed to consult his Cabinet colleagues when making this very rapid decision. There are also the costs to Fife Council, which will continue to be asked to provide social workers and community payback officers to attend hearings. Those people will now be expected to travel outside their region to Dundee to give evidence and advice, which will lead to an increase in not only travel costs but staff costs. Vital services could be damaged if areas are left understaffed because those people have to spend more time travelling to and from court than previously. What assessment has the cabinet secretary made of the effect on Fife Council? Has there been any assessment? There is nothing in the documents to suggest that there has. I am pleased to note that Alloa court will not be closing, after an active campaign that my colleague Gordon Banks and other stakeholders engaged in. Even Keith Brown, the Minister for Transport and Veterans, participated in that campaign, although I note that he is not in the chamber to observe the debate. Alloa court will be closed once there is additional space at Stirling and Falkirk. That will require capital expenditure, which, in view of the cuts that I expect, will not occur over the next period—but who knows? In the meantime, the planning of local law businesses in Alloa will be predicated on the court’s eventual closure, which will mean loss of services to my constituents. The lack of understanding or acceptance of the value of local courts is abundantly clear. The Scottish Court Service was tasked with looking at the future of Scottish courts by the Scottish Government, which is subjecting the service to substantial cuts. It is justice on the cheap. Interestingly, when Labour tried to rationalise national health service hospitals on the grounds of patient safety and the best advice of medical practitioners, the Scottish National Party recognised an opportunity and supported localism and no closures. It also made a manifesto pledge that it would close no beds—a pledge that it broke by closing more than 1,500 beds, or almost 10 per cent of all hospital beds. It was in favour of localism, but it closed beds. Now it is not in favour of local justice. Facing two ways seems a strange position for the SNP to adopt, but the SNP’s Janus-like effect becomes more evident by the day. Travelling to court is one of the most important issues. I have experience of appearing in court as a witness on many occasions in family cases that involve freeing a child for adoption or child protection issues. My whole team has had to appear in court and has sometimes been engaged for days on end. Frankly, without a local court my patients would have suffered when my whole team had to appear. Cases are still being postponed repeatedly. I know that we have made things more efficient over the past 10 years, but postponements are still likely to occur, and the effect on staff of all sorts will be significant. When I was the Deputy Minister for Justice, one of the main issues brought to me was the extensive amount of time that the police spent in courts. If police officers have to travel significant distances to court, that will significantly undermine the policy of putting extra police in communities—a policy of which the SNP is inordinately proud. None of us is opposed to modernisation. Indeed, as a justice minister I was involved in introducing videoconferencing pilots for pleading diets, outsourcing escorts and setting up two reviews of court procedures. However, there is a principle at stake here. Courts such as those in Cupar and Alloa are at the heart of their communities. This was a poor consultation with a poor analysis that failed to take into account the wider issues involved and the views of local communities, which were almost universally against the closures. The cabinet secretary should be sent home to think again.

I add that the drug court is also being closed, which is a significant loss. It is the only non-urban drug court in Europe.

Will the member take an intervention?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what additional support will be provided to cities such as Stirling to ensure that adequate infrastructure is in place for the year of homecoming. (S4O-01955)

In launching the events programme for homecoming 2014 today, the First Minister stated that the city would be one of the epicentres for homecoming, with events such as the celebration of the 700th anniversary of Bannockburn and its role as a transport hub for the Ryder cup. Given that each event will involve 50,000 visitors, will the cabinet secretary undertake to ensure that the Government funds the necessary upgrading to local infrastructure and to have an early meeting with council leaders to plan for the success of the events?

5. To ask the First Minister what impact reported reductions in the number of medical secretaries are having on patient care. (S4F-01268)

Medical secretaries are vital to high-quality care. They deal not only with letters but with communication with primary care staff and patients. The number of letters that are not being completed in seven days has gone from 13 per cent to more than 80 per cent, and one in four are not completed in 14 days. When Nicola Sturgeon—during her time as Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy—announced a 25 per cent cut in management, did that include band 4 medical secretaries? I welcome the fact that the health board is now listening, but will the First Minister ask the current cabinet secretary to ensure that the situation is not happening in other boards? I am getting reports that it is, and it is an issue that seriously affects patient care.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that comprehensive answer on the issue of brain injuries. One form of brain injury is alcohol-related brain damage. There was a specialist working group on that particular area, in which there is intensive and increasing national health service demand. Can the cabinet secretary say whether there has been progress on that group’s recommendations, or can he provide a report on the matter to Parliament at a later date, as the area is important?

I recognise the constraints on the Government relating to the workforce for talking therapies. I also recognise the progress that the Government has made and its aspirations. The Government is trying to achieve the 18-week target by December 2014, but I draw to its attention the fact that a constituent of mine who has recently been referred to psychological services in Tayside has been told that they will wait three years. As the implementation date for the 18-week target approaches, I hope that the Government will consider existing waiting lists and ensure that individuals do not wait for an extended period but benefit from the Government’s aspirations to ensure an 18-week waiting time.

There have been a number of passionate and thoughtful contributions to the debate, although I would not include Kenneth Gibson’s contribution in that description. I detect a universal view that the world would be a better place without nuclear weapons. The fact is that we cannot put the clock back and uninvent nuclear weapons. Since the first use of atomic weapons in July 1945, that genie has been out of the bottle. A nuclear-missile submarine deterrent has been in operation continuously since 1968—initially with Polaris and then with Trident. It is agreed across the chamber that no matter what our views are, we should at least continue to work hard for multilateral disarmament, which has already achieved a 75 per cent reduction in our nuclear arsenal and that of others. Under the strategic defence and security review 10, there will be further progress. The UK has reduced its nuclear warheads from 360 to 160 and, under Labour, we withdrew the WE177 capability. If Britain did not have nuclear weapons, I would not advocate our acquiring them, but history has bestowed them upon us. I would echo the words of Gerald Kaufman MP, who said: “I say clearly that I do not want nuclear weapons; I am not happy we have got them, but we have got them. Divesting ourselves of our nuclear weapons would be regarded by many as an act of self-indulgence.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 17 January 2013; Vol 556, c 1113.]

We should move towards nuclear disarmament, but there is a difference between nuclear submarines and nuclear missiles. His party appears to want to get rid of both. The basing of the Astute class and the Vanguard class, if it is finally proceeded with, will mean that the submarines will be based there—[Interruption.]

The submarines will be based there, except under an independent Scotland. In 2009, President Obama said: “The threat of global war has gone down but the risk of a nuclear attack has gone up.” The 2006 white paper “The Future of the UK’s Nuclear Deterrent” posited three scenarios. The first is the re-emergence of a major nuclear threat, which is possible but—I hope—unlikely. The second is of states’ newly acquiring nuclear capability; we have discussed generally the threat of Iran acquiring nuclear weapons. The third scenario is of state-sponsored nuclear terrorism. The white paper states that “We make no distinction between the means by which a state might choose to deliver a nuclear warhead ... whether by missile or by sponsored terrorists”, and goes on to say that a state identified as “the source of material” could expect a proportional response. In other words, deterrence, which has always been at the core of our nuclear programme, remains an important fact that is completely denied by the SNP. They did not even discuss the question of deterrence, which I think continues to be important. History teaches us that major wars tend to start when dictators believe that democracies are too weak to stand up to them. The assurance that mutual deterrence provided in preventing the cold war from becoming hot is a lesson from the past that should be recognised and not lost on us. The reality is that it is not the weapons themselves that we have to fear, but the nature of the regimes that possess them.

I am sorry, but I must make progress. Nuclear weapons can be controlled only through the non-proliferation treaties, which underpin the world’s determination to block Iran and other countries from developing such weapons. Whereas democracies are reluctant to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear dictatorships, the reverse is, I believe, unlikely to be true. No quantity of the conventional forces that were espoused largely by SNP members can compensate for the military disadvantage that would face a non-nuclear country in a war with a nuclear state. On funding, no decision has as yet been made on the replacement of the D5 Trident missile, which will continue in operation until 2042. In the meantime, the review that is seeking a cost-effective alternative, which has been progressed by the Cabinet under Liberal Democrat pressure, continues.

No. I am sorry, but I must make a little more progress. Let us assume that RUK—the rest of the United Kingdom—proceeded to the main-gate decision in 2016. It would then have to bear the additional cost that would have been our share, which would be an additional £2.5 billion. Would the rest of the United Kingdom thank Scotland for the higher share of the costs of Trident? Indeed, if, as members have suggested today, the rest of the UK was forced into unilateral disarmament by an inability to house the submarine fleet with its missiles elsewhere in the United Kingdom, would the rest of the United Kingdom thank us for that? That would come on top of the fact that independence would force us to pay additional costs, due to the loss of the European Union rebate, of £3.2 billion. What would the SNP’s negotiating position be with the rest of the United Kingdom if we were forcing it to bear those additional costs? A central theme in our concerns today has been that the SNP has reversed its stance on NATO. How could an independent Scotland shelter under a NATO nuclear umbrella after declaring unilateral independence with no nuclear weapons? It seems to me that applying for membership on that basis, in the negotiations after independence, would be quite hypocritical. As one commentator has pointed out, that would be like joining a golf club on the basis that the other members agree to play only with their putters. The SNP’s position is hypocritical, and I applaud the stance of Jean Urquhart and others who have made that point very strongly. Another question is whether the First Minister has another secret set of legal advice on the issue. Would the SNP be accepted into the NATO alliance swiftly after declaring independence, or is that something else that we would need to negotiate—negotiating on the basis that we would force NATO to remove its nuclear weapons? Would we disallow nuclear weapons from our territorial waters? Again, that seems to me to be quite ridiculous and hypocritical.

I think that I am in my last 30 seconds. On the savings from cancelling Trident, Ruth Davidson eloquently expressed the SNP’s repeated use of those savings. The money could be spent only once. On jobs, Jackie Baillie made the case that it is quite clear that, under independence, the base at Faslane would be far smaller. The central theme is that this Parliament should get back to debating the issues that are within our scope. This week, we should have been debating press regulation, but our offer on that was rejected. We should have been talking about ameliorating the bedroom tax. Those are the issues—

Those are the issues that this Parliament should be addressing; we should not be talking about the issues that are under debate, which do not fall within our purview. I rest my case.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment has had with his health counterparts to support the development of therapeutic horticulture. (S4O-01913)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answer and welcome the money that the Government has put in. However, will he consider bringing back into action small brownfield sites, which might provide allotments and opportunities for more localised therapeutic horticulture outlets? That is being done in Fife, but it should also be done elsewhere.

Will the cabinet secretary consider altering the balance between finance and quality in respect of the meat products contract for school meals?

I very much welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate, partly because I want to address issues to do with food safety and nutrition. Food safety is vital, and I acknowledge the progress that has been made. Some members will remember Edwina Currie and the salmonella scandal. That scandal is a thing of the past; eggs are now safe, although—

It was certainly an example of the media becoming overly concerned about something, although there was a problem with salmonella in eggs. The work that the Food Standards Agency in Scotland has done on campylobacter in chickens, which was another area of concern, is welcome. E coli, however, remains a concern. Professor Pennington, whom I mentioned in an intervention, says that we have one of the highest rates of E coli in the world. The combination of high E coli rates and the UK chief medical officer’s remarks about antibiotics this week should result in a call to action. On food hygiene, following Professor Pennington’s report into an E coli outbreak in Wales, the Food Hygiene Rating (Wales) Act 2013, which received royal assent last Monday, has made mandatory the display of food hygiene ratings in food businesses in Wales. Will Scotland follow that example? When will the minister introduce such a measure, which seems to be eminently sensible? Martha Payne’s website is interesting and demonstrates how social media can be used in the debate about food. During the past year, David Payne has expressed frustration that the site receives regular correspondence from schoolchildren in Scotland who say that they are still forbidden to take pictures of their school meals. How does that fit with the aim of transparency? Surely we should engage our children on food issues, as part of an overall anti-obesity strategy. Social media are vital tools in reaching the young. I hope that the cabinet secretary and his colleagues will ensure that the clear message goes out that we welcome input from schoolchildren. Will the cabinet secretary and his ministerial colleagues in education and health guarantee that no industrial hydrogenated fats—or trans fats—are served in any of Scotland’s schools? The hungry for success initiative, to which the cabinet secretary referred, started 10 years ago and led to the prescribing of minimum nutritional standards for school meals in 2008, including maximum values for fats and sodium. I welcome the review that the minister announced and the restoration of the hungry for success group. I hope that the group will look carefully at the balance between cost and quality in the context of contracting for school meals and all public procurement. I raised that issue in an intervention. The balance is 50:50 for dairy products but 72:28 for meat products. Given that we have such fantastic sources of meat in Scotland, I do not understand why we do not accord more importance to quality when it comes to procuring meat. I welcome the fact that a number of local authorities, including Stirling Council, are signed up to the Soil Association Scotland food for life catering mark. I hope that the Government will encourage all other local authorities to follow them. A role of the Food Standards Agency in Scotland is to tackle food mislabelling or misdescription on food labelling. However, legal standards do not apply to all foods. Practices of substitution with cheaper ingredients, such as mixing cheaper rice with premium rice, or extending products with fillers, such as adding offal to meat cuts, are legal here but not throughout much of the continent. We must address that. The Food Standards Agency in Scotland was working with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs on a related surveillance programme. How will that be progressed with an independent food standards agency in Scotland, particularly in a climate in which environmental health officers, whose numbers have been cut, are under such pressure? I am particularly concerned about the growth in nutrichemical products. A variety of health claims are made about such products. Although health claims are controlled under article 13 of the EU nutrition and health claims regulation, it is a rapidly growing area and the clever advertising and marketing claims that are being made about the products are a source of considerable concern. I urge the minister to work with colleagues in considering that because I am not sure that the Advertising Standards Agency is the right body to deal with the advertising of such products. I will now deal with food labelling, which is an important issue that a number of members have mentioned. I very much welcome the late conversion of Tesco to the traffic light system. The money that was spent by producers and retailers against the European Parliament’s traffic light system proposals was an obscenity. I am glad that we will have that system in Scotland. I took the opportunity to check products in a couple of my local supermarkets the other day. Although many of the products have traffic lights on them, many do not. When will we have a traffic light system alongside GDA—guideline daily amounts—on almost all products? That is important. It is clear from the Sainsbury’s marketing information—I have had discussions with Sainsbury’s—that the traffic light labelling system has moved their consumers to lower-calorie and lower-fat products. However, the claims that are made by producers about there being X per cent less fat in their products, although correct and therefore not legally challengeable, are meaningless if the level of fat was already high. Salt labelling is particularly important. It is staggering that 72 per cent of women and 89 per cent of men exceed the salt intake limit. I hope that the minister will press the FSA to push ahead with the new salt standards and get the figures down. A recent report showed that there has been almost no movement in salt intake levels since 2006. I regret that my trans fat bill was ignored. Its principles are now supported by the medical fraternity and backed by Which?, the consumer organisation. I hope that we will return to that because it is important to health inequalities that trans fats are addressed.

Will the cabinet secretary take forward the Food Standards Agency in Scotland’s recommendation that folic acid be a mandatory part of bread, as it prevents neural tube abnormalities? We need to move forward on that issue, and we can support the health service in Scotland on it. [Interruption.]

As Jackson Carlaw indicated, this discussion goes back a long way. It goes back even before devolution. In 1979, the Mitchell report talked about liaison—that was the word that was used at the time—between social work and healthcare. We have been considering the issue for a long time. As many members have said, and as Tuesday’s debate indicated, the challenge of demographic change is now upon us. As Duncan McNeil said, that challenge will intensify, as people experience longer periods of not-such-good health, chronic disability and long-term conditions. The challenge is intensifying year by year. The Parliament has previously supported very similar attempts in debates in which almost exactly the same speeches have been made. The speeches that we have had this afternoon—with the exception of the three or four from SNP members that simply attacked Labour councils—have, on the whole, been exactly the same. The desire, the ambition and the aspiration are there. In 2000 to 2001, we established the joint future programme, which Iain Gray referred to. We started with an ambitious pilot in Perth and Kinross to amalgamate social care and healthcare. People spent two years wrangling about staff terms and conditions, but then they finally got going. Two and a half years later, the pilot collapsed, because the leadership withdrew its support. The lesson that I take from that—we should take lessons from our failures—is that, without strong commitment and strong leadership from the Government, local authorities and health boards, we are doomed to another 13 years of talking about integration but seeing only a small amount of reasonably good practice. How did Labour respond? In 2004, we legislated for the CHPs, which were intended to build on 85 local healthcare co-operatives—groupings of primary care practices—and to link social work teams to the co-operatives. In fact, the CHPs destroyed the co-operatives. Very few local healthcare co-operatives are left. GPs and primary care staff disengaged from the process. Far from integration, what we achieved was disintegration. We need to learn that lesson, too. If primary care staff disengage, we will be in trouble. A number of speakers have raised a fundamentally important point. The world is changing, and the third sector is now providing an increasing volume of the services that are vital to integrated health and social care, so it must have a strong place at the table. Since the CHPs were established, we have had Crerar, Christie and Beveridge. In a thoughtful speech, Duncan McNeil showed us that reform will be more difficult in a period of austerity than it would have been when considerable additional funding was available. It will be difficult for us not to portray reform as cost cutting. Labour foresaw the problem and the need for change, so it established a commission under Sir John Arbuthnott. Far from what was portrayed by the SNP—with its usual knockabout party politics, which we on all sides love—we did not seek the establishment of a new national quango; we sought national standards to underpin local democratic revisions of the CHPs. Duncan McNeil referred to those standards—which we need now, before the bill is introduced. They will underpin how we go forward. As a number of speakers have said, it is outcomes that will matter. In his eloquent speech, Iain Gray described the reality for individuals. All the services are being provided but, if something goes wrong, people have no idea who to turn to. That is not satisfactory. The Association of Directors of Social Work has tended to welcome integration, but it does not want structural change. It is not right about that; we need to revise the structures. However, ADSW is right in saying that we need to ensure that we do not do what happened previously. We must not destroy the existing good practice. Flexibility on that in the bill is welcome, but other aspects are not. We need a mapping exercise to see whether more than the 11 councils that Audit Scotland found are engaged in the process. We need to build on that work and ensure that it is not destroyed. Resources will be important and we believe that they will have to be determined centrally. We have tried aligning budgets. In an otherwise pretty awful speech, James Dornan was right about one thing: there was disintegration in Glasgow. However, that was caused by two partners, not one. The two partners could not agree—that was the important point. In his speech, which was entirely about Aberdeen, Mark McDonald referred to an Aberdeen City Council project. That was started under the SNP, not Labour—Labour might have carried it through, but your party started it. Both parties are simply trying to solve a difficult problem that needs a huge resource. As you said, 65 people are waiting. How do you deal with that in your funding envelope? The Aberdeen approach provides one possible solution. In Sandwell, care was outsourced 16 years ago, and I commend this example to the cabinet secretary. It has been a phenomenal success—the Sandwell model has grown from an initial 82 employees to 500 employees, who provide a fantastic service that gets a superb report from the users, which is critical.

I say to Mark McDonald that that illustrates the confrontational nature of the relationship between health and local authorities, which is exactly what we have to get rid of. If he thinks that the system that is being proposed by the Government in the bill will do that, I am afraid that he will be disappointed. I said that leadership and culture are important and the last part of the discussion reflects that. There are two different cultures involved, and marrying them has never been considered as anything other than extremely difficult. However, unless we achieve that integration, things will be very difficult indeed. Accountability is critical. I was disappointed that James Dornan does not appear to think that local democratic control is in any way appropriate. I wonder if he believes in local democracy—maybe he does if his party is in charge, but not if ours is. It is important that local democracy is involved. We have tried health board elections, which have been expensive and have not worked particularly well. I do not think that there has been any word of those elections continuing. Democratising the local system through councillors being in a majority or being in control of the community health and social care partnerships will be a mechanism for democratising health. This is not about medicalising social care; it is about socialising medical care. That reflects what Duncan McNeil was saying—there are individuals who need their care to be fully integrated. We will vote for the motion even if the SNP does not accept our amendment because we agree with the principles of the bill; we will work with the Government. However, we disagree as regards the question of joint and equal accountability. There is a need for single democratic accountability and we will continue to argue that case.

The integrated resources framework provides the cabinet secretary with the opportunity to look at the financial situation in a way that was not available to Labour in 2001. The Government has a great advantage in being able to look at the budgets in an integrated form and to compare between different authorities.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I refer to standing order 7.3 and your comments on 5 and 28 February, in particular the advice that you offered on 28 February: “I expect any major policy announcements by the Scottish Government always to be made to Parliament, in the first instance.”—[Official Report, 28 February 2012; c 17163.] I regret that another point of order has had to be raised because significant policy changes have once again appeared in the first instance in various press outlets, rather than this chamber. A consistent pattern of policy announcements emerging in the press rather than the Parliament continues to be common practice for the Scottish Government. I refer to the fact that the waiting time target of 98 per cent of patients waiting no more than four hours to be seen in accident and emergency is to be lowered to 95 per cent. That appears to have been leaked to the Evening News on Monday. The issue was further confused yesterday when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said in a point of order that 98 per cent would remain as the “standard” but 95 per cent would be a “target”. There is total confusion as to the difference between a standard and a target. That is a fundamental change in policy. Furthermore, the £50 million emergency care action fund also appeared in various press outlets. It cannot be right that press outlets are leaked or given such policy information before Parliament is. These matters are too important not be heard in the chamber first. This issue is of great importance to the Parliament. Rather than first appearing in the press, announcements should always in the first instance be made to the Parliament. Presiding Officer, can you advise what action you are able to take to prevent further significant policy announcements from appearing in the press before they have been discussed or announced in the chamber, or have we reached the point at which we seriously need to discuss giving you additional powers if the Government continues to ignore your admonitions?

I begin by correcting Bruce Crawford. Duncan McNeil said that Jim Murphy regrets the UK Government’s statement and the Labour Party does, too. The minister said that an independent Scotland would end up seeing none of the next generation of Royal Navy frigates being built in this country, which would inevitably have a huge impact on current and future jobs. [Interruption.]

How many naval bases is the Scottish Government planning to maintain in the event of a yes vote for an independent Scotland within a £2.5 billion budget that would cover not only defence but security?

No matter how often the SNP repeats it, the statement that we were not committed to passing on health consequentials is just wrong. Labour committed, in its 2011 manifesto, to passing on all consequentials. Let us begin by acknowledging that, with the doubling of funding for the NHS and the staff’s extremely hard work, significant progress has been made continuously over the past 15 years. We began with people waiting for two years, and we reduced the time to six months. We acknowledge that there has been further progress—there is no doubt about that. However, that is not what today’s debate is about; it is about promises that were made to correct a system—the availability status code system—that members agreed was wrong in 2005-06, and to replace it with a better system that the public could trust. Let us look at the history. We will start with 2007. As the RCN said in its briefing, the waiting times management systems should have been about “supporting timely, equitable and transparent access to our healthcare system.” In a statement in September 2007, Nicola Sturgeon said: “the new system will be subject to full scrutiny. First, hospitals will be obliged to advise patients when their waiting time clock has been stopped”. She went on to say: “I have asked that further measures be put in place to ensure that NHS boards operate the new arrangements fairly, consistently and in the interests of patients” and she said that the NHS National Services Scotland‘s information services division “will also undertake cross-checks on samples of patients’ details. The aim will be to ensure that details are accurate and that recorded periods of unavailability are supported by evidence.” [Official Report, 19 September 2007; c 1836-7.] That was the promise that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing made to us in 2007, so where are all those checks and balances? Let us roll forward to 2009, one year after the new system came into being. I asked a question then that I have asked repeatedly throughout my period as shadow minister. When something changes or there is variation, I believe that it is the responsibility of ministers and shadow ministers to ask questions and ask for explanations. I therefore asked the then cabinet secretary whether she was sure that the putting off the list of 100,000 patients annually was justified. In the first year of operation, the figure had been only 60,000. In 2013, the Audit Scotland report has the figure at 339,000 for nine months. That is an annual figure of 440,000. The figure has multiplied immensely. That issue has not been raised today, but it is another issue that I suggest the cabinet secretary needs to look at, because real people and real patients are being put off the list. If that is not a hidden list, what is? If all are either classed “did not arrive” or cancelled their appointments, that is absolutely fine, but we cannot tell from the recording systems what is actually happening. Let us roll forward again to March 2010. Audit Scotland produced a report that said, “Yes. We’re making quite good progress. The system seems to be quite good.” Indeed, the UK Statistics Authority said that it looked like a good system. I accept that, but Audit Scotland also said that there were warning signs that needed to be addressed. It made a series of specific requests of the Government, which Nicola Sturgeon—as the cabinet secretary—ignored. When the SNP was asked in April 2011 whether action was being taken, it said that a revision of the system would be in place imminently. That did not happen until the scandal of NHS Lothian was exposed and we got through the next Audit Scotland report. Then there was action. The SNP therefore gave a false reassurance to Audit Scotland. What do we know now, in 2013? We know that we have a massively dysfunctional system. Manipulation was proved in NHS Lothian, but in many other health boards there was simply no way that the data could be tracked. However, it is telling that, as soon as the NHS Lothian scandal was revealed, the social unavailability levels, which had reached 30 per cent from 10 or 11 per cent in 2009, suddenly began to drop. Not one SNP member in the debate has explained to us why. We have been offered explanations. The first was from Nicola Sturgeon to me when I asked about the matter, before the Audit Scotland report. The explanation was: “Well, the waiting times have become shorter, so people are getting less notice, and so they’re asking for social unavailability more.” Were there three times as many people? Have 900 patients—70 per cent—in an orthopaedic department asked for social unavailability? My God! The whole of Glasgow seemed to be on holiday. It is not a consistent system or a transparent one that is open to full scrutiny; it is not the system to protect patients that Ms Sturgeon promised Parliament and the public. However, we have a cabinet secretary saying on 20 May that we have a transparent system, and then saying that the Government was not told and that it was the ISD’s fault. However, we have a statement from the ISD spokesman saying that, regarding the ISD’s reporting to the Scottish Government, “social unavailability would have been one item in the extensive quarterly reporting of waiting times statistics”. For one particular system, we were told that it was the IT system that was at fault. However, the Auditor General made it clear to Jackie Baillie at the Public Audit Committee that most systems that are currently in use have a facility to record the reason why a social unavailability code is applied to a patient to demonstrate that it is the result of a conversation with a patient or GP. However, in most places, that was not used. Labour has therefore now been joined by Audit Scotland, the RCN, the BMA and—most important—patients and families in saying that there is a real problem with our waiting list system. Unless the cabinet secretary admits that, we cannot move forward. It is of particular concern to the BMA that the use of social unavailability codes was so widespread and that they were used so inappropriately. Is all well now? We are told that it is, but the answer is “No, not quite”, because there are reports of bullying, and the BMA said that the pressures are not necessarily isolated to NHS Lothian.

I am sorry, but I really do not have time. I have a lot to get through. A survey that accompanied the 2010 audit indicated that more than half of doctors and nurses believed that patients were sometimes inappropriately admitted to hospital in order to avoid breaches of the four-hour waiting times target. Feedback from BMA members suggested that an aggressive management style is not isolated to NHS Lothian—a point that we have made but which has been rejected repeatedly. However, it is the BMA that says that—not us. It is more than two years since I called for the introduction of a whistleblowers’ line, but it will not come in until next month. Are there any other problems? Audit Scotland also reported that more than 500,000 patients—in fact, the annualised figure is slightly more, at 520,000—were offered an appointment with three days’ notice. Is that a reasonable offer under the new system? Is the new system of seven days reasonable? It used to be 21 days. We also have inconsistency in that area, as many members have pointed out. Accident and emergency is clearly a problem. In 2005, the drive to a four-hour target was announced and it was achieved in 2009, but has not been achieved since then. That is the reality, even if the figures are not being recorded quite correctly. However, more worryingly, 323 people were in A and E for more than 12 hours, as Helen Eadie said, which is the highest total since the target came in. Trolley waits are again becoming the norm, with graphic pictures such as that of 84-year-old John McGarrity. As Jenny Marra said about a hidden report from inspectors observing patients on trolleys in NHS Tayside, the inspectors were rubbished instead of there being an acknowledgement of the pressures and the effects on staff. As Jim Hume reminded us, this is not a new situation and the money that is offered to solve the problem is also not new. We have had a lower target of 95 per cent sneaked out. Again, it was not announced to the Parliament, but we hear, “Oh! It’s a target, not a standard.” I say to Murdo Fraser that he was not alone in his absolute incomprehension of what the hell is the difference between those two. Forgive my words.

I said that I apologise.

An area that is of considerable concern to me is cancer. In December, I asked the First Minister about the 600 Scots—200 with colorectal cancer—for whom the target had been missed. I was offered an explanation from the cabinet secretary in due course, but I am still waiting. However, why am I concerned? It is because although we have a target and the health service is doing phenomenally well with that target, those who wait are waiting a median time of a further 61 days, which is double the target, so the matter is not being dealt with properly. All that we ask the Government to do is look at those matters carefully, to come up with a system that works and be honest about it, and to take a deep dive on those patients who have been misled by waiting time figures that are inappropriate, as Audit Scotland has said. That is what should happen and, as Jackson Carlaw said, that is where the debate should now move to.

I will not enter into the debate over whether the UK Government or the Scottish Government has behaved better with regard to what is happening in Bahrain, but I wonder whether the minister will question the SQA to ensure that any contract or arrangement between the agency and the Bahraini Government makes it clear that there must be no suppression of any ethnic group within that country in respect of the issues in which the SQA is providing material or support.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. We welcome the establishment of a food standards agency in Scotland, which will be separate from Government and the food industry, and the fact that we in Scotland are not proposing to follow the UK Government’s decision to split up the FSA’s functions. However, we are sorry that, despite Professor Scudamore’s report in April 2012 and the minister’s statement in June 2012 that such a body would be set up, we are only now having a consultation, which will run for another 12 weeks, as well as having two expert groups. One is left with the firm impression that action is occurring with a great deal more speed now only because we have a crisis. Of course, Scotland, along with the rest of the UK, has faced many crises, such as with BSE and E coli, and I am sure that the horsemeat scandal will not be the last. Given that a full range of responsibilities will now fall to the new FSA and that the minister said the other day that the underspend that occurred related only to research, will the new, free-standing FSA have the resources to replace the labelling and nutrition staff who were moved to Westminster, for example, and ensure that adequate laboratory facilities are available? Will the minister ensure that we have a debate on the areas to be covered by the new FSA and its relationship with the UK and EU bodies? Previously, the Scottish part of the FSA was linked strongly with the English part. It appears that the new legislation will not be available until well after the summer recess or even next year. Will the minister guarantee that the public can have confidence that they will be fully protected in the intervening period?

The process by which these inspections are being undertaken is relatively new. We understand from HIS that it is updating its methodology. The concern about the Ninewells case—which I would like the cabinet secretary to address—relates to the fact that the original report was not simply published alongside the follow-up report. That might have been acceptable. The concern is not about the fact that the original report was amended to make factual corrections, which is entirely appropriate. The original report was not published alongside the follow-up report—does the cabinet secretary agree that that is what destroys public confidence? In his discussions with HIS, will the cabinet secretary ensure that the process is such that the original report is published, alongside any final caveats from the board, the implementation plan and, if appropriate, a follow-up report, because otherwise public confidence will be undermined?

How does the cabinet secretary explain exhibit 8 in the report, which shows a ninefold variation in ophthalmology and a fivefold variation in orthopaedics for social unavailability? We know that those specialties are under the greatest pressure and, surprise, surprise, they are the ones where up to 50 per cent of patients, in different board areas, declared themselves unavailable. Are the SNP’s boasts on waiting times not actually based on fiction, as is made completely clear by exhibit 9? What SNP credibility is left with regard to the system as it has operated until this point?

That is the clinician’s decision.

Is it me now?

I am sorry, Presiding Officer—and I have just used up some of my time. Access to medicines is a difficult area. Of course it is correct that politicians should not be involved in individual decisions—that would be anathema—but it is wrong to say that we as politicians are not involved. As Duncan McNeil said, we set the framework and provide the money. The framework and funding are at the centre of the debate. Joan McAlpine’s article was not helpful in that respect.

I will not—I am sorry. Joan McAlpine had a long go before. There is general support for the Scottish Medicines Consortium, which has not wavered, although people look forward to increased public participation. The fact that all medicines that industry submits—not just those that politicians refer—are reviewed is an important differential statement made by Scotland, in comparison with what happens in England. Spending on medicines in the UK is lower than in the rest of Europe. In Scotland, the spending level on innovative medicines used to be the highest among the four countries in the UK, but it is now the lowest. That change is of some importance and I will return to it if I have time. Jackson Carlaw emphasised the almost universal experience of cancer and the equally universal desire for a cure—or if not a cure, then relief or a remedy. The development of cancer treatment has almost always been incremental. Mark McDonald made a point about treatment not being life-saving, but I say to him that improvements are almost always incremental. When I was a junior doctor, children with leukaemia survived for only a year or two, whereas they now survive with a normal life expectancy. That did not happen in one blinding flash; it happened because a series of drugs was added to, mixed and improved over time.

I am sorry—I do not have time. If oncologists tell us that they do not have standard international treatments—the Health and Sport Committee was given that evidence—we really have a problem. We must be sure that medicines are available through one or another system. Jackson Carlaw reminded us about Scotland’s place in clinical research, and Aileen McLeod mentioned the BioQuarter. It is important for our research base that we ensure that innovative medicines that we are involved in trialling are then generally available. The IPTR system is an important area.

Before I come to that, however, I want to say one thing. The system that we have, whereby the SMC approves something for unrestricted use and 14 separate committees then decide on what happens, is wrong. The chief executive letter says that it must now be done within 90 days. That was a result of pressure in the previous session of Parliament, when we insisted that 18-month delays were unacceptable, but I have to say to the cabinet secretary that the loopholes are still there. Often, the fact that there is not a clinical pathway is used to delay things much further. The system is dysfunctional and it must end. We must ensure that drugs that are approved for unrestricted use are then applied in a much more universal way. I turn to the IPTR system in my last 30 seconds. It is generally recognised that the system is dysfunctional. Bob Doris said that we need consistency and Jayne Baxter emphasised the importance of fairness. Those are two important points, but there is a catch-22. An IPTR can be applied only to a patient who is different from the trial patients on whom the licence was applied. That is often difficult, if not impossible, for drugs.

I close on the fact that we have a dysfunctional system. I welcome the review and the new £21 million, but we must have published lists of all those consulted, and the stakeholders must be consulted—

—before the final decisions are reached.

It appears that the message that should go out from the cabinet secretary and the Parliament is that there is no problem and doctors are completely wrong in saying that there is. Will the cabinet secretary answer the second part of Jim Hume’s question? Will the Government give the public in Scotland an absolute guarantee that children’s wards will not close in future due to staff shortages? If he cannot give that guarantee, all the stuff about additional consultants and so on is worthless. The public are entitled to know whether their children’s wards will remain open. Can he guarantee that?

In the context of work with NHS Lanarkshire on future plans, will the minister encourage the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to fulfil the promise that he made a few weeks ago to write to me with an explanation for the astonishing reduction in social unavailability—from 27 to 7 per cent between summer 2011 and 2012—that NHS Lanarkshire achieved? The cabinet secretary made that promise in the Parliament, but as yet he has been unable to fulfil it.

It is breathtaking that the First Minister is accusing members on the Labour benches of not supporting staff in the NHS when his Government has cut almost 2,500 nurses in the past two years. The First Minister often cites England as being worse than us, but England has cut only 7,000 nurses over the same period. That means that his Government has, proportionally, cut more than three times as many nurses. At the same time, his Government has cut the student intake by 20 per cent, thereby denying 600 aspiring students a career. That comes on top of paediatric services being in disarray because of lack of staff. Is it not the case that, in reality, the SNP’s workforce planning is not the guff the First Minister has just spoken, but a total shambles?

At the outset, I should draw members’ attention to my membership of SAMH, the Scottish Drugs Forum and the British Medical Association. I am also a fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists and the Royal College of General Practitioners, and a member of William Simpson’s. I very much welcome the minister’s tone and the approach that he is taking in wanting to listen to members. The new strategy for 2012 to 2015 is evidence of the Government’s ability to produce strategies in which stakeholders are listened to. I hope that the Government will listen to the other parties today. We do not intend to be highly critical of the review, which is excellent. It builds on the previous work that has been done by successive Governments, including the mental health framework report in 1997. However, there is one difference. The first framework was immediately accompanied by two things, one of which was a monitoring and supervisory implementation group. That meant that those in the field could see where the variations that the minister mentioned were and could try to address those issues. The other good news at that time, of course, was that the framework was followed by Labour’s doubling of NHS funding. It is quite clear that that is not open to the current Government. The challenges are therefore different. That investment by Labour, the modernisation of the estate, and the increase in the number of mental health workers have changed the landscape. The number of beds has reduced and the old asylums are largely a thing of the past; even the state hospital has been renewed and its bed numbers have been halved, with medium-secure units being developed. Community care intensive home treatment and crisis interventions have increased. In particular, the level of readmissions, which I mention in my amendment, has reduced by 30 per cent. The Government and Labour take some credit for that. That is no mean feat, and it indicates the quality of the treatment that is being offered. Therefore, the Scottish National Party inherited the service in a better place. Other factors that were external to the NHS were the positive one-third reduction in child poverty during our time, the reduction in pensioner poverty and nearly full employment. As we know, all those things contributed to a better place for mental health. The 36 commitments are welcome, but there are things in the report that may reflect when it was drawn up. The challenges of a stalled reduction in child poverty, 20 per cent youth unemployment, increased part-time working, higher unemployment generally and a reduced standard of living for all confront us in considering where we will proceed on mental health. In its briefing, the Royal College of Psychiatrists painted a somewhat starker picture for us. Suicide, drug misuse and alcohol, including the rapidly rising rates of alcoholic liver disease, contribute to premature mortality rates and other health inequalities in Scotland. That is now well recognised. The poor general health of people with psychiatric illness, which the report mentions, and their high rates of tobacco use have become increasingly evident as one of the causes of premature mortality. The impact of poor parental mental health and their substance misuse has an enduring effect on the development of children. In the brief time that I have, I want to look at some of the pressure points on the system. The minister mentioned health inequalities. The reconstitution of the health inequalities task force is an opportunity to look again at premature mortality due to poor physical health and excess smoking among those with mental illness. They have a significant effect. There is up to 10 years’ loss of life expectancy for that group. I hope that the minister will assure me that that will be one of his priorities in the re-established health inequalities task force. On the elderly, the Government is to be commended for building on the work of Irene Oldfather, the cross-party group on Alzheimer’s and Alzheimer Scotland by adopting and pursuing an effective strategy on dementia, which I very much welcome. Among the elderly—the minister referred to this, but he did not emphasise the point enough—depression is three times as common as dementia. Those suffering from delirium are another important group. Among the elderly, depression is estimated to have a prevalence of around 13.4 per cent and is predicted by the World Health Organization to become the second-highest health burden in the western world by 2020. Depression is also strongly linked to disability. However, only 10 to 15 per cent of such patients are treated; unlike younger adults, fewer elderly people present to psychiatrists with depression or are diagnosed by general practitioners as having depression. Unlike the excellent progress that has been made among younger adults, suicide rates among the elderly are almost completely unchanged over the 10-year period during which the HEAT—health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment—target has been in place. Psychosis is also increasingly common because we have many more people over 85, and they are a group of people who are associated with greater levels of psychosis. However, the biggest lacuna in the strategy is the absence of a significant look at depression. Malcolm Chisholm will talk more about that following our cross-party group meeting the other day. The main concern of addiction specialists is the level of alcohol consumption among the elderly, which is another important issue. However, I feel that not enough attention is given to alcohol-related brain damage in all groups. That is a growing problem, yet progress on achieving a joined-up approach seems to have stalled—Peter MacLeod drew attention to that in his evidence to the Public Audit Committee in 2011. Although there are excellent teams such as the one in Glasgow and support is provided by groups such as SAMH, Loretto Housing Association and William Simpson’s, not enough attention is paid to the issue. One case study showed that an ARBD sufferer had 11 separate case notes—that is not integration. I urge the Government to have a further look at that area. On services for prisoners—Mary Fee will say a little bit more about this—I welcome the work on borderline personality disorder that is being done in Cornton Vale, which has been extended to Edinburgh. However, unless we take the Angiolini report seriously across both justice and health, we will be having this discussion in another 10 years. I was the justice minister when we set up the time-out centre in Bath Street, which deals primarily with people who have a drug problem. That has never been extended and has not been tried for men, yet many of those in our prisons have drug or alcohol problems. We have not tried extending such services to alcohol addiction, yet that is one way that we could reduce the prison population. We could reduce the need to build new prisons if we could get that group out of prison and into treatment. On child and adolescent mental health services, the almost certain achievement of the 26-week target is welcome and the move to an 18-week target is highly commendable. The Government has done a good job on that. However, the Mental Welfare Commission has expressed a slight concern in its report that the number of admissions to adult wards has flatlined at around 140. That is the same level as in 2009, after which the numbers peaked and have since come down again. I hope that we are seeing the start of a new trend, but I have not seen any clear statement about the bed numbers. The strategy says that the number of beds will increase from 42 to 48, but the original agreement was for 56 and I do not think that the difference can be entirely due to having intensive home care work. Although the early years strategy is very welcome—initiatives such as triple P and incredible years are excellent—we also need to work in the primary schools. For example, Place2Be provides a talking point in schools for pupils who feel under stress. That has been highly successful in Niddrie in Edinburgh and has now been extended to East Lothian and Glasgow, where it is working extremely well. Such services at a lower-tier level can prevent pressure from being put on CAMHS and help the Government to meet its target. That is not the only programme, but it is worth doing. The suicide rate is down by 16.7 per cent, so we are moving towards the target of reducing the rate by 20 per cent. Choose life and see me have both made a big contribution to that. I also welcome the minister’s announcement about refreshing the strategy. However, although we talk about percentages, we should recognise that that is still 770 deaths, which is a lot of deaths. We have 500 deaths from drugs, 770 from suicide and about 1,000 from alcohol. Those are three areas where we will need to renew our attention and renew our effort. The achievement of the target on psychological treatment is extremely welcome. The NHS 24 online service is useful, particularly in the Highlands and Islands, although face-to-face therapy is needed. Meeting that objective will continue to be a challenge, but I agree that the Government’s attempt to do so is great. The people in need of therapy are often in work, and we need a flexible approach, with appointments offered at times that will suit the workforce. I welcome the fact that we now have a specialist deafblind community service based in Lothian, but when will the admissions to the John Denmark unit in Manchester conclude with the introduction of a unit in Scotland so that individuals do not have to travel? The Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 has not been fully implemented. I know that we will be looking at tribunals legislation shortly, but when will the Government commence section 268 of the 2003 act, giving a right of appeal against overly strict detention in non-state hospitals? The time has come for that to be implemented. I commend Labour’s amendment to the chamber. Members will note that we have drawn attention to one or two additional priorities, but we have not drawn attention to all the priorities, because we recognise the financial restrictions on the Government. However, we are not alone in calling for a clear timetable and supervised monitored implementation. SAMH makes that same point, because only then can the welcome aspirations of the strategy be fully credible. I move amendment S4M-05444.2, to insert at end: “; while noting that significant progress has been made since the Framework for Mental Health Services in Scotland in 1997, the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 and Towards a Mentally Flourishing Scotland: Policy and Action Plan 2009-2011 including improving mental health services, suicide reduction and readmissions to psychiatric units, nevertheless recognises that depression in older people, which the World Health Organization has stated will be the second greatest health burden in developed countries by 2020, the record number of drug deaths and tackling alcohol-related brain damage all merit specific commitments along with the priorities identified in the strategy, which will build on and increase the pace of change in mental health in Scotland, and looks forward to the production of a report on progress on the 22 commitments in Towards a Mentally Flourishing Scotland: Policy and Action Plan 2009-2011 and on the Scottish Government’s response to the Public Audit Committee’s 3rd Report 2010: Overview of mental health services, and an action plan on the 36 commitments in the new strategy together with a clear indication of how the Scottish Government intends to monitor progress.”

On the choose life programme, the percentage of NHS staff who have been trained has improved, but it is still only 52 per cent. Does the member agree that we need to push on with further training for staff in the public sector?

Is the cabinet secretary satisfied that all premises that sell tobacco are now registered? Have any prosecutions taken place for the sale of tobacco from unregistered premises?

4. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met the chief executive officers of NHS boards. (S4O-01672)

When we last met, Scottish National Party members in the chamber appeared to be outraged when Labour called the PricewaterhouseCoopers review “a whitewash”. I have to say that Labour is still of that view because the review failed to cover the period in which misuse of the social unavailability coding was most likely to be prevalent. My question to the cabinet secretary today is simple. Can he explain how Lanarkshire Health Board was able to achieve a remarkable reduction of 75 per cent in the level of social unavailability, from a high of 27 per cent in the summer of 2011 to a low of 7 per cent in 2012, as reported in appendix 4 to its recent board papers? Both those levels of social unavailability cannot reflect a similar application of that particular coding.

I draw the cabinet secretary’s attention to the fact that, in September 2012—that is, before the winter season really got under way—only two out of 11 mainland health boards met the 98 per cent A and E target, and to the fact that, since September 2010, the 98 per cent target has been met only once on the Scottish average. My colleague Jim Hume raised the issue of capacity. This is not just about the winter situation or the norovirus; it is about the capacity in the system. Will the cabinet secretary join me in paying tribute to accident and emergency staff for their extremely hard work in endeavouring to meet the targets? Will he also respond to Mr Hume’s question and say whether he will urgently hold a further meeting with the College of Emergency Medicine to try to determine what capacity is necessary so that the target can be met on a regular basis?

As a consultant, I had my PVG disclosure paid for by the board, so that last statement, although welcome, is irrelevant and has nothing to do with what we are discussing. I ask the cabinet secretary to re-examine the audits. First, will he acknowledge that the detailed scrutiny was not of every record but of a sample, and that the audit trail was flawed in many boards? Secondly, why did he order the review of records from January to June 2012 when the Lothian scandal was exposed in the late summer of 2011? It is clear that the board’s practice began to change—

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the concerns that I have been raising over the past few years about junior and middle-grade doctor staffing? Those were dismissed by his predecessor, as always, as scaremongering, but today Lanarkshire NHS Board is reported to be concerned about its junior doctor recruitment and Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board has reported significant problems with middle-grade recruitment. Those concerns come on top of the paediatric service problems in the south-east, of which the cabinet secretary is fully aware because he has provided additional finance. Has he abandoned the ill-thought-out plans to cut doctors’ senior training grades by 40 per cent by 2015 and the FY1 and FY2—foundation year 1 and 2—grades by 20 per cent?

I add my congratulations to those of other members to Richard Baker on bringing the debate to the chamber. Once again, Parliament is facing up to an issue of which it is not fully aware, as members have said. That has been brought about by the courage of parents who have been in the difficult situation of experiencing the birth of an Edwards syndrome child. I will not reiterate the points that colleagues have made, but I will amplify one or two points. With regard to early screening and diagnosis, amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling would play a significant part, as would ultrasound screening to look for slow growth or underweight development, which should lead to amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling where appropriate, and so should give parents the opportunity to seek an abortion, if they wish to do so. In researching my speech, I drew first on my own experience. I practised paediatrics at the Western general hospital here in Edinburgh more than 40 years ago, and experienced a case that we did not know at the time was Edwards syndrome, which had some of the characteristic features that Nanette Milne spoke about. I also looked at the web, as many of us do when trying to learn about subjects for which we do not have adequate information. I discovered the SOFT UK website, which I found interesting and which offers support for both Patau syndrome or trisomy 13, and Edwards syndrome or trisomy 18. SOFT UK obviously does an excellent job in providing information. I also found it interesting that on Mumsnet there is a current thread regarding a lady who is pregnant with what may be an Edwards syndrome baby. Her consultant has said that she has a one in three chance of having such a child, so she is looking for advice and support. I hope that someone will put her in touch with SOFT UK so that she can receive that. One of the things that are transforming our society is the ability of those who have experienced such problems to come through them in a way that, in a sense, makes them stronger. They use their grief in order to do things such as setting up a trust, as Patricia and Peter have done. Their involvement through the social media in supporting others is something that we need to look at and encourage. In the meantime, there is the establishment of the proposed pathway, with its five outcomes and 10 key objectives. I am sure that the Minister for Public Health and the Government will tell us how that is progressing. It seems to me that we have a good base to build on in Scotland. Our children’s hospices, which were not the first hospices to be established in Scotland but arose from the hospice movement that developed in the 1970s, have already played an enormously important role in supporting parents in situations of palliative care. That includes engaging with families with a child who has Edwards syndrome, but there is now a move to do that in a more formal way. CHAS’s next big effort, in addition to the two residential hospices that have been established, is to develop community support across the country. I wish CHAS well in that. We need specialist support for parents like Patricia and Peter whose children suffer from Edwards syndrome. I feel that we are making good progress and, as Richard Baker is, I am optimistic because although a cure cannot be found at the present time, the possibility for supporting parents exists. I am sure that the Government will be supportive in that respect.

I entirely agree with the cabinet secretary, but the response to the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine demonstrated a divergence between public opinion, which was based on no evidence, and all the scientific evidence. The medical colleges, the chief medical officer and so on all agreed that the MMR vaccine was effective and had nothing to do with autism. What will the cabinet secretary and his Government do to ensure that the press and public are informed and engaged properly?

The member may wish to note that the Wellcome Trust stopped paying for research—at 100 per cent—in Ireland after it became independent. The other point that needs to be made is that this is not just about getting the research funding; it is about getting the research funding in competition. That competition is critical to this serious issue in future.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Eire was a member of the Medical Research Council for two years after it became independent. After that, its membership of the Medical Research Council was dropped and the Wellcome Foundation reduced its funding for any project from Eire by 50 per cent—that is the point.

5. To ask the First Minister what the maximum time is that a patient has waited beyond the cancer waiting times targets in 2012. (S4F-01039)

Yesterday, the whole Parliament joined together in acknowledging the achievements of national health service staff in reducing waiting times. Is the First Minister aware that annually 600 Scots are not being treated for cancer within the 62-day target? The Government’s early detection of cancer programme is very welcome, but one third of those who breach the target for treatment are colorectal cancer patients. Will the First Minister undertake to get the health department to investigate, track and research those patients, to see where the problems lie? Those problems could be resolved by making more of the hard choices that Johann Lamont referred to today.

The debate has taken a different tone in the last 10 minutes. The cabinet secretary has dealt with the debate in a much more measured tone than his stereotypical back benchers, who simply came out, parrot fashion, with a series of statements, half of which were actually rubbish. One thing that all speakers in the debate agree on is that we continue to owe a huge debt of gratitude to the staff of the NHS. As Christmas is approaching—unless the Government breaks its habit and finally schedules a parliamentary debate on health—this will be the last debate on health this year, so it is worth saying that we owe the NHS’s staff a huge debt. Without their efforts, we would be in even more trouble. “The NHS is continuing to perform well but there are treacherous waters ahead. There are huge risks, particularly in ensuring that quality of care does not suffer with the further financial squeeze.” Those are not my words, but the words of Anna Dixon from the King’s Fund. The NHS is on “an amber warning”. Those are not my words, but the words of the Auditor General for Scotland, who reported that nine boards have an underlying deficit and that there is a £1 billion backlog in repairs. The previous cabinet secretary—despite Jackson Carlaw’s caricature of her—did some things right, but she also chose repeatedly to ignore the warnings that we gave her. She dismissed them, as did one SNP member today, as “scaremongering”. That is what we are always accused of. She continued to deliver Scotland’s patient safety programme, which is a world-leading programme that was started by Labour and has been continued by the SNP. The programme has delivered significant reductions in adverse effects and, as the current cabinet secretary has just said, a feeling of patient safety that is greater than in most health services. However, the previous cabinet secretary failed to change the culture of blaming and bullying, as is shown by the NHS National Services Scotland reports, which suggest that 60 per cent of staff have been bullied. She failed to introduce the whistleblower’s line that I campaigned for for almost two years. I compliment the current cabinet secretary for finally introducing that. It is very welcome. In 2001 there were 3,000 delayed discharges, so we started a programme that aimed to reach zero by 2008, which was achieved. That was brilliant; the health service under SNP and Labour achieved the target. However, the SNP Government then promised that it would keep the figure at zero but, in 14 of the 17 quarters since then, the promise has been broken and the number has been higher than that. The most recent survey found 91 patients whose discharge has been delayed for more than six weeks and almost 1,000 beds still occupied by patients who had been deemed fit for discharge. There are 600 delayed discharges and 283 people with complex needs, so more than 800 beds are occupied by people who, medically, do not need to be there. I have been attacked repeatedly on the issue of beds. However, it is a fact that the SNP promised in its 2007 manifesto not to reduce the number of beds, but the number was then reduced by 1,800. I have said that that is not necessarily a bad thing if we have good redesign, but the SNP made false promises on that. No one has mentioned dementia, on which we face a huge challenge. The previous cabinet secretary—under pressure—finally introduced Healthcare Improvement Scotland inspections. Finally, after months of my asking, I am glad that, under the current cabinet secretary, HIS has produced a thematic report on the inspections. Again, I commend the cabinet secretary for that. However, the thematic report says that cognitive assessments are patchy and there are concerns about nutrition. Boarding out, which the previous cabinet secretary introduced and which was also welcome, was never followed up on because we do not get reports on what happens. However, after a freedom of information request, we have found that some patients are moved up to 18 times. The royal colleges have reported that there are currently 1,600 patients whom they regard as being likely to be receiving sub-optimal care—not medical treatment—because of the pressures that the system is under. The previous cabinet secretary left behind a slow erosion of care, an increasing level of frustration and growing anger that is getting greater by the day. Certainly, my postbag is full of those issues. Despite the absolutely ridiculous debate about the workforce in 2007 and who had more and who had less, it is a fact that 2,300 nursing posts have been got rid of. Is anyone really saying that that can be done without putting pressure on those who remain? We have vacancies for doctors in Lanarkshire. In July, the cabinet secretary said that the issues with paediatric services in Lothian are nothing to do with money and resources—another denial—yet within the last two weeks we have learned that they are in crisis. There has been an 8 per cent cut in the intake of Scottish medical students, but an increase in English students. Three midwifery schools were closed peremptorily by the previous cabinet secretary, with no discussion—oh, no—with the schools or with the UK, where there is an overall shortage of midwives. There has been a 20 per cent cut in the nursing student intake. No risk assessment has been carried out on the effect on the university departments involved. In the previous session of Parliament, we raised the issue of access to medicines, and the previous cabinet secretary responded. Great. Welcome. Commendable. A new system of individual patient treatment requests was introduced. However, within months, we realised that the system was not working. Doctors told us repeatedly that it was not even worth applying, because it just does not work. This week, oncologists complained bitterly that oncology in Scotland is a second-rate service and cannot attract staff. I commend the cabinet secretary for setting up the Routledge-Scott review, which is excellent and a good response. Several members have mentioned waiting times. When I raised the issue of waiting times in NHS Lothian, I did not know that an internal NHS Lothian report had already been produced, after a request by Naomi Hamilton. That report, which was produced well before I raised the issue, had never seen the light of day. Has the Lothian issue been put to bed? I could offer many case studies, but I will use just one. A patient, who at the time was the sole carer for her 92-year-old mother who has a complex care package and who needs someone with her all the time, asked at her first out-patient appointment for her procedure to be delayed until mid-December, after which her brother was to return from France to help with their mother’s care. What happened? She got two phone calls from a private hospital in Glasgow offering her two appointments for 8 am, when she could not possibly attend and which totally contravened her stated wishes at her first appointment. Then she was told, “Sorry—you’ve had your two appointments, so you’re off the list. Go back to your GP to be referred again.” Her GP is livid, and she has cited to me four other cases in Lothian NHS in which the same thing has occurred. There are waiting time problems in Grampian, and Glasgow has problems with blankets. I have an email in front of me telling me that patients are being advised to take their blankets with them to their scans and X-rays because otherwise they might not be there when they get back. We are not saying that the health service is bad and that the cabinet secretary is not doing his best. We are saying that, unless we all face up to the fact that we face an implosion in the health service within the next two years, we will not get through the current austerity. It is time for the cabinet secretary, as the new man, to adopt reality.

The situation as it stands is that local authorities allocate direct payments that are frequently lower than amounts paid for support under options 2 and 3, based on the assumption that a person who is taking a direct payment will employ a personal assistant. However, individuals use direct payments to buy services from organisations—the most notable example of that arose during the Edinburgh care and support retendering exercise, when service users took direct payments in order to remain with their existing service providers, rather than move to the organisations that won the retender. Paragraph 63 of the Scottish Government’s 2007 guidance on self-directed support says: “It is best practice for local authorities to offer an individual budget of an equivalent monetary value of a council-arranged service to allow individuals to select their chosen option.” My amendments 6 and 10 simply state that that payment should not automatically be lower. In other words, a local authority would have a duty to look at the type of care that the individual wanted under the bill—and to do so before making up its mind about whether to offer a lower rate. I absolutely reject the Government’s position in rejecting my amendments, which was laid out at stage 2, that that would reduce the local authority’s flexibility. The purpose of my amendments is to ensure complete transparency about the process and that a lower amount is not offered automatically for options 2 and 3. That is a reasonable approach if we are to have an open and transparent system. Amendments 7 and 11 ensure that reasons will be given in writing. That approach is required because, as a Parliament, we need to be absolutely clear that we audit what is going on. Both my sets of amendments need to be agreed to, so that exactly what is happening out there is clear. The amendments do not prevent in any way the local authority from giving a lower direct payment, but it must justify and demonstrate why it is doing so. My amendments are reasonable, and I intend to press them.

I will deal first with the amendments in the group that are not in my name. We welcome and support Bob Doris’s amendments 19 to 22 and 25 to 28, which arose from earlier discussions. My amendments in this group relate to issues that the Law Society of Scotland has raised with us. It is concerned that the bill does not provide the necessary safeguards, or place any obligation on an authority, to protect against undue influence being exerted over the assisted person. My first pair of amendments—amendments 8 and 12—would require reasonable steps to be taken to ensure that any person who was appointed to assist would be suitable in accordance with proposed new section 5(5). Amendments 9 and 13 seek to provide a definition of how the assisted person should be looked at. The intention is to ensure that we have a situation in which those who do not qualify under the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 or the vulnerable adults legislation, but who might be vulnerable and whose position in having a disability is not completely robust, are protected from undue influence from individuals who might be unsuitable. We know that such unsatisfactory cases have been reported in the press. My amendments would provide protection that the Law Society thinks that it would be appropriate to include in the bill.

I thank colleagues, the minister, the bill team and, crucially, the many organisations involved across Scotland, for the critical but collaborative approach that has been taken to the bill. Self-directed support is not new, but the bill moves us further down a pathway of respect and dignity for those who require support, giving them control in so far as they may wish to take it. Supporting independent living should reflect the principle that a partnership of collaboration between the user and the professional is central to how we wish to take things forward. Self-directed support has been in place for a number of years—since about 1996. However, as Jackie Baillie said, the number of people who have availed themselves of that option in Scotland has been quite small; uptake has been about half of that in England. There has been a perception that some Scottish local authorities and some social workers have been quite reluctant to encourage SDS. The bill will not in itself change the culture; many subtle and some not-so-subtle pressures to retain direct local authority services could remain. The not-so-subtle pressures should be transparent—as my amendment tried to make clear—to ensure that any discrepancy between payments under the various options is justifiable and, more important, can be monitored. I hope that the Government will require local authorities to record the variations and that the inspectorate will be rigorous in examining why there are differences. The bill has been amended with regard to children and young people and the minister’s amendments in that respect have been welcome. We have not been able to reach agreement on independent advocacy. We all believe that it is important. The minister clearly believes that the provision of information is sufficient, but as many members have pointed out—Nanette Milne, Malcolm Chisholm and others—availability of independent advocacy services is patchy. It will fall to the minister to ensure that the wishes that he has clearly expressed are followed through in every local authority. Carers remain critical to all aspects of support for those with disability and, as Claudia Beamish said, they should be equal partners. The fact that carers are still not assessed in large numbers is worrying, but the minister’s announcement that he will take forward a number of aspects of that is welcome—particularly his comments about promoting preventative work because the threshold for support is often far too high. However, there is a continuing need to ensure that where carers play a significant role, detailed emergency plans are in place so that care continues without additional stress in the event of a carer being incapacitated. The issues around charging have been debated and we await with interest what the minister brings forward. I would be grateful if he would give us some indication of a timetable for what he proposes with regard to charges because the unfairness that already exists in community charging, with huge variations across councils, is—for us, at least—a worry. The charging of carers for some aspects of their work would be important. There clearly needs to be a balance between localism and national aspirations, which will not be easy. I look forward to further enlightenment on that from the minister in his closing speech. One of the problems with individuals is that they do not always fall into neat categories. Those who have a defined incapacity within the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 or the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Act 2007 should be protected. However, those who are not vulnerable should be given the freedom to act to maintain their independence within the requirement of prudent expenditure of public money. That prudence should not be prescriptive and many members have given examples of what can help. A holiday may sufficiently improve a person’s mental health and wellbeing to make a big difference. Unorthodox measures can improve self-confidence and be a highly effective use of public money. Riding for the disabled in my constituency is just one example, and gym membership is another. Other members have given other examples. We need to support the individual’s wishes about how they want to use their money. That is important. The Law Society of Scotland’s concerns about the risk assessment of those who are involved in providing assistance remain. The amendment on that was rejected today by the Government party, but we need to look at that, perhaps in terms of regulation. The minister also declined to take the powers to regulate on personal assistants. It should be remembered that we did not say that he should do so immediately; we said that he should take the powers to do so in the future. The minister suggested that they are already available, but I am not sure that they are. It will be interesting to see how the organisations respond in the debate on that. I hope that he is correct. As Malcolm Chisholm said, many organisations that represent disabled persons think that things such as the training of personal assistants are desirable. That part of regulation is important. After all, protecting vulnerable groups schemes are not compulsory, and people may be persuaded not to proceed down that line by someone who is overinfluencing. To conclude, the bill will help to ensure that the legitimate aspirations for flexible support of those with a disability are achieved. The independent living movement has been very supportive in helping us to get a useful bill, which is a further step in a continuing journey that began with the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 and the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, and which will progress the changes in society’s attitudes to disability. Those changes were given glorious expression in the support for the Paralympics. We commend the bill and look forward to the post-legislative scrutiny, which may be particularly important to ensure that all our hopes are fully realised.

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take in response to concerns that out-of-hours paediatric services at NHS Lothian, Fife and Borders are at risk due to a shortage of trainee doctors. (S4F-00999)

I thank the First Minister for his reply and for the announcement. However, I wonder what the families and children in Fife, Lothian and the Borders are feeling and what they believe, given that the First Minister said in June that the closure of the paediatric ward at St John’s was unsatisfactory and that remedial action was well under way to prevent a recurrence. However, the situation has not improved; it is very much worse, with 13 staff down in the medical field. We know from the Lothian NHS Board announcements that St John’s paediatric ward is under threat of closure, that services across Fife, the Borders and Lothian are stretched to breaking point and that remedial action has not yet been taken. Is this yet another broken promise? Is this another case of the public being misled, with the First Minister saying what he likes in the chamber regardless of what is happening in the real world of the NHS?

On the Labour Party’s behalf, I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement. We have looked for such a review, particularly in relation to the 14 area drug and therapeutics committees, which I have been banging on about for some time. Is it justifiable that the waiting-time clock for a patient who applies for medical treatment under the individual patient treatment request system is reset to zero, rather than stopped, under the target system?

I understand the minister’s problem with extending the list of conditions, but I note that under the previous system people who had some conditions, including diabetes, were exempt from all prescription charges. Given his view on such disease-specific inclusions and exclusions, does the minister plan to abolish means testing for the minor ailments scheme, to which the previous system of inclusions and exclusions still applies? Moreover, dental and optical charges are not the subject of universal benefits. Will the Government continue with means testing in respect of illnesses for which some people are treated differently?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the member for taking my intervention. No one is denying what the member says about concessionary travel for the elderly, but is she saying that people like me who still go to work—I am 70—can have a bus pass and be subsidised by the Government and the taxpayer? We argue that the resources should be focused.

I wonder whether anyone in this chamber believes that having a universal benefit has no cost to our system. Does anybody believe, without doubt, that universal benefits are progressive and benefit the less well-off? If people believe that, they are not in the real world. In a time of plenty, introducing universal benefits makes sense because of the ease of administration, to which Fiona McLeod referred, and the buy-in from everyone. Those are positive features that we all welcome and acknowledge. We do not contest the popularity of the so-called free services; we are saying that nothing is truly free. We in the Labour Party believe that we should have an honest and non-polarised debate about the consequences of the choices that the Government has made and is going to make. I start with free personal care. At the beginning of the century, Lord Sutherland’s report showed us the real problems of the demographic changes that we face—or the population time bomb as it is now known. At the time, it seemed unfair to me that the NHS and hospices provided care free at the point of need for someone with terminal cancer, whereas someone who had dementia and was not among the poorest had to pay the full costs of residential care. However, we now know that the costs of free personal care were substantially underestimated at the time. Moreover, we should recognise that the policy simply reduces the cost of residential care by about £9,000 per annum. There is still means testing, and the remaining cost for those who come above the threshold is about £24,000 per year. Anyone who reads David Bell’s articles on the issue and follows the issue with interest will know that the Welsh chose a different line from us, which means that there is a difference of only about £70 a week, and people there get the attendance allowance. The Government should consider that in the current circumstances and see what the benefits might be. What are the policy consequences? Audit Scotland has shown that the threshold of eligibility for community care has risen steadily in the past five years, leaving many people for whom preventive and early intervention would be invaluable at the mercy of market forces and reliant on their own resources. As other members have said, plenty new community charges have been introduced, while others have risen steeply. In the meantime, care staff and third-sector staff are having their wages cut in an atrocious way, and mainly women are affected. Where is the equality and social justice in that? The NHS is free at the point of need or, more properly, it is paid for mainly by taxes and in part by co-payment, which exists in every European country. Even in the years of plenty before the banking crisis, the SNP did not eradicate all co-payments. There remain substantial co-payments, for example for dental work and spectacles. Labour, along with the Liberal Democrats, introduced free eye tests. Research has shown that that is an effective and worthwhile measure. The research was done not by optometrists, who have a vested interest, but by the University of Aberdeen. A properly published and peer-reviewed study has shown that the measure has a significant effect in saving some people from blindness. We need to ensure that universal benefits are focused. Has the Government even asked those responsible whether it is necessary for people to have an annual eye check-up? I have asked, and the answer is that it is not necessary and that we could extend the period between universal checks. That is the sort of question that we need to ask in applying universal benefits. Another possible approach to universal benefits in a time of austerity is to keep the benefits free and universal but examine how effectively they are applied. For example, it seems ridiculous that people who are working get bus passes. In principle, no one in our party would argue against free prescriptions but, when faced with the reality of a period of austerity, Labour took the hard decision to reintroduce prescription charges. Those hard times in the 1960s required hard choices and hard decisions. Has the Scottish Government done a cost benefit analysis of free prescriptions? No—nothing has been published. That is the sort of tough decision that we really cannot expect of a head-in-the sand Government and an NHS that is on amber warning, which it denies, and that is led by someone whom I would characterise as Alex in Wonderland. They are in denial. The recent cuts of 2,300 nursing posts and 180 allied health professionals are bound to affect front-line services adversely—unless, of course, the SNP is saying that all the extra nurses that it employed between 2007 and 2011 were never needed in the first place. We have lost prescription income of between £50 million and £75 million but waiting time targets are becoming ever more challenging. Every breached target reported means a lowering of professional morale. We have just learned that NHS Lothian’s performance against its colorectal waiting time targets has come down from 98 per cent to 86 per cent. That is a lot of patients who are not getting operated on appropriately. The board is going to send 500 patients abroad, and we are sending 8,000 patients to England. It goes on and on. The Government cannot spend the money twice. Scotland used to have the highest level of uptake of innovative drugs of the four home nations; now, it has the lowest. The result of that will be a lessening of our research budget. In addition, there is the obscene and absurd sight of a new medicine that has been approved for unrestricted use by the Scottish Medicines Consortium being approved in different ways by different local groups, with the patients getting a different approach. It is absurd. The individual patient treatment request system is also under increasing criticism. Free prescriptions are not free; they come at a price. No one suggests that we go back to the old system, which was outdated and unfair, but we need to examine whether the current system is the most effective way of spending the money. The SNP promise of an independent Scotland that will fulfil all our dreams in a land flowing with milk and honey is simply utopian unreality or, perhaps, a pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. Perhaps a better image would be that our Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing is the wizard of Oz: a loud voice behind a curtain, safe until all is revealed.

Will the minister give way?

Let us have a little reality in the debate. [Interruption.] Does the cabinet secretary accept that the Government still conducts means testing for some prescriptions? I will tell him which prescriptions means testing is conducted for—those under the minor ailments scheme. The same system of means testing is used for that scheme as before, so let us have some reality. The Government carries out means testing for many, many things.

Does the minister agree that it is about not just getting people into treatment and starting them on the road to recovery but sustaining them in treatment?

I will start with the areas of implementation and drug policy in which the Government is to be commended. The introduction of the naloxone programme, which is being delivered in a measured way, supported by the Scottish Drugs Forum, is extremely welcome. The new and welcome waiting-time targets appear to be largely being met. However, I urge the Government to get the Scottish Drugs Forum to undertake a survey to ensure that there is no gaming involved in those waiting times, which is an issue that I have identified in relation to other figures. I have received indications from those working in the field that some users are being offered assessment and treatment in a tick-box way to meet the target and that those offers are not, in fact, realistic. I urge the Government to look into that. The minister’s predecessor, Fergus Ewing, went to some trouble to engage members from other parties, and the Labour Party signed up to the road to recovery quite comfortably. We did so partly because we had already established pilot schemes that embraced abstinence, such as the LEAP project in Edinburgh, which now has some problems with its premises but is nevertheless a welcome development. We had also established a programme of alternatives to prison that should not be forgotten—other members may address that—as well as drug courts, drug treatment and testing orders and the time-out centre for women offenders at 218 Bath Street. It is regrettable that that initiative has not been replicated, as the Angiolini report said should happen. I urge such a time-out centre for men to be piloted as well. I further welcome the Government’s recognition that methadone is a significant, evidence-based tool in reducing the incidence of HIV and improving community safety by reducing criminality. It is also a first step to recovery for many drug users. In response to Willie Rennie’s comment, I cite the British Medical Journal, which said last month that a 54 per cent reduction in the risk of HIV among drug users can be ascribed to the methadone programme. I welcome the minister’s restated confirmation that methadone will be used extensively for the initial treatment of opiate addiction. However, the review should concentrate on the delivery of methadone. Pharmacists who participate are being paid small sums, but, cumulatively, those can run into millions of pounds for chains such as Boots and Lloyds. I believe that there should at least be a nationally negotiated dispensing fee. The other bits of the contract with the pharmacists are negotiated nationally and that should be negotiated nationally, too.

I think that it should be possible to discount on a national fee, but we should not have the variation that we have at present, where NHS Ayrshire and Arran currently has the largest prescribing and the largest fees. My concern is about the deaths due to methadone diversion. How many prosecutions have there been for diversion? Some pharmacists undertake the work as a service to their community that they would rather not do, so if there was an alternative, it might be welcomed. Therefore, I again propose that the review should consider recommending a pilot in a high-usage area under which the NHS itself would take on dispensing seven days a week under the supervision of a pharmacist prescriber. I have to say that when I arrived in Edinburgh as an addiction specialist in 2004 and saw the contract for the proposed local enhanced scheme for general practitioners, I was, frankly, appalled. The requirement under the scheme was minimal. Frankly, too many patients were—and are—being parked on methadone and there were minimum testing requirements. I recommend that there should be a national enhanced services contract for general practitioners and that, over time, we should move to giving that only to GPs who have specific qualifications in the treatment of drug misuse and who are prepared to provide the holistic wraparound care that, as Willie Rennie pointed out, is critical to moving people on. Both Labour and the Scottish National Party have promoted prescribing by qualified health professionals other than doctors, but the very slow implementation of protocols has meant that nurses and pharmacists, having been trained, are not able to use their skills because 14 different health boards have created 14 different protocols and have done so very slowly. We are wasting that resource, which means that we have to use more expensive resources. In 2002, when I was justice minister in the current minister’s place, the number of drug deaths was 382. I introduced the know the score approach, and drug deaths actually reduced over the next three years. They rose again only in 2006, and they have now increased, from 382 when I was minister, to 584. However, I have to say that drug deaths in the United Kingdom, including Scotland, peaked in 2008 and have actually reduced steadily since. Why is Scotland different? I do not have an explanation; I just ask the question. One concern that I have, which was also highlighted by the UK Drug Policy Commission chaired by Dame Ruth Runciman, is that some clinicians precipitately withdraw treatment from those who relapse or top up. It is entirely appropriate to challenge those who top up, but there are too many clinicians who adopt a judgmental and punitive approach to those who relapse. Some services may be achieving their waiting list targets by discharging patients in order to create space—

In summary—in my remaining 10 seconds—we need to examine the variations in prescribing, which can vary by a factor of three between one area and another. We need to look at using non-medical prescribers. We need to introduce a NES contract. We need to have a new time-out centre. We need to monitor the services provided by the Scottish Prison Service—

Will the member give way?

My question is really about the previous point. If NHS Ayrshire and Arran is prescribing methadone at a rate of 212 per 100,000 and NHS Forth Valley is prescribing it at rate of 56 per 100,000, and there is a huge range between those two figures, it is clear that we do not have a full understanding of the picture. All the boards cannot be providing the best service. I ask the minister to ensure that prescribing is related to the number of people who go into treatment so that we can understand the issues. [Interruption.]

Did the Scottish Government make detailed submissions to the committee that considered the Scotland Bill about the particular powers to which the cabinet secretary has referred?

It is an uncomfortable fact that Scotland has a difficult relationship with alcohol. Alcohol consumption per head in Scotland is among the highest in the world and is 23 per cent higher than in England or Wales, despite similar pricing and availability. The effects of harmful levels and patterns of consumption are seen every day on Scotland’s streets, in our criminal justice system and in our national health service. I hope that at some point we will have a full debate about the justice approach in general. This debate is focused on drink-driving. Across the United Kingdom, there were 19,470 accidents and 1,640 deaths in 1979 as a result of drink-driving. By 2008, the figure had gone down to 8,640 accidents and 430 deaths. That is a very welcome reduction following the introduction of the original policy by Barbara Castle in the 1960s. However, the rate of reduction has flattened and there is even a suggestion that it may be beginning to rise again, so it is time for us to refresh our attack on drink-driving. Despite our high levels of consumption, our legal limit for driving under the influence of alcohol remains one of the highest in the world, at 80mg per cent of alcohol. Reducing the legal limit to 50mg would bring Scotland into line with a majority of European states, including Germany, France and Italy, and could possibly save as many as 17 of the 30 lives that are lost in Scotland each year. Many countries that are similar to Scotland economically and demographically have established 50mg as the legal limit. Does that help? We know that levels above 50mg are associated with four times the rate of accidents. In answer to Alex Johnstone’s question, the rate rises even more at about 80mg, but the rate of accidents is four times as much above 50mg as it is below 50mg. That is the justification for the policy. The centre for public health excellence’s 2010 study analysed data from 15 European countries and concluded that the adoption of a 50mg limit reduced alcohol-related driving death rates by about 11.5 per cent among young people. In Australia, where drink-driving is one of the main causes of road fatalities, lowering the limit to 50mg reduced fatal accidents generally and, specifically, produced an 18 per cent reduction in Queensland. The case of France illustrates that the implementation of blood-alcohol limits can be effective only when coupled with publicity and visible enforcement of the laws. The French Government has cracked down on drink-driving, and has replaced the previously relaxed attitude. Strict penalties and frequent roadside sobriety checks are commonplace in France. In Sweden, drink-drivers always receive a form of custodial sentence. This is not new. Sixty years ago, when I was a child in Perthshire, we had a refrain: “30 days hath September, April, June and November”. I will not complete the refrain, but it involved remembering how long the months were, and we added something at the end, which was, “and Sheriff Prain.” Sheriff Prain jailed everyone who was caught drink-driving in Perthshire, which meant that people tended to drink less when they were in Perthshire. UK citizens are less likely than other European citizens to know what the legal drink-driving limit is. Even if the limit was more widely known, the actual risk of being detected and sanctioned for drink-driving is low in the UK. France is now going further and has passed a law that makes it mandatory, from this month, for drivers to carry a breathalyser kit in their vehicles. That will have the effect of making the public even more aware of the law. A change of threshold on its own is not enough. We need more publicity and a campaign that does runs not only at Christmas. Further, we need proper enforcement of the laws. I hope that that will occur. Introducing a new drink-driving threshold without additional resources could seriously hamper any benefit being gained. The benefits are not just in driving, but in changing the culture. France not only curtailed drink-driving and increased enforcement of the law, but introduced the loi Évin to curtail advertising. Interestingly, the French took no measures in relation to price. The effect of all those methods was to change the culture in France, which resulted in a halving of the number of deaths from cirrhosis from twice the European Union average to the EU average. In the same period, the levels in Scotland have gone from the average to twice the average. We need to make a change. The United States maintains a nationwide 80mg limit. Recent legislation there has focused on programmes to detect drink-drivers rather than on lowering the legal limit. Interestingly, to prevent recidivism, some states require the use of ignition interlock devices, so that a driver must blow into a breathalyser to start their car. As some members have said, people who reoffend are a problem. They do not take the lesson that they should have learned from their first licence suspension or fine. We may need to deal with that in the future. Will a 50mg threshold achieve the correct balance? The legal limit is set at zero in some European countries, including the Czech Republic and Hungary, but that is not always easy to enforce. The smallest remnants of alcohol from the night before, the ingestion of cough medicine or even the use of mouthwash could put a driver over the limit, so that is not appropriate. We could have a 20mg limit, but I believe that a 50mg limit is correct since it will refresh the policy and, I hope, resume the downward trend.

I was not aware of that. That is—as they always are—an interesting fact from Stewart Stevenson. In some European countries, a limit of 10mg has been implemented for people who are in the first three years of being licensed. However, although the rate of accidents is much higher among new drivers, the number of accidents that are associated with drink are lower in that age group. I think that there is a better culture around drink-driving among young people than there is among people of my generation. If we are to shift the culture, we will need to continue a sustained and imaginative advertising and information campaign. General practitioners can play a part in our efforts to change the culture, and the consultation document on my member’s bill, “Shifting the Culture”, suggests that, if a drink-driving offence is committed, the court should inform the person’s GP. I was never informed of any of my patients committing that offence—not once in 30 years of practice—which meant that I did not have the opportunity to discuss with them the dangers of their reoffending. We have the cross-party acceptance, which Mr Dornan called for, that we should reduce the limit. However, I believe that the Government will have to consider providing the resources to enforce that lower limit, just as the Labour Government gave extra money to ensure that the initial enforcement of the smoking ban was a success. I hope that the Government will consider supporting the amendment in Lewis Macdonald’s name. I support the reduction to 50mg.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that additional information. I agree that NHS Tayside has made some movement, but more is needed. It is clear that there are problems where services are being moved from one hospital to another in order to improve their quality. That has happened in Tayside and in other areas. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that the short-life working group looks specifically at where services have been centralised with the result that staff and relatives have to travel? The new service must provide for that as well.

18. To ask the Scottish Government what the average cost is of educating a medical school student. (S4O-01383)

I think that those costs probably do not include clinical lecturer costs, because I understand that medical students’ full costs are much greater. As the cabinet secretary knows, the number of medical students who were admitted to Scottish medical schools last year rose by 25, or 3 per cent, but the number of Scots who were admitted dropped by 40. Scots were replaced by fee-paying English and international students. As he is aware—I am grateful for his help on this matter—one of my constituents was refused access to Scottish medical schools but received an unconditional offer in England. Will the cabinet secretary undertake to investigate whether that case was unique? How many qualified Scots were turned down in favour of fee-paying English and international students? Are we paying for non-Scottish students from the Scottish funding budget?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is disappointing that, in the first full year after the ban on discounting that was introduced by the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Act 2010—which the entire Parliament supported—the reduction in consumption in Scotland is only 1 per cent more than in England rather than the 3.8 per cent that the Sheffield model predicted? Will he invite the University of Sheffield team to help us in determining why its predictions are not being fulfilled and what more can be done?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the information that he has provided. Given that it remains the fact that people in care homes with dementia are significantly more likely to be on a psychoactive substance, will he consider, even before he receives the report that he mentioned, allowing those citizens to register with a pharmacist for chronic condition prescribing? Up to now, they have been barred from doing so. It is a right for every other citizen and it appears to me that residents in care homes should have that right as well.

The cabinet secretary was doing so well until that last comment. When his representatives met the WHO individuals, did they discuss the issue of drug deaths, which is a major problem for Scotland? The number of drug deaths in Scotland is increasing, whereas the number in England is decreasing. Indeed, in France the number has been reduced by a considerable measure. Was there any discussion of what best practice might be of assistance to us in tackling that difficult problem, which has been growing for the past eight or nine years?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government supports the Royal College of Nursing’s this is nursing campaign, celebrating the professionalism and compassion of nursing staff. (S4F-00865)

I am sure that the whole Parliament would join the First Minister in praising our hard-working nursing staff. However, I ask the First Minister whether he agrees with his back benchers, who said yesterday that the Royal College of Nursing was wrong when it stated that nursing staff numbers are now at their lowest since 2005. Is the First Minister asking the public to believe that axing 2,500 nursing posts is having no direct effect on the ability of our nurses to deliver the quality of patient care to which they aspire and which the RCN campaign celebrates?

The cancellation of EGIP beyond the central line is very unwelcome. Stirling and Alloa had an economic development plan that included that electrification as one of its pillars, and it would have led to new and increased service opportunities between Alloa, Dunblane and Glasgow by reducing journey times by up to 10 minutes, and would have reduced journey times by up to five minutes between Dunblane and Edinburgh. The economic aspect of the project was very important. It is no wonder, in that case, that the minister announced the changes during the recess.

No. I must make some progress.

I know that Jamie Hepburn wants to tell me about Cumbernauld, but I am talking about Stirling and Alloa, which have been seriously affected by the cancellations, and which the minister’s own constituents did not hear about until Parliament was in recess. That means that we had no opportunity to question him. At Westminster, the Speaker would have treated that as complete disrespect for Parliament—which is what it was. We learn that the revisions have been made on the basis of a highly partial report. Were Stirling Council and Clackmannanshire Council even consulted about the proposed cuts to the programme? I know that Network Rail was not consulted, because I asked. There has been no consultation about an important report that has led to what some members are calling “phasing”, but which I am calling cuts. What will be the consequences of the disinvestment decision? They are certainly not in the minister’s press release, which was—as is usual for the Scottish National Party—overstated with the headline, “Full steam ahead for Rail Project”. It is not even a quarter steam ahead. I suppose that it could have been worse; the minister might have announced, “Minister’s announcement electrifies Scots”. He did say that he was electrified, but my constituents are certainly not electrified. There will also be an effect on the minister’s constituents of prolonging the use of diesel trains, which idle for up to 40 minutes at Alloa station, not just in cold weather but at all times of the day and evening. Some of the minister’s and my mutual constituents suffer from a combination of noise and diesel exhaust fumes from which they expected to get relief by 2016. That will not now happen. Does the minister have any proposals to alleviate the sufferings of those constituents? Is he even concerned? As the minister knows, I continue to pursue the night coal trains issue. His abject failure to tackle that problem with any vigour is a complete mystery to me. He and I both made a mistake in accepting a false basis for the freight trains on the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway line, and the consequence for many households has been deep suffering. People such as the McIvers are in despair because they have to suffer levels of night noise of up to 85dB. That has been completely disregarded and the Government has held out no possibility of mitigation. The Government is also using noise thresholds that bear no relationship to the World Health Organization guidelines. However, let us look on the positive side. Bruce Crawford—who, I am sorry to see, has left the chamber—was able to tell his constituents that the cuts would mean an end to the Polmaise site for the stabling yard. Network Rail has confirmed that and it is good news for the residents of Pike Road in Stirling. Will the minister use his summing-up speech to confirm that that matter has been put to rest once and for all? Bruce Crawford also made an interesting announcement in his press release: namely, that the electrification programme, when it is eventually phased—I think that that is the current word—will go up as far as Perth. Will the minister tell us whether Bruce Crawford was correct in reporting back from the Cabinet that that will happen? If the electrification is to go to Perth, care should be taken about the extensive and expensive refurbishment at Gleneagles station for the Ryder Cup. I hope that it will take the electrification into account.

As others have said, this is yet another massive retreat to add to the cancellation by the Government of the Glasgow airport rail link, the Edinburgh airport rail link and other projects. Up the hill, everything looks great, but then we are all taken down the hill to despair.

On a point of order, what has the peroration about the English health service got to do with the Scottish health service?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I join others in welcoming Alex Neil to the challenges of the health part of his portfolio. He has a hard act to follow. However, he will also have to overcome what Jackson Carlaw correctly referred to as the raw complacency illustrated by Michael Matheson in his opening speech today—it was one of the worst that I have ever heard in the chamber, matched only by the repetitive, recycled speeches from back benchers. I welcomed the initial tone of Alex Neil’s speech, which, for the first time, admitted that the health service is under severe pressure. That glimpse of reality gives me some hope that we might move forward. This has been an interesting debate. The motion reflects a reality that is the opposite of the hyperbole of the SNP and the self-congratulation and the self-deception contained in its amendment. I welcome the minister’s initial remarks about some of the realities. The issue of demographics will really confront us in the future—it is already happening. Let us consider the speeches that were given. On Health Improvement Scotland inspections—we called for them and I was delighted when the previous health secretary announced them—as Duncan McNeil said in his excellent analysis, there are now ten reports. I have been calling for a thematic report that brings together such reports—as used to be done for care inspections—and is sent to health boards so that they can respond proactively. Jackie Baillie and Duncan McNeil are right that boards are waiting to be inspected before making changes; they are not making the changes that we all want to see and they are not showing improvement. The issue is vital in relation to cognitive impairment, so I hope that the minister will agree to ensure that HIS produces a thematic report. As there have now been ten announced reports, my second request is that the cabinet secretary ensures that we now move swiftly to unannounced reports, because once a thematic report is produced, the board should be able to address the issues. Delayed discharges are a linked problem. When patients are moved, it is commonly because they are ready—or nearly ready—for discharge. Labour tackled the problem by reducing delayed discharges from 3,000 in 2001 and promising that they would be at zero by March 2008. The SNP Government indeed achieved that, but Shona Robison and Nicola Sturgeon chose to make a further promise that the number would be kept at zero. In not a single quarter since 2008—except at the annual review in March—has that promise been kept. Tonight, there will be 1,000 patients occupying beds, 630 of whom are on the delayed discharge database, fit to be discharged. My FOI request last year resulted in only one clear, honest and unambiguous response. That came from Fife NHS Board, which revealed that 90 patients who had been declared fit to go home had died while on the delayed discharge database. The delayed discharge situation has other effects such as increasing the number of cancellations of operations, which itself has a significant knock-on effect. The SNP 2007 manifesto promised that the number of beds would not be reduced. The number has been reduced by just under 1,000, which is a 5 per cent reduction in staffed beds. We all agree that the debate should be put to bed. Bed numbers can be reduced by removing delayed discharges for example, so we should do that. However, we must be very careful about how closures are handled; it must be done well. Let us turn to waiting times. A family member of mine was recently referred for possible cancer. It was diagnosed rapidly, but he then had to wait well over the target period for admission for his operation. When he was finally admitted, some 35 days after the target, his operation was cancelled due to an emergency in the preceding operation. That is entirely understandable and the entire family accepted it, but he was then offered another appointment a month further on, although he was already beyond the target date. The 10 per cent of patients who are not being admitted in line with the referral-to-treatment-time guarantee are human beings whom we are treating badly. It is a great target, but in Wales—Michael Matheson used a Welsh comparison but is speaking at this point, Presiding Officer; perhaps he might like to listen to this—cancer targets are being achieved to a far higher degree and far more quickly than elsewhere. Cancer operations are critical. Do we know what happens to the 10 per cent of patients for whom the target is not achieved? Does the cabinet secretary know? Do we have the statistics to understand? We do not, except in some cases. I suggest that that needs to be examined closely. We had the waiting times scandal in NHS Lothian. Does anyone really believe that that is the only place where game playing occurred? I await Audit Scotland’s report with great interest. I praise NHS Lothian not simply for coming clean but for its subsequent decision to establish a whistleblowers line. What happened there with waiting times was interesting in that, almost two years before I raised the subject in the Parliament, a bed manager raised it within NHS Lothian and was told not to raise it externally because an internal review would be carried out. She was refused sight of that internal review, and she eventually resigned from the health service because her complaints were not being taken—[Interruption.]

The individual whom I mentioned resigned because she was gagged. We are getting consistent reports of that from clinicians up and down the country. I was previously a doctor, so I still have many contacts among clinicians and am repeatedly being told that health boards are gagging them—stopping them talking to MSPs and, indeed, the Health and Sport Committee, as I said in that committee yesterday. I hope that the new cabinet secretary will issue a very clear instruction to health boards that if they are caught gagging any clinician from talking to MSPs about the pressures that the health service is under, they will be dealt with extremely severely. I turn to the workforce, which every SNP back bencher raised in a recycled way—they said that there was more, less or whatever. The fact is—Margo MacDonald will want to know this—that there are 2,500 fewer nurses. That is the reality. When the reduction occurred and who had more at which point in time are completely irrelevant points. Can we lose 5 per cent of our clinical workforce without it having any effect on the health service? I find the idea that we can unbelievable, but that is the truth that has been peddled in the chamber for the past two years. I am glad that the cabinet secretary is adopting a new tone on that and I look forward to it being maintained. We are not scaremongering; we are referring to the truth. If Kevin Stewart wants comparisons with England, I tell him that Hansard for 12 June reports Simon Burns as saying that there were 3,700 fewer nurses and 954 midwives in England. The statistics may be somewhat different, but a tenfold difference in cuts in Scotland is highly significant. I do not have time—

I have to conclude rapidly and have left the most important bit almost to last—the ambulance service. Jackie Baillie and Rhoda Grant illustrated graphically the problems in that service. It is another service under pressure. I ask the cabinet secretary to respond in the way that he suggested and to meet the trade unions from the ambulance service about that. I hope that he will do so. I would take an intervention even at this late stage.

I will end by saying—

I join others in congratulating Claire Baker on securing the debate and welcome Paul Wheelhouse to his ministerial position. I also congratulate the Fife diet organisation on producing such a high-quality and challenging manifesto. One of the greatest health threats that faces Scotland today is the population’s obesity problem. In 2010, 32.5 per cent of children had a body mass index outwith the healthy range. Statistics from the 2010 Scottish health survey suggest that 27 per cent of people between the ages of 16 and 64 are obese—the figure is up from 17 per cent in 1995. That unfortunate trend means that the figure could reach 40 per cent by 2030. The number of adults in Scotland who are deemed to be overweight—with a BMI greater than 25—has now reached 65 per cent. Being overweight can not only restrict severely a person’s ability to lead an active life, but have dire consequences for their health and lead to many other health problems, including the development of cancer. An individual can take action on preventing obesity, therefore it is paramount that urgent and decisive action is taken to support the correction of the dangerous trends of overeating, eating the wrong things, not eating the recommended amount of fruit and vegetables and not doing regular exercise. The Government’s commitment of £7.5 million to that area is frankly a pittance in the attempt to stem the tide. For those reasons, I welcome the timely publication of the Fife diet food manifesto, which promotes and explains healthy eating in a simple easy-to-understand document. Last year, I lodged a motion to applaud France for introducing a soda tax, to which I notice the manifesto refers. New York has followed up its requirement for every food outlet to publish calorie values with an attempt to get rid of large bottles of sweet soda drinks. Scots consume 23 per cent more sugary drinks than the UK average. Noting that one quarter of Scots’ daily calorie intake is consumed in that form, Professor Naveed Sattar stated: “What you drink can be as damaging to the body as what you eat and there is no question that consuming too many sugar-sweetened drinks can greatly contribute to abdominal obesity and, therefore, increase your likelihood of developing health conditions such as type-2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease.” He went on to say: “Some varieties of drinks such as pure fruit juices and smoothies, which are perceived” and advertised “as ‘healthy’ options are also very high in sugar.” Denmark has introduced a tax on saturated fat, which we should look at. It banned trans fats five years ago, but the Government and other parties in Scotland refused to support my member’s bill on that subject, which I find regrettable. There are some encouraging signs, and people’s consumption of five fruit and vegetables a day has shown some slow improvements since 2001. However, I advise the Government that those figures have now reversed and urgent action is required. NHS Fife and Fife Council are working on developing more opportunities for growing food. I took part in a seminar at Stratheden hospital on that area, and some of its innovative approaches should be developed in the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill. The use of smaller brownfield sites and contracts to bring back into use underutilised gardens—

We need to develop such initiatives. I welcome the Fife diet food manifesto, but I call for further action. I am sorry that there is no health minister present to back up Paul Wheelhouse, but I hope that he will communicate strongly to the minister the wishes of us all to improve the situation.

Does the member agree that one thing that the Scottish Government could do is to ensure that the people from whom it and the public sector procure pay their subcontractors in a timely fashion? Cash flow is a big problem for small businesses. Germany has that approach, and we should have it.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would the First Minister like to take an early opportunity to correct the misleading information that he gave about the St John’s hospital closure? It is not about the recruitment of paediatric staff but about the decision to withdraw training posts. That has already resulted in the closure of wards in Kirkcaldy two years ago, and both closures followed the 2009 chief executive’s letter that reduced the number of junior doctor training posts in Scotland.

Will the member take a brief intervention?

Clearly, we are faced with a difficult set of circumstances and massive change to the welfare system. It is a challenge that the Parliament has risen to and, apart from the amendments about scrutiny and the policy context, the debate was largely consensual, at least between the SNP and Labour. Indeed, as Drew Smith said, we welcome the joint working with the cabinet secretary and her officials in at least one area. Many members have acknowledged the challenge and the steep learning curve in dealing with welfare reform, and—as was also acknowledged—we have been helped by many stakeholders and the input that they have made. Welfare reform was required—that was agreed—and universal credit might be a valuable simplification. A UK Government that repeatedly states, “We are all in it together,” has, as Siobhan McMahon made clear, meant tax cuts for the wealthiest, increased VAT, and cuts in benefits for the least well-off. It caters for many of the worst instincts in our society. A Government that is determined to cut the deficit is going off course when it is failing to produce the growth that is necessary to create the work that Alex Johnstone said is vital to allow people to move into jobs. Making work attractive is important, but much of the growth that has been achieved in the private sector is part-time work. That has to be matched by benefits; as Jamie Hepburn, Siobhan McMahon and others have said, the people who are in work with an income that does not provide a living wage without benefit support must also be supported. The Tory Government’s curtailment of the rise in the minimum wage—under Labour, it always rose above the rate of inflation—is also not welcome, because it contrasts with exactly the situation that Alex Johnstone was talking about. We are agreed that people who do not need support should not get benefits but, as we have heard, the cuts will affect many vulnerable people. As Margaret Burgess outlined in a detailed and passionate speech, the effects of, for example, moving people off DLA into PIP or UC—which in fact is designed to create a saving of 20 per cent—is not being handled at all sensitively. I do not doubt Mary Scanlon’s commitment to people with mental health problems, but I say to her gently that, notwithstanding the reviews of the process that her UK Government colleagues have undertaken, many with mental health problems are being devastated by the current application of the benefits reassessment process that they must go through.

I have been a member of SAMH since 1976, and I am making the point for exactly that reason. One of my main concerns arises from conversations with a housing association in my constituency. It has already begun to advise tenants of the effects of the rule changes that are about to come in—an issue that Mark McDonald referred to—and it will be particularly difficult to manage the changes in any sensitive way. The Welfare Reform Act 2012 provides for a wide range of measures that are being introduced at great speed not to modernise the system but to cut the welfare bill. As Kevin Stewart reminded us, £2.5 billion will be, as he put it, “ripped out of Scotland”. I add to and redefine that by saying that that money has been ripped out of our most vulnerable communities, whose economies will become even more fragile as a result. The only areas of real dispute between us are on the questions of transparency, accountability and affirmative procedures. It is regrettable that, although our amendments were supported by so many different organisations, the cabinet secretary’s one piece of intemperate language was to suggest that we were in some way playing “fast and loose” with the most vulnerable in our society. I say to her that that is not the case. Our duty is to make representations on behalf of groups such as Children 1st and Families First, which are among the six or seven significant front-line players—to be honest, they are far more engaged at the front line than the cabinet secretary is—and therefore required representation.

I served on the Subordinate Legislation Committee as well and both procedures would require 40 days. If a move is made to annul a negative instrument, that would delay the whole process. The right to scrutinise is crucial, and all that those organisations were looking for was the time to enter into debate. We have had some welcome reassurances from the cabinet secretary on the policy context, although another amendment of ours was defeated. We look forward to her fulfilling those promises and giving us as much time for debate and scrutiny as she said she would. We will hold her to that. The challenge of the bill has been met and it has been supported by all parties, so it will be voted for by all parties later today. The challenge now is to improve on what we can do within the powers that we have. The SNP members have repeatedly said that an independent Scotland will provide us with a glorious situation but, before the referendum, the SNP must be absolutely clear about the benefits system that we will have in an independent Scotland and how it will be funded. That is critical.

The debate is likely to be consensual, which reflects the fact that under the previous minister in the previous parliamentary session agreement on the recovery programme and policies on drugs was reached by cross-party consensus. That approach should be adopted in a number of areas, but particularly that of substance misuse. In 2001, when I was the justice minister in charge of the drug aspects of the Government’s work, I was very happy to support the predecessor organisation to Scottish Families Affected by Drugs, which began a process that has continued to develop. The work of Scottish Families Affected by Drugs to develop a growing network of local family support groups is very welcome. At the beginning of the Parliament’s first session, I was involved with local group called locals against drug abuse in Alloa, which was formed by parents whose children were involved in drug use. That group had a major effect on the development of policy and services in the area. Out of LADA grew an organisation called Signpost Recovery, to which many addicts who are beginning to seek treatment turn. I ask the minister to provide some further information, either now, or, preferably, through the Scottish Parliament information centre. First, how many family support groups are there? I would like those to be listed so that we can see how many there are. An equally important question is what their sources of funding are. In the current climate of austerity, like many voluntary groups, they are under considerable pressure. Are alcohol and drug partnerships funding those groups? If so, is the funding being maintained? What funding is being provided by the Lloyds TSB Foundation for Scotland? The foundation often provides initial funding, which leads to pressure on ADPs to provide further funding. I would also like the minister to give us information about the criminal assets cashback scheme. The scheme—the introduction of which I was involved in as a minister—has been one of the Parliament’s great successes. It should be noted that out of the £45 million that has been handed back to communities, only £2.25 million—in all that time—has been used to support community assets, including family support groups. I would like the minister to provide to SPICe a list of the groups that have been given community cashback scheme funding. That scheme should be used to a far greater extent to provide support for family support groups. The minister mentioned drugs deaths. When I was justice minister, the number of drugs deaths was 332, and the year after I left office, it had dropped slightly to 317. That was still too high in comparison with the 250 or so deaths in 1997, but by 2008, the figure had risen to 574. As the minister reminded us, the numbers have come down since then, and now stand at 485. That is partly due to the very welcome naloxone programme. We need to involve families in that, but not just by providing them with the naloxone equipment, because they are often not involved when their child or relation takes an overdose. We need families to help us to identify those who are closest to the user and who are most likely to be in a position to use the naloxone. I hope that that will happen. I call on the Government to do further work on bereavement counselling and support for the 485 affected families, because each death is a tragedy. The guilt that families sometimes feel—often wrongly—that they have not supported their loved ones adequately through the process is a problem.

We should praise Scottish Families Affected by Drugs, welcome the work that is done by the Scottish Drugs Forum and call on the Government to continue its co-operative approach in this field.

5. To ask the Deputy First Minister what impact industrial action by doctors could have on operations, diagnostic tests and out-patient appointments. (S4F-00778)

I thank the Deputy First Minister for that answer and advise members of my British Medical Association membership. I think that every member in the chamber regrets the action for the effect that it will have on patients. Whatever the rights and wrongs on the pensions issue, I think that the public would be more sympathetic if doctors confined strike action to defending the national health service and patients. However, the BMA gave three weeks’ notice of the strike rather than the statutory one week’s notice in order to allow patients to be informed in good time of the fact that their appointments, operations and diagnostic tests would be cancelled. What action did the Government take? Was a chief executive’s letter issued to health boards? What monitoring has the Government undertaken to ensure that patients have been informed in a timely way of that disruption to their lives? What further action will the Government take to ensure that those patients whose lives are being disrupted today get their appointments as quickly as possible?

One of our concerns is that the second Bruce Keogh review—not the toxicology review—is on cosmetic procedures only. There are many other procedures, such as laser eye treatment, that are real treatments and are not just cosmetic. The problems may be much broader than what the second Keogh review will cover.

As all members have acknowledged, this has been a useful debate, but some questions remain unanswered. Why should there be an inquiry? Why should we not just rely on the Earl Howe report on the MHRA, and on the two reports by Sir Bruce Keogh? Why are they not sufficient? As the minister said, those reports are helpful, but they are not sufficient, although they will and should inform our approach. In her thoughtful contribution, Nanette Milne reminded us of the fraud by the manufacturer, but the issue is not one of blame. We are talking about ensuring patient safety. That is what regulation is about, and the regulatory system failed those patients, some of whom are in the gallery today. The Earl Howe report says that the MHRA did all that it could, but it fails to examine whether the system of reporting was adequate, as reports were made directly to the company and might have been used as a substitute for an effective UK reporting system. Systems for reporting on adverse effects generally are an area of concern and, as Malcolm Chisholm said, there was a refusal to test at least some of the extracted implants. The House of Commons committee has been justifiably critical of the Earl Howe report, although it is a pity that there has not been a greater analysis of it. The Government simply appears to have accepted it as being wholly valid. I was somewhat disappointed in Maureen Watt’s contribution. Many of the women that we are talking about have had reconstructive surgery, but others who sought private implants did so for quite genuine and reasonable psychological reasons. Although I understand what she is talking about when she talks about the emphasis on body image, it is not particularly relevant. The stories of the affected women are striking for a number of reasons. It is those women who are asking the Parliament to act to ensure that what happened does not happen again in either this or other contexts, and I will come to that point in a minute. It is those women who are asking for an inquiry in Scotland—because there is a Scottish dimension to the issue. It is they who want the situation not to arise here again. A number of members have talked about the difficulties that the women encountered as the scandal unfolded. The French Government took strong and decisive action, which contrasted with the rather slower and more confused action that was taken at the UK level. Margaret Burgess’s description of the women’s distress resonated, and that was quite helpful. When we are told that some women had to pay for removal of the device even once it was established that the producing company had switched from medical grade silicone to industrial grade silicone without telling us and had not passed on information about the level of ruptures, we have to question what private companies were doing. Those affected tell us that there has been some suggestion of a postcode lottery, so I welcome the minister’s agreement to listen to and take up the issue for any woman who has not had a satisfactory response from the NHS. I hope that the campaign group will spread that information around so that some of the cases that we have already heard about can be raised. When we hear about the woman who was not only charged for the removal procedure but was charged £100 for disposal of the removed device, we must question the ethics of the private company involved. Some women were also charged when the provider did not think that the removal of the device was necessary, but if a woman faced with the situation wishes to have the device removed because her anxiety levels have increased, she should be entitled to have it removed, especially given the level of fraud that has allegedly occurred. We have particular problems in Scotland, because class actions cannot be taken here, unlike in England, but that is a separate issue that I do not fully understand. The Howe inquiry has gone so far and the Keogh inquiry will go further, so why do we want to establish our own public inquiry? It is not that we do not welcome both of those inquiries, but if we are serious about a potential move to independence, we will need to consider having not just a Scottish Medicines Consortium to authorise medicines, but a similar body—the 81st regional body—to authorise devices. With 27,000 devices approved, that would be no mean undertaking. The EU may revise the rules on devices, but it is clear from the scandal and from the scandal that is going to unfold regarding metal-on-metal hip replacements that the regulation of medical devices—particularly those involving implantation—is inadequate. Moreover, we cannot look to the United States for better regulation, as they, too, have problems with what constitutes a threshold for notification by companies of changes in devices. They, too, have their own unfolding scandals. Scotland and this Government have a duty of care to Scottish residents, as Jackie Baillie and Mary Fee made clear, which falls within the scope of an inquiry. What efforts did the Scottish Government make when the first medical alert came out in March 2010? We are not accusing the Government of inaction once the scandal began to evolve, but there was a medical alert in 2010. Did we, at that point, inform all the providers in Scotland whose regulation we have responsibility for that they must pay heed to that medical alert? Did we, at that point, talk to women who had had implants that were subject to the alert? No, we did not. There was delay, and that must be considered by the inquiry because the issue may also arise in relation to the metal-on-metal scandal that we will shortly face. We need much greater clarity and effort to ensure patients’ safety. Some issues are reserved, and the MHRA deals with those. The Health Professions Council deals with the regulation of practitioners, but we have responsibility for determining the minimum standards of care, which can include things such as insurance cover and the medical qualifications that we believe are required. For example, should only dentists be able to perform tooth whitening? That is another issue that is coming up. There have been legal cases on the subject, but the fact remains that unqualified people are still performing tooth whitening. Eye laser surgery is not cosmetic, but the level of qualification required of those who undertake it in Scotland is not fully regulated beyond HPC level. Regulations in respect of companies that do marketing in Scotland or undertake surgery in Scotland should be introduced quickly. We passed legislation in 2010, we held a consultation in 2010 and the consultation was completed in July 2011, but we still have not had a report. We have not acted with speed on the issue of more effective regulation of high-street surgery and the private sector; it requires greater speed. Those are all issues on which we believe a public inquiry is needed to ensure that Scottish patients are adequately protected going forward. I therefore support Jackie Baillie’s motion calling for a public inquiry.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with national health service boards that show significant variation below the mean in the recording of either referral-to-treatment or waiting time targets. (S4O-01121)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer but what I was really asking was what specific conversations she had had with boards such as NHS Ayrshire and Arran, which accounted for 93 per cent of all the breaches over nine weeks in the waiting time target for diagnostics and, in addition, accounted for nearly 50 per cent of the breaches of six weeks, which is the current target. Almost another 50 per cent was accounted for by NHS Fife. Out of the total breaches of the diagnostic target, two health boards accounted for well over 90 per cent. I have asked NHS Fife about it and it has explained what happened and how it is being tackled. Has the cabinet secretary asked the questions of NHS Ayrshire and Arran? Can she tell us what the problem is in NHS Ayrshire and Arran and what support she is offering both boards, or has she yet again failed to ask the right questions?

Such outbreaks are not easy to manage and we should all congratulate NHS Lothian on how it has handled the outbreak so far. I will ask the cabinet secretary a specific question. How has NHS 24 been involved? NHS 24 is the one group that was not mentioned in her statement. She said that “Clinical services and general practitioners across NHS Lothian were ... notified”, which was entirely appropriate. However, as events happened out of hours at the weekend—the cases were confirmed on Sunday and the procedure swung into action then—was NHS 24 involved? Did it respond appropriately and give the right advice, of the sort that the cabinet secretary is now putting out?

The increase in population is in part accounted for by the increase in the number of births. Since 2001, the annual number of births has gone up from 52,000 to almost 59,000. Will the First Minister invite his Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy to reconsider the 40 per cent cut to the student midwifery intake, which is happening at a time when the birth rate has gone up, complex problems to do with drugs and alcohol are increasing, breastfeeding rates are poor and there are high rates of smoking among pregnant women? This is not the time for such cuts.

5. To ask the First Minister whether the 48-hour waiting time target for access to a general practitioner or relevant healthcare professional is being met across Scotland. (S4F-00736)

The Sunday Post ran an interesting front page this week. I thank the First Minister for his response, but is he really telling the Parliament that we should be confident in the patient experience survey, which covered fewer than 2 per cent of patients and had an even lower response rate on the specific question about the target on 48-hour access? If he is saying that we should be confident in the survey—which we really should not be—is he pleased that one in five practices did not reach the 90 per cent target for 48-hour access and that in some practices the rate is as low as 72 per cent? Will the First Minister invite the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy to stop focusing on independence and start discussions with the British Medical Association and the royal colleges, so that practices that are not meeting the target are not only identified and challenged but supported, given that many GPs are finding that pressures and demands are increasing year on year?

During stage 2, when I moved a more complex set of amendments to section 1, I believed that it was important to simplify the overall formula. However, I have taken on board Jim Eadie’s criticisms of those amendments, which were that my stage 2 proposals would complicate the bill by introducing two definitions. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s acknowledgement at stage 2 that the central purpose of my amendments was to promote the measure of strength that we all hope that the public will increasingly understand and accept—namely, the unit—and the idea of how safe or, indeed, unsafe it is to consume units. I also accept that, in law, what is required—and what the formula lays out in the bill—is the much more complex measurement of strength by volume. However, the fact remains that, although the public have some understanding of strength, they need to begin to understand that the bill and its consequences are about minimum unit pricing. Therefore, not to define “unit” seems to me to be remiss. The formula, after all, relates to minimum price per unit. What exactly constitutes a unit? That should be defined in the bill with clarity, and my simplified amendments achieve that end. The other argument from the cabinet secretary, which was a rather legalistic one, was that there is no current statutory requirement to display the number of units on a bottle or other container. However, the industry has agreed to introduce such information on a voluntary basis within the next 18 months. Knowing that a bottle of wine is 15 per cent might tell someone that it is strong, but telling them that it is nine or even 10 units indicates how safe consumption is. It is to help the public that the term “unit” should be defined, and not to do so would be a missed opportunity. I am advised that the industry would welcome a clear definition. After all, we are not passing a bill that talks about “minimum price per 10ml of pure alcohol”; the bill talks about the price per unit. What a unit is should be clearly on the face of the bill, otherwise it is open to manufacturers have their own definition of unit. I move amendment 3.

As I indicated in my opening remarks, I have accepted that the formula is quite clear and that there is no need for the complex set of amendments that I originally proposed at stage 2. However, I maintain that not to define “unit” in the text of a bill that has minimum pricing as its whole context is seriously remiss. There is a possibility that people could define “unit” differently, notwithstanding any guidance that might be subsequently issued by the cabinet secretary. My amendments would put that issue beyond doubt and make it absolutely clear exactly what, in Scottish law, a unit of alcohol is. I therefore press amendment 3.

Amendment 5 relates to a scheme for recovery of sums in relation to certain licensed premises—or what has come to be known in debates as the windfall tax. I make no apology for returning to the issue of the additional revenue that will accrue to the industry—mainly to the off-trade but also to the on-trade. This is not just Labour’s red line. The supermarkets in particular are predicted to gain around £100 million out of the £124 million raised each year from a minimum unit price of 50p. There are mechanisms in place to claw back the money, and in amendment 5, we have not defined how the Government should do that. I acknowledge that the retailer public health levy is designed to tax large retailers, but only if they sell tobacco and alcohol. Some major stores do not sell tobacco—they may be joined by others—and they will presumably be exempt, which will give them a commercial advantage. Labour voted for the levy in committee even though it is crude and its impact has not yet been examined in depth. The social responsibility levy would have the merit of a broader base and covers only alcohol. Which licences it should be applied to could be a matter for local determination—it could be sensitive to the needs of local communities. Other clawback methods might be considered. For example, a separate rating of the licensed area in relation to the off-trade, based on turnover, has been suggested to redress the balance between off-trade and on-trade, given that that approach already applies to the on-trade. The amendment does not specify how to do that—it simply recognises that one of the public’s gravest concerns about minimum unit pricing is that it profits the retailers. The Institute for Fiscal Studies has said that how the market responds will undoubtedly contribute to the outcome. On the one hand, the price of premium brands will rise to maintain differentials if commoditisation occurs; on the other hand, companies such as Whyte & Mackay, which produce own-brand spirits, may well adapt with its retail partners to create new brands, which, although profitable, are lower in price than the current premium brands. It is highly likely that competition will continue to be fierce in what is an increasingly profitable market, which will be more profitable if the windfall tax is not put in place. Advertising is likely to increase, along with promotion activities. It is frankly naive to think that retailers will abandon what is an even more lucrative market to subsidise bananas or other staples. Amendment 5 takes into account the technical flaws in the amendment that I proposed at stage 2. I turn to the other criticisms made at stage 2, some of which were more helpful than others. Bob Doris’s comment that clawback powers already exist is true. However, amendment 5 would make it clear that, from the day of implementation in April 2013, the Government would claw back the windfall. Industry would have the certainty that it needed to plan, rather than assuming that the windfall would be available to it for some uncertain period. Business needs that certainty. Gil Paterson questioned the use of the word “profit” and asked how profit would be defined. I agree that that was a difficulty, so I have changed the wording to “increased revenue” and suggested that it be based on modelling after discussion with those affected. I welcomed Jackson Carlaw’s support at stage 2 for the sentiment in my proposal. I am not opposed to working with the alcohol industry. The World Health Organization is clear that there should be no input from the tobacco industry in discussions, but the alcohol industry is quite different. I would be very sympathetic to the industry discussing how, as part of its corporate community responsibility, it could add value to the use of, for example, the social responsibility levy, perhaps in promoting community safety schemes, as it has done at St Neots in Cambridgeshire, or for youth diversion work. Amendment 5 does not rule out voluntary, locally agreed schemes. At stage 2, the cabinet secretary summarised some of the points that I have referred to, but added, in effect, that it was all too difficult and that we did not know what would happen. If the amendment is not agreed to in its new form, we will just have to wait and see what the market does. That would be an approach of masterly inactivity, which I am afraid characterises too much of this Government’s complacent attitude. The Government has failed to recognise the genuine concerns of respected commentators such as Nigel Hawkes, who wrote in the British Medical Journal that windfall revenues were one of the central reasons why he believed that the policy was not worth pursuing. If we must have a minimum unit price, let us use the tax that is being imposed on the community, for that community. I move amendment 5.

That is a misrepresentation of the discounting issue. Richer people take up opportunities to purchase discounted alcohol to a far greater extent than those who are poorer. The discounting ban had a principle behind it that we could support, which was that nobody in our society should be encouraged to buy a greater quantity of alcohol by paying less for more. In addition, because that policy affects the rich more than the poor, it fulfils some of Labour’s values, with which the Scottish National Party does not seem to agree.

We have been consistent on this issue from the outset of the debate— Members: Oh! We have been totally consistent about the windfall issue. In its briefing for the debate, Children 1st expressed considerable disappointment that the social responsibility levy, which nobody said at the time was too difficult to collect—no one raised that in debate—is not being collected. It is not being collected because this Government has decided at this point in time not to collect it. Whether the figure is £124 million, or whether it is more or less than that, we are talking about a model. We have said from the outset that that model may or may not prove to be accurate. In answer to Gil Paterson, that is why amendment 5 says: “The estimates mentioned in subsection (3) are to be based on such research and modelling as the Scottish Ministers consider appropriate.” One big flaw in this whole operation is that the Treasury intake will reduce, while the supermarkets’ and off-trade’s intake will increase. The producers are unlikely to get additional money. If members do not want to listen to me, what about the Institute for Fiscal Studies? It has said: “the policy would probably transfer large sums from drinkers to alcohol retailers and manufacturers. We suggested it would be preferable to move towards a more equal taxation of different drinks on the basis of their alcohol content, helping introduce a floor price through the tax system but allowing the revenues to flow to the Exchequer instead.” From the tone of the debate, it seems that the Parliament is going to decide to hand a substantial quantity of money to retailers. Just because the amount is difficult to assess, that does not mean that we should not attempt to assess it. In the stage 2 debate, an issue was raised about the use of the term “profit”, but the change to the term “increased revenue” would allow differentiation. It is regrettable that the tone of the debate on amendment 5 has been less about looking at the issue seriously in the way that groups such as Children 1st have asked us to do, and more about making spurious attacks on what is a reasonable amendment. I press amendment 5.

This is the last group of amendments on the bill. My amendments 6 and 7 seek to achieve additions to the welcome amendments that the cabinet secretary has proposed, which are amendments 1 and 2. I thank the cabinet secretary and her officials for responding positively to the intentions of my amendment 12 at stage 2. I welcome amendments 1 and 2, which will underpin the MESAS—monitoring and evaluating Scotland’s alcohol strategy—programme of research on minimum unit pricing. My amendment 12 at stage 2 sought to lay out in considerable detail many of the elements that I believe are necessary to show whether a minimum unit price is effective. The models make predictions about many beneficial changes but, if those changes occur, we will know that the policy is working only if the multiple variables are controlled for, which will not be an easy task. I can give some examples. The number of deaths with alcohol as an underlying cause has reduced since 2005. The most recent figures are from 2009 and they show a 15 per cent reduction in that number, which amounts to 231 fewer deaths. In other words, there are 58 fewer deaths in that regard on average each year. The Sheffield model predicts that minimum unit pricing will produce a reduction of 60 deaths in the first year. However, that figure could be met on the present trend and, with the discount ban, it may even be exceeded in year 1 without the introduction of minimum unit pricing. There have been similar reductions in hospital discharges, with the latest figures showing a reduction of 2,500. The Scottish schools adolescent lifestyle and substance use survey shows that there has been an increase in the number of non-drinking children aged 13 to 15. The Scottish health survey shows a downward trend in hazardous drinking from 28 to 22 per cent. Something is therefore already happening and I suspect that it is the result of the new licensing acts and all the debate that surrounded that and the fact that we have been debating the alcohol issue in the Parliament on and off for the past three years. Something is happening out there, for whatever reason, whether it is minimum unit pricing, the discount ban, excise and VAT increases—which the coalition Government followed Labour in introducing; 2 per cent above inflation every year—or changes in the excise policy for different drinks, with a reduction in the tax on low-strength beer and a change in the definition of cider. Those elements of the coalition Government’s alcohol policy will also have an effect on what happens to alcohol consumption. There is also the fact that unemployment has risen substantially and that there is therefore considerable income restraint. Those two factors may also affect alcohol consumption. Before we sell the Government’s alcohol policy, which I still believe is deeply flawed, to the rest of the world, we need to ensure that it is properly evaluated and studied and that its effects are properly understood. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s funding of the Queen Margaret University group that is looking at seriously harmful drinkers. A previous study found that they consumed an average of 197 units a week. Such individuals are known to treatment teams and they form the one group that I have always accepted could benefit from minimum unit pricing, because an increase in the price of their alcohol will help underpin their desire to stop drinking or to achieve controlled drinking. However, I remain extremely sceptical about the effect of minimum unit pricing on harmful and hazardous drinkers, which is the group that we should wish to affect most, and I am still sceptical about the effect that the policy will have on young adults who binge drink, which is the age group that even the Sheffield team acknowledged the policy would have the least effect on. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to the research project. I hope that she will take the opportunity to put on record a commitment to present to the Parliament a comprehensive programme to examine the possible effect—or lack of effect—of minimum unit pricing. In the meantime, my amendment 6 simply requires data to be published as we go along, with an accompanying analysis of the available statistics. That would involve a revision of the annual Information Services Division alcohol statistics. My amendment 7 invites the Government to look at the response of the market, which has not been examined so far. We discussed it a bit in the previous amendment. The Sheffield researchers, in their evidence to us, offered to make predictions on how the market would respond. Regrettably, that offer was not taken up by the Government. I hope that the Sheffield group, or Professor Hastings’s unit at the University of Stirling, which has advised the House of Commons committees on alcohol, or any other reputable research unit with a track record in market effects, will be invited to undertake this important research. As I indicated previously, the Institute for Fiscal Studies has suggested that market adaptation could seriously undermine the intended effect of the policy. As far as amendment 1A is concerned, the Health and Sport Committee report drew particular attention to the issue of protecting children who may be growing up in a household where alcohol is being abused and the detrimental effect that that can have on their care, development and wellbeing. We understand that around 80,000 children in Scotland are currently affected by their parents’ harmful drinking. As I said earlier, Children 1st was disappointed that no specific reference was made in the reporting requirements to assessing the harm caused to children and young people by parental alcohol misuse. Although one of the licensing objectives in section 4 of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 is to protect children from harm, that has tended to be interpreted with a focus on restricting the sale of alcohol to under-18s, rather than on the wider issue of the harm that is caused to children by alcohol misuse among adults. That issue is, however, reflected in the guidance accompanying the act. The children’s charities have called for the specific inclusion of “children and young people”, which is what amendment 1A addresses. However, if the cabinet secretary can provide assurances that the age category in amendment 2 would cover an evaluation of whether minimum pricing had reduced the impact of parental alcohol misuse on children and young people, I will not move amendment 1A. I move amendment 6.

I thank the cabinet secretary and Jackson Carlaw for their contributions, which have been very helpful. The first of the two most welcome things that I have heard today is that there will be an annual report by MESAS on the statistics and the analysis. In effect, that is what is suggested in amendment 6. With that proviso and the hope that the cabinet secretary will ensure that that is laid before either the Parliament or the Health and Sport Committee, I am happy to seek to withdraw amendment 6. Jackson’s Carlaw’s points on amendment 7 are well taken. It is important to include it in the bill. We are not including stuff about windfall profits in the bill, but including that amendment will at least indicate that there will be an examination—I hope that it will be a strenuous one—of the industry’s response. That is important. Part of the reason why we are in the situation that we are in with the growth in alcohol problems over the past 15 or 20 years is the shift in the purchasing of alcohol from on-trade purchasing to off-trade purchasing. However, we have all agreed in the debates over the past four years that there have been unacceptable practices in using alcohol like any other commodity. That term, which is used in the WHO analysis, is critical. Retailers need to treat alcohol unlike any other commodity. Agreeing to amendment 7 will send the message to the industry that it will be under scrutiny by the Parliament. We will want to ensure that any surplus revenue that it accrues is used for the greater good and not to line the pockets of the top people or the shareholders. That is critical. If society’s attitude is to change, it is critical that the attitudes of the supermarkets and other retailers also change. Therefore, I will move amendment 7. In light of the cabinet secretary’s comments and assurances, I am happy not to move amendment 1A. Amendment 6, by agreement, withdrawn. Amendment 7 moved—[Dr Simpson].

In 2001, as the Deputy Minister for Justice, I recognised that Scotland had a growing problem with alcohol and that we were well into the third wave in our history of the sort of problems that were outlined by Jackie Baillie, the cabinet secretary, Richard Lyle and others. Although the level of consumption remains well below that which was reached in 1900, the increases were alarming. In addition, it was clear that, although the price of alcohol was the same across the UK, Scots had been consuming 23 per cent more. What that said to me was that, although affordability was an issue, availability of the sort that was described by Sandra White and the culture that was described by other speakers were as important or more important. The action that I took then was the Nicholson committee and the result was the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005. The concern was availability, because the number of licences had increased by 5,000 over the preceding 20 years, from 12,000 to 17,000. Labour tackled some of the problems. The sales areas for alcohol in supermarkets are now restricted. No more do we have the pile it high, sell it cheap approach at the front door, which was previously beloved of managers. There are now fewer licences, and licensing boards are at long last challenging any expansion where there is high density, using the unique provisions in the 2005 act on the public health interest and the protection of children from harm. All that public debate and action over the past decade is having results. Consumption is down. Non-drinking reports in 13 to 15-year-olds are moving in the right direction. The proportion of consumer spend is down. Deaths are down by 15 per cent. Self-reported hazardous drinking has gone down year on year from 28 to 22 per cent, and even hospital discharges fell between 2008 and 2009 by more than the predicted fall in the first year under the Sheffield proposals. Action is also being taken at the UK level. Labour and the coalition have increased excise duty by 2 per cent above inflation annually. To give it its due, the coalition has introduced a lower tax on lower-strength beer and increased tax on higher-strength beer. That has worked extremely well in Australia, where the only evidence for minimum unit pricing exists. Minimum unit pricing was not adopted in Australia. The definition of cider has also been tightened, and I hope that that will have a beneficial effect. The industry, which has been participative, as Jackson Carlaw would like it to be, has agreed to take a billion units of alcohol out of sales by 2015. However, the bill is about minimum unit pricing. No matter how often the cabinet secretary repeats that the bill is not a magic bullet, it was drawn in such a way that nobody could amend it. I hope that, once we get minimum unit pricing out of the way, the SNP will sit down with us and the other parties and seriously consider some or all of the 14 measures that are proposed in the consultation on my bill which, as it says on the tin, is designed to shift the culture. As Jackson Carlaw and Graeme Pearson said, we need a common way forward now. We achieved that with drug misuse. As Alison Johnstone indicated, it is regrettable that we have not tackled caffeinated alcohol. The cabinet secretary is still in denial about that being a problem. We could and should have a collective approach; we owe it to the people of Scotland to have that in the future. As I said, however, the bill is about minimum unit pricing, and it still irks me that even Jackson Carlaw has been convinced by the constant rhetoric from the SNP about our being against the bill because it is an SNP bill. We are against the bill for a variety of reasons. Richer households are more likely to buy alcohol, and they are more likely to buy more alcohol than poorer households. They buy more expensive alcohol. For example, the wealthiest currently spend 50 per cent more per unit on cider than those in poorer households. Cider is one of the contentious issues. Moreover, there is a difference in the types of alcohol that people buy. For the lowest income group, 40 per cent is spent on spirits and 28 per cent is spent on wine. For the richest income group, 16 per cent is spent on spirits and 52 per cent is spent on wine. The biggest increase is in wine, and the richest people will not be affected. There will barely be any effect.

No. The Sheffield report predicted that off-licence sales will fall by a quarter for the poorest, but by only 12 per cent for the richest. To summarise, the rich drink more and pay more. They drink more wine and will barely be affected by minimum unit pricing. There are more hazardous drinkers with each rising decile of income. It is the hazardous drinkers whom we need to tackle, not the harmful drinkers—they are a matter of medical treatment. All price increases are regressive, but minimum unit pricing is far and away the most regressive measure that we can put in place. To put things simply, the UK coalition will impose a granny tax next year, and the SNP is imposing its own granny tax. A pensioner couple who want to enjoy a single dram each evening will pay £100 more annually from April 2013. [Interruption.]

Every year, more goes straight to the alcohol retailers. It does not go to the hard-pressed national health service or the police, and it does not go on alcohol treatment; it goes straight to the retailers who behaved irresponsibly in the first place. As Nigel Hawkes said in his excellent article in the British Medical Journal, minimum unit pricing “is a deal not worth doing” because of that. In a poll in the British Medical Journal, 67 per cent of doctors said that it would not have an effect on drinking. How will heavier drinkers respond? I have always said that they might show some response. Fiona McLeod has not read the evidence. In the 2008 Sheffield study, Petra Meier indicated that the price elasticity for hazardous and harmful drinkers was half—not twice—that for moderate drinkers. That reinforced the study by Chisholm in 2004, which said that harmful drinkers were around a third less sensitive to price. Therefore, at best, the jury is out. Perhaps young binge drinkers are the public’s and doctors’ greatest concern. As Dr Holmes from the Sheffield team said, they are least affected of all the groups by minimum unit pricing. With a price of 45p, 18 to 24-year-olds will drink half a pint less a week on average.

As always, Presiding Officer, time is against us. As I have said before, I do not believe that this measure will work, although it will have some effect on harmful drinkers. The cabinet secretary has the opportunity to enable us to move forward unanimously in Parliament, despite our reservations, if she agrees to our reasoned amendment, which we first put forward at stage 1. I hope that that will happen, but I regret that it will probably not. I hope that minimum unit pricing will demonstrate that we were right and the others were wrong, but we should come together—[Interruption.]

We should come together to tackle Scotland’s problem, which can be tackled by price measures at a UK level and excise duty. Minimum unit pricing will affect only harmful drinkers; it will not benefit other groups.

I congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing the debate, and I welcome the opportunity to speak about epilepsy. His analysis of the work of the genetics service was excellent. I have always had an interest in the area, not only as a medical practitioner in my previous life, but as a parliamentarian who has held the positions of convener and deputy convener on the cross-party group on epilepsy for many years. I join Kenny Gibson in congratulating the staff at the Glasgow epilepsy genetics service. Their dedication, enthusiasm and professionalism are helping and supporting families and individuals throughout Scotland and further afield through modern testing for genetic association with epilepsy. As Kenny Gibson said, the team continues its support after diagnosis, but there is a need to ensure that there are effective specialist nurses throughout Scotland, and it is critically important that we have the number of nurses that we need. An early diagnosis of the genetic element can lead to better targeted therapy of the particular form of epilepsy and better use of the medicines that might be applied, to which there are different responses. The service is an excellent demonstration of exactly where medicine is going—the interaction between genetics, the diagnostic element and the fact that treatment will become more and more specialised. It is a tribute to the excellent work carried out by the service that it is now the primary genetic testing centre for the UK and Ireland. The service also carries out tests for Australia, New Zealand and other countries, including parts of Europe. As the service’s reputation has grown, so has the number of genes that it tests for—it started with one gene in 2005, and I think that it now tests for six or more. In the past two years, the service has tested more than 500 DNA samples, and has detected mutations, such as the SCN1A gene, in 160 individuals. Fifty per cent of those diagnosed were children under the age of five, and 20 per cent were children under the age of two. More than 80 per cent of the parents who participated in a questionnaire found the testing helpful; more than half found that the testing led to a change in treatment; and around 45 per cent found that the change significantly improved seizure control. It is important that we draw attention to epilepsy, which is why the recent epilepsy week motion, also in Kenny Gibson’s name, has gained and will gain support from across the political parties in the Parliament. With eight people developing epilepsy every day in Scotland, continuing awareness is required and is paramount if we are to identify those who are suffering from epilepsy and ensure their early diagnosis through effective first seizure clinics, so that their epilepsy can be managed and corrected, as far as possible. At a Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland event that took place the other night, members heard some discussions about the work that is being done by Epilepsy Scotland on employment, which is another issue that has developed. If employers understand how to work with individuals with epilepsy, they will receive immeasurable payback from those individuals. Epilepsy Scotland’s campaigning is extensive. I have worked with the organisation on a number of issues over the past few years, particularly in relation to justice. Considerable progress is beginning to be made on ensuring that those who commit offences that are associated with post-epileptic states are treated with justice. Considerable advances are being achieved by the service. It is an excellent unit in an area in which Scotland plays a leading role in the world. We should show gratitude to the staff involved, and I am pleased to support Kenny Gibson’s motion.

Will the minister give way?

Let me be quite clear: the cabinet secretary is saying that she will not ask questions when she sees variation. The NHS Lothian figures were in the public domain, and there are many more figures in which there is substantial variation. However, the cabinet secretary says that she will not bother asking questions.

Some do.

Would the member be surprised to learn that NHS Ayrshire and Arran failed to record 26 per cent of its referral-to-treatment notifications? Twenty-six per cent of episodes were not recorded by NHS Ayrshire and Arran—the same health board that he has just referred to.

Will the member give way?

I am slightly concerned about the fact that the published record of the spike in retrospective use of the exceptional way of dealing with social unavailability occurred in June and July 2011, yet it is only after having received the report nine months later that we are discussing the issue. Nothing was done on the basis of the published figures for months, until I raised the matter in Parliament last autumn.

Waiting times have been one of the success stories of the NHS throughout Scotland since 1997, underpinned by Labour’s decision to increase NHS funding radically in 2001. I hope that the time when patients could wait for years for an operation and could lie overnight on trollies has been consigned to history, although I hear stories from England about the trollies re-emerging. However, the progress has stressed the system. The discovery that availability status codes—which, I say to Joe FitzPatrick, were created in the 1980s—that were designed only to allow patients to be removed temporarily from waiting lists were being wrongly used led Nicola Sturgeon, the then Opposition spokesperson, to attack Labour on the subject. The response was the creation, by Andy Kerr, of the new ways waiting times guidance, which was implemented by the SNP Government. That is fine, but as I said in 2008, this is a complex system and it is likely that people will start gaming if they are under pressure. My warnings were ignored. In a speech in 2009, I said that doctors are being bullied by management in respect of targets and that it could become a serious issue. I did not know at the time that the Investors in People report in Lothian in 2010 would indicate, as Neil Findlay has said, that bullying was occurring in that health board. The figures for social unavailability rose inexorably over the next two years and I again questioned whether gaming was going on. In other words, were we heading for a new scandal of hidden waiting lists? I was told that I was scaremongering. I am always being told that. The SNP’s complacency, which its supine back benchers demonstrated admirably today, is utterly breathtaking. Forced by our exposure of one form of gaming in Lothian, the cabinet secretary has finally had to intervene. Otherwise, the Lothians initial internal whitewash report would have brushed the issue under the carpet. Do we have confidence that the investigation by other health boards, which she has instigated, will not do the same? Is all now well and are all the other health boards managing the new system so that the target data, on which the waiting times claims are based, is real? That is what the cabinet secretary believes. She has dismissed my observations on the appendix of the Pricewaterhouse report—[Interruption.] She has. The appendix shows substantial variation, month on month, in other health boards’ use of exceptional retrospective correction of the social unavailability codes, yet I am told that this is not happening in any other health board. Let us look at the central figures on waiting times, and bring a little reality to the situation. Yes, it was a new system in 2008 and, yes, it is complex, but here we are in 2012, with a self-congratulatory cabinet secretary trumpeting achievements, yet out of 111,000 referral-to-treatment incidents in the most recent reported set of statistics, 14,000 are unrecorded and unknown. We know that there are 7,700 patients for whom the referral-to-treatment guarantee has been broken—that is reported—but we know nothing about the other 14,000. How can we say that the waiting time guarantees are reaching the figures that the cabinet secretary keeps trumpeting? The codes used in the PWC report were “other” or “patient contact”. I spoke to a Grampian general practitioner today in Mark McDonald’s constituency who said that he had re-referred a patient to gastroenterology this morning who had been removed from the waiting list having phoned and said that they were unavailable. Do not tell me that this is not happening. My GP colleagues—I have phoned 12 of them in the past week—are telling me repeatedly that this is happening. The combination of abusing the social availability status code, using “other” and “patient contact”, and short-term cancellation of clinics is causing massive disruption and considerable distress. That is not innuendo but reality, and the Parliament needs a reality check on the issue. I decided to undertake a reality check by carrying out a freedom of information inquiry into the health boards—[Interruption.]

I asked the boards how many concerns have been raised. Whenever I have mentioned the new partnership information network arrangement for whistleblowing and raising concerns, the cabinet secretary has reassured me that all is well. NHS Highland and NHS Borders reported their quarterly statistics on concerns since 2010 as being excellent, and 12 other health boards had no concerns reported to them and no record of whistleblowing. Is the cabinet secretary really telling me that, despite the stress that our health service is under, no concerns are being expressed by any member of staff out there? That cannot be true. The cabinet secretary must introduce a whistleblowers’ line, which England introduced following the Mid Staffordshire inquiry, and after the General Medical Council and the Nursing and Midwifery Council sent out their new guidance. I phoned the line and was told, “I’m sorry, but we cannot deal with concerns from Scotland, except to give general advice.” That is not good enough and it is letting our staff down. The staff whom we value and who are doing a good job are not able to express their concerns, and there is a much more widespread culture in that regard than the cabinet secretary is prepared to admit. In the past few months, I have carried out a detailed analysis of the figures that are being presented, but I will not talk about that today. I can tell the cabinet secretary that she was right to say that her job is not to micromanage the health service—no minister can do that, and we do not expect her to do so. However, we do expect her to ask questions. If her civil servants are not telling her about the striking variations that are occurring, they are not doing their job, and she is not doing her job in ensuring that they give her that information. There is a potential scandal out there. I can tell the cabinet secretary that there are concerns in other areas, which I will talk about in the next few weeks once I have checked them with the local health boards. I turn to Joe FitzPatrick’s figures for Tayside, and the letter from Sandy Watson, which I received because I cover part of that constituency. In the letter, NHS Tayside revealed something else that is very interesting: referrals that are made directly to nursing staff and to allied health professionals are not recorded in the waiting times system. It is true that the original ISD published figures included figures related to nurses and allied health professionals. However, that was a mistake, and it was corrected by the health board. If I, as a general practitioner, refer a patient to a specialist service in a hospital—for diabetes, for example, which is one of the big ones—why is that referral not subject to a waiting time guarantee? The health service system is changing. The system of referral no longer goes from GP to consultant but concerns many different aspects of the health service. If the cabinet secretary really wants to protect patients and ensure that the system works well, and if she wants to support staff, rather than using them as a shield—as she has done blatantly today—she must ensure that staff are working in a safe situation in which they are free from bullying and are able to raise concerns. When they cannot or feel unable to do so, they should have a whistleblowing line to call for support. That will give the cabinet secretary the information that she wants. The Government stands accused not of not trying its best, but of not asking questions and of being completely and utterly complacent.

5. Back to some reality. [Interruption.]

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the finding in the report by the Royal Pharmaceutical Society in Scotland that care home patients are being prescribed powerful drugs for long periods of time without proper checks. (S4F-00682)

I welcome the First Minister’s response and the group that is working on the issue. Is he aware of the research that was published in The British Journal of General Practice last month, which showed that, despite a welcome reduction in the prescribing of psychoactive drugs, residents in care homes are still 22 times more likely to be on antipsychotic medication? Is he also aware of the study that the General Medical Council commissioned on errors in general practice prescribing? Both those studies reinforce the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland’s report of 2009 called “Remember, I’m still me”. Why is the Government denying my constituents in care homes the right, when they have capacity, to register for long-term condition monitoring by community pharmacists? Will the First Minister ensure that residents who do not have capacity have contracts with pharmacists, as in Tayside, to ensure safer and more effective prescribing for that vulnerable group and to tackle the problem of excessive psychoactive treatments?

I declare an interest, as I am a member of the William Simpson’s home trust, which I will refer to in my speech. I congratulate Paul Wheelhouse not only on securing the debate but on his excellent analysis of the problem. I am sorry that I have not been able to attend meetings of the cross-party group on armed forces veterans, which I attended in the previous session. Our soldiers are exposed to the most horrific scenes and situations while taking part in combat to protect our country. On return, some find the memories and flashbacks that are caused by their time in battle unbearable and turn to alcohol in an attempt to forget the tragedies that they have seen. We need to have a better support unit in place, to identify not only the tell-tale signs of the mental scars of war but also, as Paul Wheelhouse said, the initial signs of alcohol problems, which develop before that stage and which can be fundamental to our understanding of the situation. We need to offer packages that deliver not only effective medical care, in general physical terms—things have improved in that regard—but more extensive psychiatric and psychological care. Because of the line of work that they were involved in, many people who have served in the armed forces feel that it is a weakness to admit to having a problem. We must do more to ensure that those brave men and women are able to come forward and speak about their problems. Recently, I worked as a consultant addictions psychiatrist in West Lothian, which showed me something of the extent to which alcohol and drug use covers up post-traumatic stress from conflict, going back to the Falklands conflict, which I know that the minister was involved in, and to both Iraq wars and Afghanistan. I found that the expert help that I was able to get for some of those veterans at Hollybush house was invaluable. I know that the Government has given support to that care home, and I hope that it will continue to do so. There are some fine examples of other organisations and individuals who have created packages to support current serving personnel and veterans. One that I have been engaged with is Gardening Leave, a charity that was founded by Anne Baker Cresswell, which provides current and former servicemen and women with gardens in which they can grow plants and fruit in a safe and relaxed environment while contributing as much or as little as they choose. That might sound rather simplistic, but therapeutic gardening is critically important as a measure across Scotland not only for this group but for others. Trellis in Perth in my constituency co-ordinates 160 such therapeutic gardening projects. Gardening Leave is developing more centres and I hope that, where those centres do not operate, the Scottish Government will consider talking to Trellis about engaging with veterans, because some of them benefit enormously from those projects. Another supportive organisation in my constituency is the William Simpson’s home in Plean, which I mentioned earlier. It has existed for more than 100 years and looks after people with alcohol-related brain damage. More than 50 per cent of those individuals are veterans. Supporting them is important. The home is trying to raise capital to fund a new development programme to modernise its facility. Unfortunately, we have been unable to garner any Government support for that yet. I know that the economic situation is difficult, but I suggest that the minister might want to consider giving it some support. I acknowledge the work of the Government in Scotland, previously in partnership with the UK Labour Government, which is reflected in the joint meeting of the veterans and mental health cross-party groups in the previous session of Parliament, where work was taken forward to ensure that those coming out of our armed forces are supported, that problems are identified at an earlier stage—and indeed in service—and that treatment and support are offered. The work of charities such as Help for Heroes has an important role to play and they need to be engaged in the process.

The Government will be delighted to hear that, at the European Union congress in Lyon last week, Scotland was recognised as being a world leader in an evidence-based weight programme. I refer to the counterweight programme. Is the Government as dismayed as I am to learn that, despite the cabinet secretary’s answer to my previous question on the issue, all six staff in the national counterweight programme were declared redundant at the end of April and the programme has therefore effectively been abandoned as a national programme?

Enough!

I do not intend to sparkle with revelations like those that have been made by some members. We have had a consensual debate, and it has been none the worse for that. Patricia Ferguson was right to say that the starting point is the recognition that the world has changed. I go back even further than many members do. As a five-year-old, I walked half a mile down a hill to catch a corporation bus and then another half mile to primary school at Perth academy. There was still rationing at the time, so the diet side of things was not particularly important. We just did not get the sweets, fast food and so on that are available today. Of course, if we go back even further, obesity used to be a sign of wealth. Today it is a sign of greater poverty. Obesity is so endemic in the population that it is a problem. Two thirds of adults are overweight. We have a generation that is largely inactive and is happier to watch on television the amazing exploits of people such as our champion Dr Andrew Murray, admiring his marathon to the pole or his ultra-long-distance runs, such as his run to Ethiopia—which he did in one go, rather than over 200 marathons in the way that Dennis Robertson described. Perhaps such exploits put people off doing, rather than watching. Many members reminded us that obesity increased from 17 per cent in 1995 to 27 per cent in 2010. The proportion is predicted to rise to 40 per cent by 2030 if the trend does not change, as Margaret McDougall said. The minister and other members outlined the stark consequences of failure to reverse the trend. As Malcolm Chisholm reminded us, obesity is only partly about activity. Margaret McDougall emphasised the importance of promoting breastfeeding. That is a starting point, although I would go back a step, because we need to work with pregnant women to promote their good health. Gil Paterson, in a thoughtful speech, made clear just how complex tackling obesity is. Diet is important; family meals play a part, as Jackson Carlaw reminded us. Parents wrestle with television and games technology, as Gil Paterson said. Perhaps the Wii that we give our children to exercise with is a palliative to our consciences, rather than being real exercise. When Scots gave up porridge in favour of salt-laden, high-calorie energy foods, when we moved from home cooking to prepared foods, when we went from taking sandwiches to work to eating takeaways, high in saturated fats, we began to travel down this path, which could lead to a reversal of many of the extended years that have been achieved in the past generation. Meanwhile, the health inequality gap simply increases. What has become clear, and was re-emphasised at the conference in Lyon last week, is that treating children on their own is ineffective. It has to be about treating mothers and families; that is the way forward and the research evidence is now becoming clear on that. Dennis Robertson correctly identified parents as critical and grandparents, too, are perhaps important. A number of speakers made the important suggestion that we need to look to ourselves. I regret that the Parliament does not have a gym or, rather, it has a gym but no equipment. That is a poor thing not just for us, but for our staff. We are employers and we need to look after our staff. Patricia Ferguson referred to the gender gap and Mark McDonald gave personal testimony of his own struggles, from his 20s on, with exercise and resisting fast food. Margaret Burgess reflected on something that is more true of women but does not apply only to women, which is the see-saw of weight. We need to recognise that a bit more. In question time today, the minister batted away my question about the counterweight programme. I say to her that I was not being economical with the truth in any way when I said that the Government’s efforts to transition the programme into health boards, which I would applaud, have resulted in six redundancies in the counterweight programme. Scotland is leading the world with that programme—that is a fact. I am certain that it was not the Government’s intention, but the reality is that there has been a failure in transition, as there was with healthy living centres, which had to be rescued by money; and as there was with the retired and senior volunteer programme, which was important in my area in providing exercise for people with learning disability. We need to look at the transition of programmes. Malcolm Chisholm rightly said that physical activity is not the most important factor, because someone can be overweight and really quite fit and have an extended life with a reasonable quality of life. If someone is overweight and unfit, that is less likely. I will not go into the consequences of being overweight, but diabetes is probably the biggest challenge, which could lead to a reversal of the cardiovascular gains that we have made. Many cancers are associated with obesity as well. What should be done? We have targets. Labour in 2004 set the target of two hours of physical education for every pupil, to be met by 2008. Progress was slow. The target date was moved by the SNP, despite a promise in 2007 to meet it. It has now been moved further, to 2014. The watering down of that contract is regrettable. The Health and Sport Committee showed in its report on pathways into sport and physical activity that East Renfrewshire, for example, with good leadership and good commitment, achieved the two-hours goal and an extensive range of participation in sport. That shows that the target is achievable, but there has to be a drive from the new leadership in the councils to achieve it. I hope that it will be a subject of early discussion with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, using the money that the Government has—I am glad to say—announced. There are other broken promises. Malcolm Chisholm referred to the five days of outdoor education. I add to that the free swimming that was promised and the moratorium on building on playing fields, which does not seem to have been fulfilled completely. The mainstreaming of active sports co-ordinators is important, as is inreach from sports and athletics clubs. As Bob Doris said, an inspirational teacher in a sport—he mentioned Gaelic football—can often be instrumental in encouraging people into sport. In my area, we had a teacher at Wallace high school who was interested in canoeing—

I was told that I had between seven and a half and eight minutes by the Deputy Presiding Officer, but I will wind up, Presiding Officer, obeying your instructions. There are many other things that I would have mentioned, such as Trellis, which is involved in therapeutic gardening; woodlands; and the importance of achieving good walking. However, I will conclude by asking members to support the amendment in my name and saying that we will be supporting the amendment in Alison Johnstone’s name.

I congratulate Dave Thompson on securing the debate. I confess that, despite being a doctor, I was not aware of the Dewar legacy until last year, when David Stewart lodged a similar motion. At that time I took the trouble to look up the issue. When, in 1851, the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh carried out an early investigation into the deficiencies of medical provision in the Highlands and Islands, it found that only 62 of 170 parishes had a resident doctor and that 41 parishes could be “regarded as destitute of medical aid”. Sir John Dewar’s report in 1912 was the world’s first analysis of health provision in rural communities, and the analysis and recommendations in that Edwardian study remain just as pertinent in current debates about providing healthcare to Scotland’s rural communities. Dewar’s principal recommendations included better training for rural doctors, better use of transport and technology, and guaranteed minimum levels of service provision for rural populations, despite geography. However, the Highlands and Islands medical service was not established until 1923 and Sir John must have been as concerned as some of us are today about the rate of progress that can be made on such matters. It is not easy for Governments to make changes, although I have to say that 11 years seems to be a rather long time to take to introduce such a service. I agree with Dave Thompson that the HIMS provided the template for the future NHS. Interestingly, Ernest Beveridge, who was a Liberal, was the research assistant for Sidney and Beatrice Webb at around the time the Dewar report was being formulated and might well have picked up from that some of the material he subsequently translated into the reforms that Aneurin Bevan took forward and which resulted in one of the world’s greatest social creations. Current healthcare provision problems in remote and rural Scotland include recruitment, retention and, as John Finnie pointed out, increasing specialisation across the professions. I know that general practice is a recognised specialty, but it is difficult to take the approach to generalism in rural general hospitals. Through the World Organization of National Colleges, Academies and Academic Associations of General Practitioners/Family Physicians, Australian and Canadian general practitioners have led the world in defining modern rural practice and the training that is required. WONCA’s working party on rural practice has gone a long way in that direction and has given us some suggestions about what should be happening. In Norway and Sweden, rural healthcare is underpinned by telemedicine and a well-organised transport infrastructure, including fast boats. I know that we are endeavouring to increase the use of telemedicine in our own setting. The centre for rural health, which was set up by Labour, has been continued by the current Government and important managed clinical networks have been developed in the Highlands. Medical and communications technology have been improved, emergency response times have been maintained by community first responders, defibrillation teams and rural GPs attending road accidents and—as far as coronary disease is concerned—emergency call-to-needle times are being reduced by paramedics giving pre-hospital thrombolysis supported by telelinks to coronary care. However, it should be pointed out that rural general hospitals in Shetland, Orkney, Stornoway, Fort William, Oban and Elgin are having problems in maintaining consultant-led services because of the increasing specialisation that I mentioned, the European working time directive and the reduced training time for consultants, which means that consultants who come through now are less experienced than those in the previous generations. Although all those elements raise challenges, they also provide hope for the future provision of healthcare in remote and rural Scotland. The Government’s 2008 report set out what I thought were very challenging implementation plans and tight timescales, and I wonder whether the cabinet secretary will tell us whether all the dates, none of which went beyond December 2009, were met, and whether she will place in the Scottish Parliament information centre details about the plans’ implementation. Presiding Officer, I apologise for going on a little longer than usual. In conclusion, is say that I believe that remote and rural healthcare will continue to be a challenge and that the integration of services for health and social care will be as important in those settings as it will be in more urban settings. Although we owe a debt to Dewar, we also owe it to today’s communities to strive for better services now.

Cue a proposal for the Scottish Futures Trust and the non-profit distributing model, which is a lovely new name, just as PPP was a new name for PFI. Audit Scotland has stated that the non-profit distributing model is identical to PPP, so the Scottish Futures Trust’s building programme will be the same as PPP.

It is just a term.

The builders, architects and suppliers all make a profit. It is just a new form of PPP.

I declare that my wife is a candidate in the forthcoming elections. Localism is interesting to debate, so I welcome the opportunity to participate. Localism can mean all sorts of different things to different people. I, too, will study John Mason’s thoughtful and interesting speech later, because he specified some of the difficulties that we face. The Labour Party devolved power to Scotland through the formation of this Parliament. That was a form of localism. It was understood at the time that further devolution to councils should take place and that it should not stop there, but should go to local communities. However, that approach sets a problem, which is how to deliver national strategy and national policy with some evenness—at least within fixed parameters—and without the unevenness that has resulted from the concordat. That is a difficult situation, to which no one has yet produced a true solution. I will take business start-ups as an example. Scottish Enterprise’s powers to deal with new business start-ups were devolved to councils. That seemed to be a reasonable solution, but let us look at the consequences. In my area—Stirling—the number of start-ups has gone down from 480 to 350 under the local SNP administration. That just reflects the national pattern, but what does not reflect the national pattern is the three-year survival rate of new businesses in Stirling, where the rate has gone from being above the Scottish average to below it. If that is not enough, in the most recent year for which we have figures, the weekly wage in Stirling dropped by £29, in comparison with a rise of £4 across Scotland. The local SNP council is undoubtedly underperforming. What will be done about that? The only opportunity that we have to address that is to kick out the SNP council on 3 May and put back in a Labour council, but will it have the necessary powers to deal with the situation? I can give a number of other examples. The Parliament agreed that healthy living centres were a good thing and they were set up under Labour. However, in the previous Parliament, Jim Mather decided precipitately to transfer the money to local authorities. It was only subsequently, under pressure, that the cabinet secretary, Nicola Sturgeon, produced bail-out funding to ensure that the healthy living centres did not collapse immediately because they were not a priority for local authorities. If the Government is going to transfer things to local institutions, which is appropriate in some cases, it must ensure that there is proper transitional funding. Jim Mather also transferred the funding that Labour had allocated to produce the retired and senior volunteer programme—a scheme that is run by Community Service Volunteers, which was given £350,000 of central Government money to hire development officers to encourage local volunteers. In my area it was hugely successful, with 600 volunteers in the central region and a vast variety of opportunities for volunteering. The red T-shirted groups in our local hospitals began to provide something similar to candy stripers, in helping patients and supporting staff. Those groups were being implemented in an excellent way. There were also knitting and sewing circles to assist people with learning disabilities to have greater self-esteem, in addition to there being walking groups and a wide variety of other groups. What happened? The Government precipitately, without any planning, pushed the money out to the local authorities and within three months half the Scottish development officers were made redundant. A scheme that was working and that had created more than 3,000 volunteers throughout Scotland was seriously damaged by that precipitate move.

That does not “blow apart” my argument at all. The minister has clearly not been listening. My argument is not that the money was not transferred, but that the transfer should not have been precipitate. If a national scheme is set up—something that the SNP Government wants to implement—it should be done in a careful manner and there should then be some modification. If a new policy is introduced, there should be some way of monitoring it in local authorities. Another example is the kinship care allowance. Under pressure from Wendy Alexander, the Government announced £10 million for local authorities for kinship care, but what have we seen? We have seen such variation in the application of the kinship care allowance across councils that there is genuine anger among the kinship care groups throughout Scotland to the extent that they are now petitioning Parliament. I am not suggesting a solution, but I think that there needs to be some way in which national policies are operated locally within parameters that ensure a level of social justice. There are some things for which there is a strategic need, such as the power line from Beauly to Denny; we are all agreed that there is a need for that connection. However, although the local MSPs—SNP, Labour and Tory—all agreed that the line should be undergrounded, the decision was made nationally in a way that ensured that undergrounding would not occur; it was made in a political way that allowed the local MSPs to suggest that undergrounding might possibly take place, but it did not. That was political gerrymandering of the worst sort. Pharmacy applications are another good example that Jackson Carlaw raised. I will come back to the question—

—on another day.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the chairs and chief executives of the territorial NHS boards and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00913)

I want to see whether we can get any greater clarity on bonus point payments to NHS consultants than the First Minister was able to give the other week, when he deliberately confused merit awards and bonus points. What instructions, if any, were issued to health boards on bonus point pay awards for consultants? Did the cabinet secretary order that, apart from payments that have to be made under prior contractual agreements, no new or additional bonus payments should be made? If that was the case, why were 250 new bonuses and 650 additional bonuses paid out? That made the public sector NHS pay freeze apply only to workers who earn over £21,000, except for those 900 consultants and a considerable number of managers, whom I will come back to at another time.

Having worked in Scotland’s only women’s prison from the day that it opened until my final locum there in 2003, and having served as Deputy Minister for Justice when Professor Sheila McLean presented her review of women offenders, I have a particular interest in the area. That review arose from Henry McLeish’s aspiration to halve the number of women prisoners following the then inspector Clive Fairweather’s comments in 1999. As a minister in 2001-02, in what was then a new Administration, I tried to restate the aim as reducing the number of admissions rather than the daily prison population. At that time, the number of admissions was 2,100. The report, “A Better Way: The Report of the Ministerial Group on Women’s Offending”, and the subsequent proposals, if they had been fully implemented, would have significantly reduced admissions. Many of the proposals in that earlier report are repeated in this welcome and important report from Dame Elish Angiolini and her colleagues. It is a welcome restatement of the direction of travel that we really must follow. As a starting point, other members have said that we should recognise that there is a considerable difference between male and female offenders. Women are different and an adapted male prison model is not good enough. In 1987, only a handful of drug misusers were admitted to Cornton Vale. By the time that I did my last stint there, more than 80 per cent of the prisoners had been convicted of drug-related offences, but the background of abuse in childhood, looked-after status in childhood, mental health problems, including borderline personality disorder, and histories of domestic violence or self-harm—much of which was detailed in research by Dobash and Dobash—remained unchanged throughout the period of my association with Cornton Vale. I want to ensure that, this time round, as well as agreeing with the warm words in all the reports that have been produced, the Parliament agrees a set of targets. That is vital, because without hard targets we will not achieve the change that we all seek. My only criticism of the Government is that its attempt simply to abolish short-term sentences by diktat demonstrated a surprising lack of understanding of the judiciary and how it works. The courts will choose non-custodial alternatives when they are seen to be effective. In 2001, the number of offenders who were admitted for fine default was 587. The fact that, last year, the figure was less than 90 shows that change can be achieved. The principle of sheriffs managing cases, which the report mentions, is of great importance and has been welcomed by those who have been involved in the drugs courts, the domestic violence court and drug treatment and testing orders. That continuity of management should be extended. It is not by chance that the number of young offenders who are admitted and the number of short-term sentences have reduced since 2001. That has happened thanks to the establishment of drugs courts, DTTOs and the unique, innovative and—as others have said—successful time-out centre at 218 Bath Street, which every year admits up to 500 women whose offence was wholly or largely drug related. The tragedy is that, once that pilot project was shown to be successful in the middle of the last decade, it was not rolled out for women, nor was a similar project piloted for men. I believe that that should happen, and that the project should be extended to deal specifically with alcohol-related offences. We now need centres to deal with alcohol problems and we need to extend treatment and testing orders to cover alcohol. Over the period that I am talking about, although the number of short sentences and the number of people admitted to prison for fine default have gone down, the reverse is true of the number of offenders admitted on remand, which has increased from 800 to 1,800 per year. The proposals for bail supervision and electronic tagging that I made when I was a minister have not been implemented nationally, which might be partly why the judiciary feel the need to use remand so often when only 30 per cent of those who are on remand eventually receive a custodial sentence. Therefore, I welcome the proposals for bail supervision plus and those for tackling housing and dealing with mentoring. In my view, the proposal that remand should be to local treatment and support units that are similar to time-out centres is welcome. Section 5 of the report, which is on supervision, tagging, mentoring and ensuring that housing and treatment are provided, has my full support. Another important issue is children. Although I do not have time to go into that today, it is critical. In the meantime, I recommend to the cabinet secretary some issues on which he should consider making early progress. First, I ask him to ensure, almost immediately, that someone be appointed to the SPS board specifically to deal with female offenders. David McLetchie and others mentioned that. That would cost no money and would provide the focus that has been lacking on the board for far too long. Secondly, I ask the cabinet secretary to meet the call of the report and the chief inspector for a prison visitors centre at Cornton Vale, possibly in the old staff canteen, which would be run by the community. I have been pressing for such centres in the prisons, three of which are in my constituency, for some years. Glenochil prison could have had a prison visitors centre, but the prison board chose to abolish the premises that could have been used. The old canteen at Cornton Vale is still there and it could be used tomorrow. It would cost very little to turn it into a visitors centre and the community is willing to run it, so let us get on with it. Thirdly, we need a successor to the prison visiting committees and I look forward to the announcements that the cabinet secretary referred to this morning. I hope that, as well as involving a monitoring function, the new system will embody the best of the prison visiting service, which was working well in Cornton Vale, if not in some of the other prisons. Fourthly, arrest referral and other intervention services related to drugs and alcohol should be extended. Again, that could be done at relatively little cost. Finally, the Government should work with the judiciary to increase continuity of management. Those measures would cost little and would demonstrate momentum, but the danger is that the suggested demolition of Cornton Vale will lead to planning blight. We need action and we need a good action plan now.

I am glad to have the opportunity to join so many members from the north-east in welcoming the UCAN initiative. Prostate cancer is a significant problem, and radical prostatectomy, when surgery is the preferred option, has problems, including interference with neurological pathways, which can result in erectile dysfunction and a degree of incontinence. As Nanette Milne said, there can also be significant blood loss. There is a need to consider all forms of management of the condition. I recently chaired a meeting on behalf of the prostate cancer group in my constituency, and I was interested to learn that the group is concerned to ensure that there are effective managed care networks, through which consideration can be given to all forms of treatment of prostate cancer, including watchful waiting, chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery in its different forms—of which robotic surgery is the newest. Robotics are an intriguing development, which I first came across in relation to work in the American military, which was doing robotic surgery remotely. The potential for remote surgery in Scotland, and elsewhere, in the future might be significant. I welcome the briefing from UCAN. I was particularly interested in the comparative study of twins Jim and Sandy. One of the twins was operated on through robotics, in the south; the other was operated on in the more traditional way. Single-case studies of that sort are often undervalued, although they can point the way towards more robust studies. I commend UCAN’s theatre suite initiative. The approach should be carefully monitored and evaluated, and if it is successful the facility should be used to train surgeons from throughout Scotland. The important point is that charities such as UCAN and enthusiasts such as Dr George Stevenson—who is clearly an enthusiast of enthusiasts—are extremely welcome, in partnership with the NHS. I sound a note of caution, to which I am sure the minister will pay heed. It must be clear that the running costs will be met by the charity or by the health board. Before the money is raised and the equipment put in place, I am sure that there will be a proper business plan, which I am sure will be approved. The principle of partnership between charity and the NHS is an important one, particularly in times of austerity such as this, and should be encouraged. Partnership in the health service is perhaps most exemplified in the hospice movement, where there is a triple partnership. Local people who want a community hospice raise money, and through gift aid, Government can enhance and augment the money that is raised. Such an approach can be taken to gifts to UCAN. The triple lock on the system is the approach that Michael Forsyth introduced—I must say to Nanette Milne that I do not often praise him—whereby money that is raised by the community is matched pound for pound by the Government, on an on-going basis. That approach saved the hospice movement in the 1980s, when there were great problems with finance, and there was no such initiative in England. That mechanism is an important one and I commend it to the minister as a potential area to look at. I note that the technique can be used for other operations, such as those for bowel cancers, for which I understand the keyhole techniques can be enhanced. It can also be used for gynaecological operations, including for endometriosis. The potential benefits to patients of minimally invasive procedures that are enhanced by robotics are clear, as are the other gains to the patient that Richard Baker outlined. There are accompanying benefits, such as more rapid rehabilitation and shorter hospital stays, which benefit the health service economically as well. I therefore hope that there will be a proper economic evaluation of the procedure as we go forward. I welcome the motion and commend the UCAN campaign.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her commitment in this area. Will she tell the Parliament what steps she took after Audit Scotland’s warning—in its 2010 report—about variation in the use of social unavailability codes in relation to the new ways waiting times programme? Does she share my continuing concern that the use of the codes has trebled since 2008? The rising trend stopped only after I raised issues about Lothian in autumn last year. Does that fact give pause for thought? Will she now undertake an inquiry—similar to the Lothian inquiry—in each health board in which there is either higher use of the codes or variation from month to month in the use of the retrospective correction mechanism, which is supposed to be for exceptional cases only?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met Skills Development Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00849)

In my region of Mid Scotland and Fife, careers advisers are being removed from secondary schools and replaced with an online service. Does the minister agree that, as 102,000 young people in Scotland are without employment, it is important that any changes to the careers advisory service are evidence based and will improve employability? Will she agree to place in the Scottish Parliament information centre the evidence for such a radical change?

May I add to Gil Paterson’s comments by saying that although Scots drink 23 per cent more than people in England, they do so at exactly the same price as people in England pay for their drinks? The position of the Scottish Labour Party is that we remain very sceptical of minimum unit pricing. Does the First Minister accept that there is validity to our greatest concern, which is the windfall profits of more than £100 million—in UK terms, the figure is likely to be more than £1 billion—which will go mainly to the supermarkets? Does he accept that the unintended consequences of such a windfall, the dangers of which have been pointed out by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, are important? Will he look again at the fact that the Scottish Labour Party, despite its scepticism, is offering to make the policy one that has unanimous support, provided that the Government agrees to claw back the entire windfall profits?

In June 2008, I raised my concerns about the level of deletion of patients from waiting lists for social reasons under the new system. As we know, since then, the level has tripled. In October last year, I suggested that there was manipulation of the data, but I was told that I was exaggerating. However, we now know that, for Lothian, the situation was actually worse than I originally thought. Why does the cabinet secretary not accept that a broader look across all health boards is required? Has the Information Services Division not warned, or at least advised, her of the concerns—other than those about information technology in Glasgow and Grampian—of variation in other boards? The retrospective changes measure was supposed to be exceptional. In some boards, the number of those changes is in only single digits. In others, it is in the hundreds. Within boards, there is a variation from single digits or tens to hundreds—indeed, sometimes 400 or 500. That level of variation does not smack of an exceptional measure. We still think that a full independent investigation is required. Will the cabinet secretary agree to that?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will reconsider its support for the continuation of the bonus points scheme for hospital doctors in light of a reduction in national health service jobs and a general pay freeze in the public sector. (S4F-00569)

I do not know whether I can thank the First Minister for that answer, because I am talking about the bonus points scheme, not the distinction awards. When his Government imposes a pay freeze on everyone in the national health service who earns more than £21,000, how can the First Minister justify to those on low pay the fact that there were 201 new entrants to the hospital doctor bonus points scheme last year and that they received top-ups of between £3,200 and £25,632 over and above their salaries? How can he justify the fact that more than one third of the consultants who are already in the bonus scheme—not the distinction awards scheme—were given increases at an additional cost to the health service of £2.6 million? That happened despite the promises from the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy to freeze the system to new entrants and cease increases for other people.

In 2008, I asked a question about quality control, as I was concerned about some of the exclusion reasons at that time. Since then, the annualised rate for out-patient exclusions has multiplied by three, with the annual figure going from about 60,000 to about 200,000. When I raised the issue in 2008, I was assured that the Information Services Division would carry out an evaluation, including of the patient experience, as part of quality assurance. Last year, I warned that games might be being played, and that has proved to be the case. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the data in the appendices to the report show an alarming variation not only between boards, but within boards? Many boards show a true exceptional use of retrospective changes, with single digits being reported, whereas the figures for NHS Borders range from 10 to 143; for NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde they range from 130 to 545; and for NHS Grampian they range from zero to 421. Does the cabinet secretary agree that a fuller independent inquiry covering all boards is required to restore public confidence in the new ways waiting time system? A Lothian internal report did not unmask the manipulation that we now see laid bare by the PWC report. Will the cabinet secretary invite Audit Scotland to carry out a further review of the new ways waiting time system, particularly all aspects of the removal of patients from waiting lists, and with particular attention to the vulnerable patients whom I have warned about repeatedly: those with sensory problems, learning difficulties and literacy problems and immigrants and refugees?

Alison McInnes reminded us of the poor outcomes: 62 per cent of prisoners reoffend, and the figure is even higher for young prisoners. Although there has been a little progress, we have a long way to go. Christine Grahame reminded us eloquently that we debated the issue back in the first session of Parliament. Indeed, one of the initiatives of which I was most proud as justice minister was the 218 centre for which we got funding. It is a matter of some regret that that unique and successful Scottish centre has not been replicated for men, or for other women. The cabinet secretary might like to take another look at that. We will see what the Angiolini commission comes up with—I hope that it supports the centre. As Dennis Robertson from the SNP and my colleague Lewis Macdonald indicated, reoffending is a complex issue. We must begin by understanding the needs of each individual prisoner and the barriers that they face in addressing their reoffending. As Lewis Macdonald said, it is clear that being close to home and family is important, as is tackling problems such as drugs and alcohol. We need to address not only illiteracy, which Graeme Pearson mentioned, but communication difficulties more generally. Areas such as education and the acquisition of skills need improvement, and we need to address all the barriers to effective reintegration into the community. Scotland’s futures forum held a seminar on the innovative impact of social impact bonds, which, as Lewis Macdonald reminded us, was a pilot initiated by Labour at Westminster and continued by the coalition Government. The futures forum noted that prevention was often the first to suffer cuts in times of austerity, so SIBs were a way in which we might leverage in funds. However, it urged caution in that if there is to be a return to investors of between 3 and 13 per cent depending on the outcomes, we need to be very clear about those outcomes. It called for clarity on the goals. One perceived advantage of the social impact bond is that it can bring together multiple agencies. An individual who has not only the core problems caused by drug or alcohol but literacy and communication problems, housing problems and employment problems can be treated holistically. Under the recovery framework, drug services should really be providing that holistic care, but I accept that the links are not easy to make, particularly in aftercare, out of prison. Meaningful educational activity in prison is still far too sparse. Hugh Monro said in his annual report that a common theme was “poor access to activities such as education, employability training, work, PE and programmes.” David McLetchie reminded us that at Cornton Vale, 65 per cent of prisoners are locked in their cells and that only 35 per cent engage in meaningful activity. Although something has been done to deal with that, we do not go far enough. Glenochil is just as bad. It is unacceptable because we all pay the price when prisoners reoffend. The inspector has said: “I would like to see increased opportunities and encouragement for prisoners to access alcohol reduction programmes. Too often I see addressing alcohol issues as being ... less important”. He said that we needed to do more about that, perhaps particularly in Polmont. Graeme Pearson called for tighter key performance indicators on activity in prisons. I support that call. Mary Fee talked about her commitment to families affected by imprisonment and mentioned the cross-party group on families affected by imprisonment. We need to consider a charter of rights for the children of those in prison, like the one in the United States, perhaps as part of the children’s rights bill. Families are an important area. Visitor committees are important. We do not have a programme for those. We need to have one in every prison, and not just Saughton and Perth. I hope that the Barlinnie one opening next month will receive support from the Government. The Government’s amendment is interesting but I hope that, when he sums up, the cabinet secretary will go a little further in justifying it. As Roderick Campbell said, we should be cautious. However, we also need to be fairly detailed in our approach to the issue.

This is not the first time, nor even the second time, that alcohol excess has become a major issue of public alarm in Scotland and the United Kingdom—in fact, it is the third. As with the previous two periods of excess, the current one will not be overcome with a single measure. The precise character of each period of alarm has been different, but they have a common theme, which has been a cultural tolerance of excessive drinking. The second explosion of excess, which was in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, was overcome by growing public awareness and even resentment, coupled with a strengthening temperance movement. Those were aided latterly by a reduction in the strength of beer and by limitations on availability during the first world war, which, when combined, added to the lowering of consumption. The trend was well into a reduction when the magic bullet of the era came into effect, namely prohibition—and we all know the effects of that. With the current wave, the main concern is not just the 45 to 55-year-old hardened drinkers; it is also the 18 to 24-year-olds who binge drink as part of a pub and clubbing culture, sinking shots until they are intoxicated or at least unsafe. Friday and Saturday nights stretch police and ambulance services, and accident and emergency units can look like war zones. In 2001, when I was the Deputy Minister for Justice, Labour recognised the problem and created the Nicholson inquiry, which led to the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005. As public awareness has grown, in part through the parliamentary debate that we have been having ever since that time, consumption has stopped growing. The number of deaths a year has declined by 15 per cent or 200 deaths—it is down from 1,546 a year to 1,318 over a four-year period, which is a decline of 40 a year. Self-reported hazardous drinking among men has dropped, from 28 per cent to 22 per cent of men. Although the hard number is almost certainly underreporting, the methodology of repeated health surveys is valid, so the trend, which is downward, is meaningful. We all agree that something needs to be done. The Alcohol etc (Scotland) Act 2010 set about ending discounts that are based on volume, but we have now discovered that the Government was briefing that there was a loophole even before the act was introduced. I fail to understand why the SNP would undermine its own policy, especially when it had support across the political divide. We tried to amend the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill to tackle pre-mixed caffeinated alcohol. That measure has now been shown to be valid by America’s ban, which was introduced subsequently to that debate, and by Professor Stockwell’s support for caffeinated alcohol limitation and the support of Dr Laurence Gruer, a Scottish public health specialist.

I have said that we thought that the evidence was there, and that was confirmed two weeks after the debate by America’s ban. The evidence is now there. We also tried to introduce alcohol treatment and testing orders, but that measure was blocked on the ground that it was beyond the scope of that bill. Those are the facts. Now that the SNP has a majority, it would have been good if it had offered a general discussion on how to tackle the problem.

I will come to that but the fact is that, since the election, we have not been offered any discussions on the problem at all. The SNP has said repeatedly that minimum unit pricing is not a magic bullet, but it is an absolute fact that the SNP has introduced a bill that is so narrowly drawn that it is incapable of being significantly amended. I agree that we need to do more. I spent much of my career as a doctor working with people with alcohol addictions, so I would not oppose a measure if I genuinely believed, on balance, that it would be beneficial. The SNP has tried to use against me my careful words at the beginning of the debate on minimum pricing in 2008 but, as the Official Report shows, I said that the idea was a novel one, but it needed close examination before we decided whether it should be supported or rejected. After careful study, I recommended rejection to the Labour Party. I will make my reasons for that clear but, before I do so, I point out that I accept that the bill will have an effect on some of the very serious harmful drinkers, such as those in Professor Chick’s study, who drink on average 200 units a week. However, those people constitute a small minority of the minority of 7 per cent of Scots who are harmful drinkers, which means that they drink more than 50 units a week. There are, I believe, better-targeted and more constructive ways of tackling those highly dependent, damaged drinkers. Why have we opposed the Government’s minimum pricing proposal? The proposal is based on a single, untested, theoretical mathematical model—the Sheffield model. Yes, the model has been peer reviewed and is supported by many; nonetheless, there is no overwhelming evidence for it, only opinion. It is a model whose authors, in evidence last session, admitted that it was as reliable as weather forecasting—a model according to which, as Mary Scanlon pointed out, the real data applied retrospectively do not match its predictions. It is also a model that has not examined binge drinking, which is a particular concern of this wave, as I have said, and that, crucially, has not studied the response of retailers to the massive windfall profits of more than £100 million—a response that the Institute for Fiscal Studies has suggested could undermine the benefits of the policy. It is a model that shows clearly that the smallest effect will be on 18 to 24-year-olds.

I am sorry if I am getting under the cabinet secretary’s skin, but it is important that we lay things out. I quote specifically from the Sheffield report and ask her whether she thinks that it is a good reduction. For 18 to 24-year-olds, a minimum unit price of 45p would result in a reduction of 0.6 per cent. For every 100 pints that young adults drink, they are predicted to drink one pint less. I do not regard that as being significant. It may be statistically significant, but I cannot believe that it is clinically significant. Even the harmful drinkers who, according to the Sheffield report, drink an average of 58 units a week—29 pints or two bottles of vodka a week—will reduce their drinking, on average, only by 5 units, or two and a half pints. It was Ross Finnie who pointed that out last session. They will still be harmful drinkers. I accept that those are averages—of course they are. However, when the Sheffield study states that the average consumption for moderate drinkers is only 5 units—two glasses of wine—a week, I wonder about the model. My concerns have gone further, as those who have listened know. The number of hazardous drinkers increases with each decile of increasing income, and it is that pattern of hazardous drinking that we have simply got to change. The proportion of cheaper alcohol in the basket of alcohol purchased is less in the higher-income groups but it is still significant, and minimum unit pricing will barely touch the wealthier 70 per cent of the population—they can absorb with ease any proportionate price increase that the cabinet secretary cares to name. Minimum unit pricing will punish those who are less well-off if they are moderate drinkers at a higher level. For example, a man of modest means who drinks 20 units a week—a bottle of vodka a week—will now pay a minimum unit tax of £200 a year, which I do not regard as appropriate. The less well-off, who are drinking safely and moderately, will have to pay a price for those who are drinking irresponsibly. The cabinet secretary has referred to other concerns such as internet sales, cross-border purchasing and increased black market or counterfeit sales. Those are concerns, but they are lesser concerns. Nigel Hawkes, writing in the British Medical Journal the other week, said: “a deal which gives the retailers, who are part of the problem, over 100 million pounds and takes away millions from the taxpayer is a deal not worth doing.” We urgently need measures to change the culture. We must confront those who get intoxicated on our streets. We need a return to a culture in which getting drunk is not acceptable. A general taxation approach is preferable, building on Alistair Darling’s alcohol duty escalator, which the coalition is continuing, along with new measures from the coalition, which include changing the definition of cider and encouraging lower-strength beer. Those measures will have an effect. A taxation or levy approach would be much more equitable and would generate revenue for the public purse, not for alcohol retailers. It is ironic that, despite complaining that it does not control alcohol duty, the SNP is refusing to implement the social responsibility levy that the Parliament passed. Labour still believes that introducing minimum unit pricing with no adequate clawback mechanism risks doing more harm than good by generating windfalls in excess of £100 million. However, we are responding to the cabinet secretary’s welcome and more measured tone both at committee and today—with her agreement to notify on the legality and to insert the sunset clause—in the hope that she will also refer the research measures to the new chief scientist, Professor Andrew Morris. Therefore, despite our continued real reservations about the unintendeds of the bill, we have lodged our reasoned amendment, which I hope that the cabinet secretary will accept, to allow us to move forward unanimously. On that basis, I move amendment S4M-02305.1, to insert at end: “but, in so doing, strongly believes that the Scottish Government should bring forward proposals to eliminate the windfall to large retailers arising from the minimum unit price by means of the proposed public health levy or other targeted levy.”

No one disagrees that price has an effect. Our amendment is about the fact that nobody is looking at the market response. The Institute of Fiscal Studies says that the market response will have a significant effect on the policy by reducing price just above the level of the minimum unit price, so the basket will remain just the same.

We supported that.

Let me be clear. Is Christine Grahame saying that the US Food and Drug Administration’s decision to ban pre-mixed caffeinated alcohol is founded on absolutely no evidence whatsoever?

11. To ask the Scottish Executive how many schools in Clackmannanshire, Stirlingshire and Perthshire have asked for further support in implementing the curriculum for excellence. (S4O-00779)

I thank the cabinet secretary for the constant reassurance, but can he indicate a little more clearly the sort of support he envisages? I know that he has done something of that already, but he could do a little more. I was not at this morning’s debate, but I received reports of it, and I understand that the cabinet secretary was somewhat critical of the Educational Institute of Scotland survey, with its reports of a considerable lack of confidence, although the survey was limited. What is he doing to ensure that every teacher is asked individually whether they are confident of being able to deliver the national qualifications within the proposed timescale?

I understand that the Mental Welfare Commission is to issue new guidance. Does the member think that that should be a matter of some urgency? Secondly, I simply point out that the one recommendation that the Government has rejected is that the long-term conditions registration process be open to care home residents.

I begin by making a declaration. A relative of mine recently went into a care home, and I am a director of Nursing Home Management Ltd, which runs a single nursing home in England. As we have heard, the inquiry arose from a combination of serious events at the Elsie Inglis home, which recently had good assessments, and the collapse of the Southern Cross group of homes. As Malcolm Chisholm said, the report illustrates the Parliament working at its best in partnership with the Government and the Opposition. The Government responded as evidence came in. In particular, it reversed in part the cuts in the new care inspectorate budget, although that came too late to prevent significant redundancies among qualified inspectors, and it has modified the lighter-touch inspection regime to which Parliament had signed up. As Jim Eadie said, we will need to scrutinise the care inspectorate’s capacity to perform adequately. One of the core concerns arose because of the rapidity with which the level of care declined at Elsie Inglis. Jackie Baillie and Malcolm Chisholm described that. Risk assessment that underpins the announced and unannounced inspection system is critical if public confidence is to be maintained. In England, the recent resignation of the chief executive of the Care Quality Commission demonstrated the importance of public confidence. Therefore, I welcome the continuing efforts to ensure that the risk assessment tool is subject to further iterative development, as are the triggers for additional unannounced scrutiny. Will the Government place the new tool and strategies in the Scottish Parliament information centre as soon as they become available? I hope that that will be soon. The inspectorate’s national inquiry line and dedicated national complaints team are welcome, but independent evaluation of its credibility with residents, staff and carers is needed. As the cabinet secretary knows, I have been pressing for an independent and confidential whistleblowers telephone line for NHS staff, which should be for all care staff given the pending integration of health and social care. I hope that that will be part of the cabinet secretary’s welcome commitment to raising the profile of the complaints system generally. The complaints system should be aligned and integrated with the new complaints process for the NHS. As Mary Fee reminded us, the landscape is far too cluttered. It needs to be focused on the individual, not on service silos. On the engagement of health professionals, the development of shared protocols between the inspectorate, the General Medical Council and the Nursing and Midwifery Council is welcome. Visiting health staff are being invited to comment as part of the pre-assessment. However, the Government’s rejection of the involvement of community pharmacists beyond their current role is a mistake, and it deprives residents of the same rights to registration for long-term conditions that others will enjoy. That really must be extended to other groups, such as optometrists and audiologists, as part of a falls prevention strategy. I welcome the greater fulfilment of the key performance indicator on timing of publication but, as Richard Lyle and Nanette Milne said, local authorities must be alerted to that and we need to ensure that the process continues. I also welcome, but seek some urgency on the implementation of, the powers to refuse further registration of services and, as Anne McTaggart and Annabelle Ewing said, powers to examine the financial health of care homes. Many members mentioned the need to value the workforce, the absolute need to establish a minimum wage, the need to ensure that there is good training and the issue of registration. The length of the registration process is now more crucial than ever. We are moving to self-directed care and much more home support, so we need care workers to be registered early. I hope that discussions on that will continue. We need the national care standards urgently, not in the future. We also need all local authorities, not just 11 out of 32, to have commissioning strategies if we are to prevent further scandals like the one that was exposed by the BBC’s “Panorama”.

This is a most interesting debate, which I very much welcome. It is a good innovation, and for petitioners who want an open debate rather simply a report or an acknowledgement it is the right way forward. I hope that this is the first of many such debates, because it enhances the role of Parliament. That is important. Pernicious anaemia is a suitable topic for the first debate on a petition because the issue is not clear. We do not know the epidemiology of the illness nor its prevalence and incidence. There are wide discrepancies in the figures. That is an important starting point. The second most important starting point is the survey that was conducted by the Pernicious Anaemia Society. Even though its sample may have been skewed, the fact that 47 per cent of respondents had waited two years or more for diagnoses indicates that all is not well. This is not a situation with which we should be happy. The Pernicious Anaemia Society has listed on its website the symptoms that people might experience. That list is long and the symptoms are scored: 12 of them score 5; three score 2; and no fewer than 20 score 1. That illustrates the problem for the general practitioner: when one is confronted with such a variety of symptoms, it is difficult to decide on a diagnosis. The public now expect us to have a medical system in which there is a simple test that defines the condition and allows clear treatment to be given, but of course that is not the case. Doctors need to be aware of the most common symptoms and they need to be able to think of B12 deficiency as being one of the possible diagnoses. To do that, they require the support of good information technology systems so that they can interrogate the symptoms—B12 deficiency may come up on the list of symptoms that are presented. On the diagnostic tests, I found the Schilling test on the Royal College of Practitioners website, yet the test has been abandoned. If our respected college does not have the most up-to-date information, there is a problem. The petitioners have suggested that we should adopt the new active B12 test. I find that fascinating because, as a GP, I used to be presented with patients who were being given B12 and were testing adequately for it, but who still had symptoms that they should not have had. From the information that we now have, we know that there is active and inactive B12. It is important that we move forward on tests such as the active B12 test. I hope that the Government can give us a response on that. There are other tests, such as the anti-intrinsic factor antibody test and the antiparietal cell antibody test, but they display the common difficulties that are faced by medicine in that they have different levels of sensitivity and specificity, which means that they are not like simple dip tests that would allow us to say, “This is pernicious anaemia.” The inconsistencies, which were recognised in the evidence that was given to the Public Petitions Committee, are sufficient for us to ask a number of questions of the Scottish Government. First, why is there no Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline for pernicious anaemia? It should be placed on the SIGN work table, unless the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines embody the new ones from the British Society for Haematology. We need greater clarity. We need not just to look at the fact that 47 per cent of diagnoses were delayed, but to ask why there were delays. What caused them? We need to know what review the Government is undertaking of diagnostic testing for pernicious anaemia. In the light of continuing concerns about the validity of thresholds for B12, we need to know whether the active B12 test should be introduced as a priority, not only because the condition itself is unpleasant, but because the neurological consequences—dementia is an increasing problem—can be serious if the condition is left untreated. What steps has the Government taken to examine the practice team information data to ensure that everyone on B12 injections is—first—adequately monitored and, secondly, treated with folate? That combined treatment is necessary.

The cabinet secretary is aware that we very much welcomed the new system that was brought in to be Scotland’s answer to dealing with the issues—I realise how difficult they are. The new system has not yet passed the critical test of public acceptability—I think that the jury remains out. Will the cabinet secretary say, first, whether patients are represented on the panels? Patient representation is part of getting public confidence in the system. Secondly, will the data on applications and decisions be compiled nationally—as well as dealt with locally, as she announced following the short-life working group’s work—with the appropriate anonymity, to enable Healthcare Improvement Scotland to minimise postcode effects, which still seem to be relatively prevalent?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and I congratulate Dennis Robertson on an excellent speech, which, as other members have said, must have been difficult to give. I join Nanette Milne in paying tribute to David Davidson, who, in the first session of Parliament, began to awaken the Parliament’s interest in the condition. We should recognise his contribution to creating some of the in-patient units and support systems that we now have. Eating disorders are associated more with young females than with young men, but we should be clear that any individual, regardless of gender or age, can suffer from an eating disorder. Like Dennis Robertson, I, too, have a relative who suffered from anorexia—although fortunately they are a survivor—so I have personal as well as professional knowledge. It is important that we get away from stereotypes. Each person is an individual, so how they should be treated must be considered on an individual basis, taking into account their wishes. When I was a general practitioner, because I was psychiatrically trained, the majority of patients in the practice who had eating disorders came to me, rather than to my partners. People went to striking lengths to hide their eating disorders through the clothes that they wore and the demeanour with which they presented. The parents were often in an extremely difficult situation. Many of them were not aware of how serious the situation might be. I have a practical suggestion for the minister. We have an excellent anti-stigma campaign that has been successful on a number of issues. I suggest that part of its remit should be raising awareness on anorexia nervosa and other eating disorders. That would help to destigmatise the condition, which is absolutely critical. Several members have mentioned the problems of the celebrity of the ultra-thin model and the promotion of anorexia on websites, both of which are to be deplored. I hope that the fashion industry is beginning to get to grips with the issue to an extent, although there is a considerable way to go in that respect. However, I praise the television programmes such as “Hollyoaks” that have begun to tackle eating disorders and to demonstrate how difficult it can be to live with an eating disorder for the individual and for the family and friends. It is important that such programmes offer information about an advice line at the end, as that can encourage individuals and families to respond. I welcome organisations such as Beat that highlight the necessity for raising awareness of eating disorders, but there is a great deal further to go. Several members have referred to the fact that this is yet another area in which we need integration. The issues can be picked up in school. Some youngsters will not change to take part in physical education and will not expose themselves. They do not go for meals to the vans outside or to the school dining room. Teachers, school nurses and other pupils have a part to play. That should be part of a programme of education in schools. I hope that the minister will consider having specific programmes. A number of members mentioned general practitioners. I remind members that almost a third of GPs have no formal postgraduate psychiatric education. Those GPs do not have even a general education in psychiatry, let alone education in eating disorders. GPs are generalists, so it is sometimes quite difficult for them to pick up issues. I wrote an educational article on the topic almost 30 years ago, for one of the journals. GPs and other primary care staff need further education in the area. I end, as other members have done, by praising Dennis Robertson for bringing the debate to the Parliament. We have made progress since David Davidson first raised the issue in the Parliament, but there is a long way to go. It is a journey on which we should continue.

Why were no focus groups undertaken in the women’s prison as part of that consultation? Having worked there for 19 years and having been a justice minister, I know that the visiting committee at Cornton Vale has had a profound influence on that institution and on maintaining it. Now that women are dispersed to Saughton and Greenock, it is even more necessary that women prisoners—who are different—should have their rights sustained by PVCs.

What Margaret Burgess says is crucial, but is not of much relevance to prison visitors. I commend the Government for having introduced a new system for dealing with complaints, concerns and comments in the national health service. Prison visitors deal with comments and concerns before they become complaints—that is the system that is being abolished.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s new revised PIN policy. Will she ensure that the policy—or, at least, a link to the policy—is circulated to every member of staff so that they are aware of it? In light of the concern about the cuts in nurses and allied health professionals, and the potential effect on front-line services that the cabinet secretary has committed to maintain, will she establish a helpline for whistleblowers to advise them on the correct course of action in the PIN policy and to support them if they decide that the matter must be taken further?

Kinship care should be of vital concern to this Parliament and to this Government, not least because the outcomes from kinship care placements are better than those from foster care. It is quite clear that the First Minister’s promise in 2007 to match the foster care allowance has not been fulfilled. That is undisputed. Although, by 2010, most councils had started to make some payment, a new postcode lottery has been established, and COSLA is now saying that the full payments cannot be made. As Joan McAlpine—we seem to be quoting her a lot today—said: “Financial provision ... is often inadequate.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 17 January 2012; c 634.] The Government’s response is, once again, to shrug off its responsibilities and blame local authorities and the UK Government. In other words, as usual, it is everybody else’s fault. Meanwhile, there are 20,000 kinship carers providing care for some 15,000 children. My biggest disappointment with Aileen Campbell’s speech is that she seemed to refer only to children who are looked after formally, when there is a larger group of children who are looked after informally, whose needs we must address as well. Many have a background of neglect due to drugs and alcohol. As with other carers, we rely on the good will of kinship carers and their sense of family responsibility. Indeed, I would say that we are taking gross advantage of their good will. I will describe to the chamber the history of one such carer. June Cotier is 78 years old. Her 19-year-old grandson still lives with her, as he has done, along with his sister, from an early age. Like many kinship carers, she received those two children into her care without any warning. For many years, she received no support, training or advice. In particular, she received no advice about the likely damage to the children as a result of the loss of their parents. Like other carers who have been discussed this morning, June had to give up work. She was not assessed—indeed, she was hidden—until she went to her general practitioner when she was having problems. She was, therefore, in the group of informal carers that I am talking about. The health visitor and the school must have known about her situation but, despite the report “Getting Our Priorities Right—Good Practice Guidance for Working With Children and Families Affected by Substance Misuse”, which was published in 2002 and the GIRFEC approach, which appeared in 2006, there is still no statutory duty on communication.

I listened to the minister’s speech, which she has just repeated. It is not an either/or matter: the £10 million for foster care should have been delivered. Like many carers, June has no emergency plan and has never been offered respite. Kinship care is yet another area in which the Government bathes us all in warm words in order to create the mood music of a caring Scottish Government; for most kinship carers, the reality is a cold shower. In the spending review 2007, the Government promised a strategy and better support, including allowances and access to psychological and education services. The 2011 spending review does not mention kinship carers at all, and the carers strategy does not mention kinship carers. What needs to be done? The GIRFEC requirement needs to be enshrined in law. COSLA and the Government should agree to fund allowances properly and fully. There should be new definitions to tackle the inappropriate divisions between formal and informal kinship carers, which should embrace both permanent and temporary placements. Every child placed in kinship care should be assessed, and every kinship carer should be offered assessment and an emergency plan.

The issues around school meals, school uniforms and respite must also be resolved. Above all, the First Minister’s promise should be kept—and kept now.

Will the minister give way?

9. I apologise, Presiding Officer, for arriving late due to the late running of the cross-party group on epilepsy. To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the consequences of the proposed reduction in the college student support budget. (S4O-00617)

I would like to thank the cabinet secretary for his reply, but of course it contained a word that is critical but which was masked by a lot of other verbiage—the word “baseline”. In reality, there has been an £11 million cut from the final budget in 2011. Does the cabinet secretary accept that that budget, even with the additional money, was inadequate? Does he acknowledge that in my constituency requests for funding and the allocation differed by £302,000, even after the additional money, and that it has been suggested that there is a £3 million shortfall at national level? What impact assessment have he and his department done on the effect on the future potential of our college students of the reductions from the final figure that he was able to provide last year?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it has taken to compensate households affected by noise and vibration from coal freight trains on the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine railway line or to ameliorate the disturbance. (S4O-00594)

I thank the minister for his reply and for agreeing to meet me to discuss the issue in further detail. Does the minister accept the facts that have been made clear to the Public Petitions Committee, namely that the parliamentary private bill committee on the railway was misled, as were the public, the minister and then leader of Clackmannanshire Council and I, as the local member of the Scottish Parliament at the time? Scottish Power and DB Schenker stated on the record at the Public Petitions Committee that night trains were always going to run and were critical to the adequate supply of coal to Longannet. The impact study, which Keith Brown ordered as leader of Clackmannanshire Council, presumably advised by Transport Scotland, was based on the false premise that there would be no night trains. Will the minister now ensure that our mutual constituents are compensated for the overall permanent effect of the night trains and for the three years of hell that they have been through since the line opened? Will he also undertake to ensure that noise levels are retested after the mitigation measures are completed in March?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I do not want to sing, although I will if Bruce Crawford asks me to. I seek the Presiding Officer’s guidance on the rules regarding the admissibility of Scottish Parliament motions and the abuse of the system in order to mislead Parliament in contravention of rule 3.1.8 of the members’ code of conduct, which requires that members act honestly. Presiding Officer, you may be aware of motion S4M-01746, which was lodged on 18 January, in the name of Bob Doris MSP. In that motion, Bob Doris cites a motion for an Opposition day debate in the House of Commons in order to assert that the Labour Party supports the privatisation of the national health service. The move was accompanied by an SNP press release that stated: “Scottish Labour’s MPs including the party’s deputy leader Anas Sarwar and shadow Scottish Secretary Margaret Curran voted in favour of using the private sector throughout the NHS.” In fact, the House of Commons motion in question is backed by the trade union Unison as part of its our NHS, our future campaign and was drafted to oppose the Conservative-led “Government’s plans to open up the NHS” in England “as a regulated market, increasing private sector involvement in both commissioning and provision of NHS services”, which will “risk putting profits before patients”. It can in no way be honestly portrayed as support for increased private sector involvement in the NHS; in fact, the precise opposite is true. In view of the fact that such manifestly false assertions have found their way into a motion of the Parliament, what provision is there for members to be required to withdraw motions if they are found to be demonstrably false and misleading, considering that they will remain on the record even if they are amended? Will the Presiding Officer confirm that the chamber office is unable to prevent the lodging and publication of such erroneous motions, as accuracy is not currently one of the admissibility criteria under rule 8.2.2 of the standing orders? If so, does she agree that that should be changed in order to protect the Parliament’s integrity? Finally, is it appropriate that a member who wantonly and mischievously misleads Parliament in this way should be able to continue as deputy convener of the Health and Sport Committee?

Further to Jackie Baillie’s question, will the cabinet secretary now terminate the yellow category response—or ensure that it is terminated—as it is causing confusion? Can the cabinet secretary confirm that ambulance workers are now categorised as emergency workers under the EU working time directive, in the same way as firefighters and police officers are? Is that a change? Further to Jackson Carlaw’s question, will the cabinet secretary provide written details on the new £5 million? I calculate that there has been a loss of capacity of about 5 or 5.5 per cent in a budget of £200 million and I am not clear how the £5 million will replace that capacity. I understand that it will take some time to build up new capacity.

I thank the First Minister for his comments. Will he welcome the unions’ agreement to extend for a short period the interim agreement to allow negotiations to conclude? Does he agree that it is time to reclassify front-line ambulance workers as emergency workers under the European Union directive as applied to police, firefighters and the armed forces in order fully to ensure the safety of the public and the workers?

I thank the cabinet secretary for requiring a report from NHS Lothian on waiting times management. Now that she has received the report, is she satisfied with it, in the light of the fact that no one from the public participation forum was on the group that investigated the problem; that not a single patient who had refused an offer that was regarded as inappropriate of treatment in England for minor illnesses was looked at, although that was the original source of the complaint that I placed before her in the chamber; and that nobody knows the cause of 330 out of the 1,150 suspensions, so the tracking system has not operated effectively?

10. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met NHS boards and what was discussed. (S4O-00518)

I draw members’ attention to my declaration of interests. Does the cabinet secretary remember resolving the dispute over the NHS consultant contract, at a time when health boards were advertising posts on a split of nine clinical sessions to one non-clinical session, rather than 7.5 to 2.5? Although that advertising has stopped, is she aware that in some health board areas new consultants are being pressed to accept 9:1 contracts? Does she recognise the dangers of requiring non-clinical elements, including service development and redesign, audit and appraisal, teaching, training and—not least—patient safety, to be delivered in only four hours a week? Does she agree that such an approach is disturbing and will she look into the issue for us?

The cabinet secretary is making a particularly important point, and the concept of networked primary care is supported by the Royal College of General Practitioners. Local healthcare co-operatives are the embodiment of what the cabinet secretary is saying. There were 85 in 1999 but there are only 40 now, and there has been a critical disengagement of primary care and community staff.

Will the member give way?

The member makes a very important point at the beginning of his speech when he asks what we can do at the moment to prevent emergency admissions, which cost us £1.4 billion. Does he agree that emergency planning for individuals who are receiving care is absolutely vital and that, without that, emergency admission is almost inevitable?

Who actually suggested that separate super-quango? It was not the Labour Party.

Only the Lib Dems portrayed it as such.

I always enjoy Jackson Carlaw’s speeches, although his remarks about my colleague should more properly be addressed to me, as I am the second-oldest member. I draw members’ attention to my various declarations of interest with regard to my membership of a variety of colleges, which have some of the vested interests that we are trying to tackle. It was at a time of even greater austerity than that which we face today, when deficits were not 60 per cent to 80 per cent of gross domestic product but 250 per cent, that the post-war Labour Government implemented the Beveridge reforms to bring about the NHS, an institution that, despite its minor failings, has embodied principles that are embraced by all but a few Britons. It has delivered healthcare free at the point of need for more than 60 years. Moreover, notwithstanding the massive changes that have been proposed in England, about which I have huge concerns, it is to remain free. The integration of health and social care as delivered to individuals in need is the pre-eminent challenge of this generation. It must be done within a national framework—not a national super-quango, which is how the Liberal Democrats constantly try to portray Labour’s position—with a national set of standards and outcomes.

No, they did not. As I have just indicated, they proposed a national framework and national standards. Why do we propose that? Because, as Jackie Baillie has just said, our freedom of information inquiry found a tenfold variation in charges for the same services across local authorities. I am not saying that variations should be eliminated, but the costs should be managed within a national framework, so that we do not have such gross differences. I acknowledge that progress has been made on delayed discharges, an issue that was the big challenge in 2001-02. Many members have quoted the figures on the growing size of our elderly population. We have been told by Audit Scotland that, without a radical change, we will need many more hospital beds, reversing the trend of the past 25 years to reduce their number. As Duncan McNeil said, the associated costs will overwhelm our budget—whether Scotland has devolution or is independent. We must change or face being overwhelmed by the situation. Many members, including Nanette Milne, Richard Lyle and Mary Scanlon, have indicated a certain disappointment with the briefing from the Association of Directors of Social Work. A briefing that starts by saying that the Kilbrandon report separated us and that that is where we want to remain indicates that there has been a certain lack of thinking, but the ADSW makes the important point that institutional change alone will not deliver what we want. That said, there is legislation in many areas—I refer to the requirement to provide emergency planning for carers, for example—that the ADSW has not implemented. Even some of the basics that would prevent unnecessary admissions have not been followed through by those in social care and social work. Therefore, even in the current situation, things need to be addressed. Many members have said that if health services are not to be overwhelmed, a shift in the balance of care is needed. We have talked about that for many years, but we know again from Audit Scotland that addressing of the matter has been minimal. If the ADSW understands the changes that all four parties in the Parliament now propose as being a means for the medical model to overtake the social care model, I say to it that nothing could be further from the truth. This is about engaging the social care model and reducing the medical care model and making it more effective. Mary Scanlon made an excellent speech that was redolent with institutional memory. Like Malcolm Chisholm, she reminded us that we have had good intentions for 10 years. A pilot was established in Perth and Kinross that included a shared budget and staff on shared terms and conditions, but it failed. We must start with a resolve not to repeat the mistakes of previous attempts—I fear that that may be being done in Highland. I urge the Scottish Government to talk to the joint futures group and everyone involved in that failure to ascertain why it occurred. I have already done so. There was a lack of consensus on what constitutes a model of care and the desired outcomes, and there was a failure to build on the micro examples of existing good co-operation and practice in the area. Many members, including Dennis Robertson and Mark McDonald, have referred to good local examples. They must not be destroyed by any institutional change that we create; rather, they must be enhanced.

Like Mark McDonald, I hope that that will occur. I am merely saying that ministers’ intentions were the same in the first parliamentary session, but the pilot failed. There was a lack of adherence to the key worker principle in the pilot. There was competition between nurses and social workers. As an elderly person, it does not matter to me whether my key worker is a social worker or a nurse, but I want a key worker who is responsible and accountable and can determine the budget for the care package that will come to me. We need to recognise that the pilot fell apart. Worse than that, the process undermined the effective micro joint working that existed. The CHPs have been subject to an Audit Scotland review, which confirmed that they have largely become creatures of the health boards and that many of them have poor governance and lack transparency. There is little evidence of resource transfer either from the acute sector to the community or between health boards and social care. Perhaps the worst failure is the failure to enhance preventive services. Those sub-health board structures should have grown organically from the local health care co-operatives, of which there were 85. The Royal College of General Practitioners has recommended the networking of primary care groups and their engagement. Contrary to the good intentions of ministers to involve professionals and have them leading, in practice the professionals have withdrawn from the community health partnerships and are totally disengaged. Therefore, whatever legal structure comes forward must seek to re-engage them, as the cabinet secretary said. To go further, it must engage patients, carer groups and voluntary organisations, and it must ensure that there is accountability. In my view, elections to health boards have not delivered in the way that we would have liked. Engaging local councils through the reformed community health partnerships will produce the degree of strengthened local accountability that—along with an accountable officer—is necessary. Do I have a little more time, Presiding Officer?

Thank you. Unison and the RCN have already indicated the hurdles that they will face in transferring staff between the local authorities and the NHS, and we should not underestimate the difficulty of that process. However, there are situations in which that type of joint approach has worked well—in Lothian, for example, where Peter Gabbitas was given a joint appointment between NHS Lothian and the City of Edinburgh Council. In future, we cannot have an opt-in and opt-out approach. Some members have referred to the CHPs in Glasgow, where the system just fell apart. It must not fall apart because the people at the top decide that they do not want it to work and undermine local efforts. We need a legal underpinning, which is what our amendment says—it does not call for a national group, but simply mentions legal underpinning, which the SNP now accepts is necessary. The Government specifically said in February that legislative change should not happen and is not required, but it now says that we need legislation. I very much welcome that change. Bob Doris reminded us of the importance of self-directed support as a means of rebalancing power between the institution and the individual. This issue is the biggest challenge that we face. There is a measure of consensus across the chamber, the likes of which we have rarely seen. The opportunity is there for the Government to engage with Opposition party spokespersons in the post-consultation and pre-legislative phase to ensure that we get something lasting and sustainable, which delivers the good intentions that each previous Parliament and Administration—including this one—has had with regard to integration.

The responsibility for that was mine and not officials’. An important point that I failed to make in my speech is that neither undergraduate training nor continuing professional development is undertaken jointly. I lectured in social work for 19 years and when I attempted such joint training, I found it extraordinarily difficult. Serious leadership from the top will be required to ensure that it happens, so will the minister invite NHS Education for Scotland and the appropriate social work groups to get together as soon as possible?

5. To ask the Deputy First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the Royal College of Nursing survey that shows that 37 per cent of nurses have been discouraged from reporting, or told not to report, their concerns about issues such as patient safety and staffing levels at their workplace. (S4F-00334)

I welcome the new PIN guidelines. Will the Deputy First Minister give us a date for their implementation? Will she require all concerns that are raised to be registered and reported to the health board and the area partnership along with subsequent action? The nurses report, in their latest survey, that 48 per cent of respondents indicated that no action was taken when issues were raised. With the more frequent discouragement and 80 per cent of nurses now saying that they fear victimisation or an effect on their career if they whistleblow, does the Deputy First Minister agree that the time has come to set up a confidential national whistleblowing helpline for all NHS staff?

11. To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to address the shortage of short-term supply teachers as reported in TES Scotland on 11 November 2011. (S4O-00469)

Is the supply teaching situation not in rather a mess? That has occurred since the reduction in pay to point 1. Headteachers have reported serious difficulties in Stirling, Perth and Kinross, Dundee, Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire, Falkirk and North Lanarkshire. My colleague Neil Findlay was told that, of 324 requests for supply teachers in West Lothian, 299 were left unfilled. In other words, only 8 per cent of requests for short-term supply teachers were met. What does the cabinet secretary now propose to prevent any additional problems for our hard-pressed and dedicated teachers?

I begin by declaring an interest: my son is a director of the Towpath Trust, which is an organisation in the west of Scotland that provides services to MS sufferers, among other groups. I welcome the debate and congratulate Rhoda Grant on bringing it to the chamber. MS is a very particular condition, and people who suffer from it face significant difficulties. An early diagnosis, while it may be welcome, and is no doubt important, nevertheless confronts the person who is diagnosed with a difficult situation, as the progress of the condition is so variable—ranging from a fairly rapid deterioration to a single attack and no further deterioration. Therefore, uniquely among the things faced by doctors, specialist nurses and support teams, the psychology of the condition and how people face it can be extremely difficult. The traditional approach, which has now largely gone, was that a doctor, when faced with someone with an initial set of symptoms such as a bit of sensory loss in one limb or a blurring of vision, would not tell the person of the diagnosis, because they wanted in some way to protect them. That is an inappropriate way in which to treat patients. Individuals should very much be partners in their own care. The pathology of the condition is interesting. As members have said, we do not know the cause. The process of the nerve wires becoming moth-eaten, as the insulation around them breaks down, thus affecting the transmission of neurological impulses, is particularly unique. The epidemiology is interesting. Rhoda Grant referred to the fact that the UK has a high proportion of MS sufferers and that, in fact, the further north we go, the more people suffer from the condition. We do not fully understand the reason for that, but it must be reflected in the support that is given, so that more services are provided in areas with a high density of MS sufferers. That is self-evident, but when we consider the distribution of specialist services, we find that it is not the case. NHS Ayrshire and Arran has about the most complete team—it has an occupational therapist, for example. As the condition progresses, people need early adaptations in their houses. That is critical. Care and Repair’s services face the same challenges as many other services face at present, so they must be supported in providing early adaptations. I was appalled to hear that NHS Tayside decided only 18 months ago, as an efficiency saving, to merge its aids and adaptations service with that of the local authority. A similar merger took place 25 years ago in the NHS Forth Valley area. It is necessary to co-ordinate those services. The key standards that have been published are extremely welcome. I also welcome the monitoring of those standards and the reports on the monitoring. I think that we will receive an interim report in January. I look forward to the minister publishing the results of follow-up of the issues. The implementation of the specialist nurse programme is of the greatest importance, because nurses who have special training can provide the support that individuals need. People need an holistic approach that not only deals with the physical symptoms and problems of increasing disability, but achieves the psychological adaptation that is necessary. I welcome the work of the MS Society and the progress that we have made, but we have further to go in supporting those who suffer from MS in Scotland.

To continue the Christmas theme, the statement reminds me of pass the parcel. We begin with a large parcel, but when the music stops, we find that there is a very small item inside—the mitigation. The people of Stirling will not be fooled by the minister’s rhetoric today. Will the minister publish the full calculations for his stated cost for undergrounding of £263 million? My calculation is that undergrounding would cost less than £85 million, which seems a small price to pay to avoid the visual impact of the massive towers that will now be placed across the carse of Stirling. Has the minister also asked SP Transmission to look at the new designs of towers? They are slightly less unappealing than the ones that are proposed to be put up. Finally, will he publish full information on the enhanced landscape measures that he now proposes—the very small piece of chocolate that is at the centre of this bad-tasting parcel?

Any death of a baby in childbirth is a tragedy. Sir Harry Burns, our chief medical officer, reminds us that Scotland has a substantially higher rate of stillbirth and neonatal deaths, which he believes could be a target for early intervention policies. Will the minister agree to examine the differences in midwife numbers in different health boards, which currently vary by a factor of more than two from the least well provided to the best provided? Will he, along with his colleagues, rethink the 40 per cent cut in student midwife numbers, as part of addressing the chief medical officer’s priority—

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, whatever system is devised, there is a great need for increased democratic accountability at the front line of health and social care services and that at present that is not properly provided?

11. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the Scottish Ambulance Service and what matters were discussed. (S4O-00409)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that rest breaks are required under European Union regulations for reasons of safety and could be given up only if the ambulance service were designated as the police and the armed forces are? Does she have any intention to consider redesignating emergency ambulance personnel to bring them under the same section of the regulations as the police? Also, does she have any concerns, as I do, about the fact that there is at least anecdotal evidence that some red light calls are being downgraded to yellow light status?

I certainly do not doubt the minister’s intention, but how is the Government going to monitor the situation to ensure that that happens? It is what happens out there that really matters.

I welcome this opportunity to open and close this important debate. My colleague Claire Baker will talk in more detail about child and student carers, as well as about kinship care. Mary Fee and Siobhan McMahon will give examples of where we think that there is a gap between the Scottish Government’s aspirations and the present reality, and Margaret McCulloch will talk a bit more about carers’ rights, and look at some of their effects on carers. Debates such as this are crucial in demonstrating the problems that carers face in their daily lives, and how we, as elected officials, should do all that we can to highlight the issues and come up with solutions to protect and assist those who care and are cared for. They include Zoe Bojelian, a full-time parent and carer for her son, who suffers from complex medical needs and who communicated with us through assistive technology. He told us that he did not feel that he was an equal partner in care. He did not believe that that was a reality at the moment. We need to deal in reality. I fully acknowledge the excellent and ambitious Scottish National Party strategy and implementation plan of 2010. It builds on Labour’s previous plans of 2006, and extends them in a very ambitious way. I am concerned, however, that there is a gap between the rhetoric and the reality. The minister has indicated that we have around 657,000 carers in Scotland, which means that approximately 14 per cent of households include a carer. Three quarters of those are single carers—there is just one carer in the household—and they most commonly care for a parent, although it could be for a spouse, a child or a sibling. Of those carers, 23 per cent will spend more than 50 hours caring for an individual, which is a lot longer than the European working time directive allows. They do all that work unpaid, with little in the way of financial support. We have quite a lot of data, but it comes from the 2001 census, so I will ask the minister a number of questions to which he may care to respond. The Government’s strategy indicates that “the views of carers’ organisations will be taken into account in deciding what analysis tables will be produced for the General Register Office for Scotland 2011 Census.” What steps have been taken on that particular aspect of the data? How is that work progressing? I welcome the minister’s statement and the fact that he has launched the plan, but I have some questions for him about primary care and health professionals. We know that 28 per cent of households in the most deprived areas contain carers, as opposed to 13 per cent in the least deprived areas. Once again, I ask him whether we will ensure that the resources are directed to practices—such as the deep-end practices—that work in our most deprived areas. How many primary care co-ordinators are now working with health boards? They are in place already in South Lanarkshire and the Borders, but has the programme been extended? What has been the Government’s response to the welcome results that were published by the Moffat programme? The programme, which was sponsored by the Government, seems to have been very successful and produced a number of recommendations. Around 37 per cent of carers are over 60, and many of them will themselves be suffering from long-term conditions. As the minister said, the carers assessment, which was brought in by the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002, is a fundamental part of support for carers. Not all carers will seek it, but they must be offered it. Much of the research literature recognises that there are still barriers to that assessment—for example, middle managers are not keen to assess carers because the assessments will unveil even more need and create financial and support problems for them. We know that 70 per cent of carers will hide the fact that their health is suffering. Indeed, a survey to be published next week suggests that 79 per cent of the Scots involved in it said that their health has been getting worse recently, and that their mental and physical health is suffering as a result of caring. That is a sad fact, but it therefore behoves us to ensure that assessments are carried out. Many carers are isolated and experience poverty of opportunity and difficulties with the financial impact of caring. They may require additional heating or special diets, or they may need to refurbish a home that has been damaged by a child with autism. They also need to spend more on transport. A comprehensive assessment is therefore fundamental.

I agree with Mark McDonald on that, and I add that the Welfare Reform Bill will not help matters, because some carers will lose their allowance as people will be excluded from claiming disability living allowance. There will be more problems coming our way rather than fewer. I have one specific health question for the minister. The carers strategy mentions encouraging carers to get the flu jag. We are currently in the flu season, but what has been done to promote the jag? I have seen nothing much in the way of advertising, and I know that many carers are not aware of it. One of the fundamentals is that care should be personalised, and that carers and those who are cared for should be treated as equals in the process. I acknowledge that the Government has done a considerable amount to try to engage carers in various situations. Earlier this year, I asked the First Minister specifically about emergency plans. I welcome the work that is being done with Enable Scotland in that regard, but we have a very long way to go. I turn now to the issue of learning disability to demonstrate how we are failing. In 2008, the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability showed that there were 7,793 adults with learning difficulties and autism who were known to local authorities in Scotland and living with a carer, representing about 48 per cent of the adults for whom that information was reported. We also know that 4,000 individuals with a learning disability are in specialist learning disability residential care. That is fine. However, at this moment—as we are debating—there are 1,000 individuals with learning disabilities in residential homes for the elderly where the average age is well into the 80s and where the care packages are not suitable for younger people with learning disabilities. Of those 1,000 people, 400 are aged under 65 and many—if not all—of them have been placed in those homes as a result of the failure to have effective emergency planning in place. Once they are admitted, they do not leave residential care. I ask that that be looked at carefully. We are all agreed that much greater emphasis should be placed on anticipatory and preventative care for both the cared for and the carer. However, although that can be quite simple to do, it is not happening. We know from Audit Scotland that the opposite is happening. The threshold for community care packages is rising year on year, and people now have to be in serious need of care before they can get a care package. The opposite of what we all want is happening, driven in part by the budgetary problems. Will the change fund solve that? We will see. I welcome the change fund and the fact that 20 per cent of it is to be devoted to carers. However, the change fund is already in operation. Will it change next year, following next year’s budget? Another major issue that we all face is the integration of health and social care. The strategy tells us that carers should be represented on all the community health partnerships. I ask the minister what progress has been made on that. Will the charter of carers’ rights be published next month, as was agreed? Respite is a crucial element of care. The minister has answered some of the criticisms that I was going to make about double counting. I hope that the data is now being collected accurately, as that was not being done well. I praise the six local authorities that have increased their provision, but some local authorities have cut provision, which cannot be appropriate. If they had maintained provision, that might have been adequate, but we know that what is happening is not adequate. There is a postcode lottery out there, which will be a real challenge for the Government. Carer information on early diagnosis is critical. The Government has done quite a lot on that through the carer information zone, Care Information Scotland and the other things to which the minister referred. Emotional support is also important, but we have a considerable way to go on that. At the moment, I am dealing with a case involving paediatric occupational therapy, on which I asked a parliamentary question. The waiting lists are up to 24 months for advice to a parent on occupational therapy issues, which is not acceptable.

We acknowledge the Government’s motion. I move amendment S4M-01399.3, to leave out from “agrees” to end and insert: “further acknowledges promises in successive carers strategies for increased respite hours, emergency carers plans, mutual and sustainable support, good quality information and for carers to be treated as equal partners in care and care planning, but notes with concern that respite care hours have decreased in around a third of local authority areas in the last three years and that figures are obscured by different counting methodologies such as counting overnight stays as more than two days’ respite in some areas; further acknowledges the particular roles and needs of young and kinship carers and also welcomes the aspiration that, from 2012-13 onwards, at least 20% of spend from the Change Fund for Older People’s Services will be dedicated to supporting carers to continue to care for older people, but notes concerns expressed by carers groups that this money must not be used to replace funding lost through local cuts.”

I acknowledge the excellent and ambitious SNP strategies and implementation plans of 2010, which are the basis for much of the debate. Of course, they built on Labour’s previous plans and the additional funding that was provided in the previous session of Parliament. I do not intend to be very critical, but we need to be very wary of a gap between our aspirations and the reality that carers face, much of which came across today. This has been an excellent and compassionate debate and there has been surprisingly little repetition, which I think shows the scope of the challenge that we face. We have heard a number of helpful suggestions from throughout the chamber, such as from Fiona McLeod on training and the possibility of cards for adult carers. Mary Fee drew our attention to hidden carers, including carers with a parent in prison, which nobody else mentioned. Families Outside is trying to address that issue—it is an area that needs to be looked at. The identification of carers is obviously the starting point. Carers often hide themselves, but the Moffat programme showed that we can identify them if we set out to do so. As I said in my opening speech, I hope that the minister will tell us whether the recommendations of the progress report on that programme will be accepted. In my opening speech, I gave some facts. I want to add that 70 per cent of our carers have already been caring for more than five years, so caring is not a short-term thing. Long-term commitment is vital. Bill Kidd reminded us that there are more women carers. We know that women are being most affected by benefits cuts, wage freezes and public sector job losses. Many of the women who work and are carers are under much greater pressure than their male colleagues. Mark McDonald and Fiona McLeod said that the carers allowance is too low, as did other speakers. In the current time of austerity, SNP colleagues often remind those of us in the Labour Party that when we say that an amount of funding is too low, we must say where the money would come from. Perhaps the SNP members will reflect on that when they next criticise us for calling for improvements. I welcome the initiatives in primary care and the health board information initiatives, but I reiterate the fact that there needs to be a focus on deprived areas where there are substantially more households with a problem. Claire Baker talked a lot about young carers, as did a number of other speakers, and referred to the fact that many of them are supporting people with drug, alcohol and mental health problems. They support not only adults but carers. The childhood that they lose cannot ever be replaced, so what we do for young carers is important. Nanette Milne gave some examples of good support, but there is concern about sustainable funding and some of the care support workers for young people are on very short-term contracts. I ask the minister to examine that. The minister said that the next school census would include identification of young carers. That will be welcome, but I hope that he will go further and require general practitioners to ensure that it is recorded on the notes if a patient is a young carer. The minister referred to the Scottish young carers services alliance website, the toolkit and the young carers authorisation card pilot. Those are all welcome, as is the support for the young carers festival. I particularly welcome the support for carers of disabled children, and I hope that we are better at delivering that than we were when we received £34 million of Barnett consequentials in the previous session of the Parliament. The Labour Party heard many tales of people not getting the care that they needed. Students were referred to as another group of hidden carers. However, as Mark McDonald reminded us, many are not eligible for even the derisory carers allowance. As Claire Baker said, education institutions and their support systems need to recognise the additional strain that such individuals are under when they study. Bob Doris and Claire Baker acknowledged that the delivery of kinship care is crucial. I am sure that the whole Parliament would support the representations of the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy on integrating benefits and allowances and resolving some of the complexities around that—Jackson Carlaw was nodding at that in the Health and Sport Committee yesterday—but the problems are added to by the postcode lottery way in which local authorities apply allowances. How we address that is a difficult matter, as is the change fund. Bill Kidd suggested punishment for local authorities that do not use funds for the intended purposes. We used to call that ring fencing and I am sure that he does not want to return to that. Nevertheless, we need to find a mechanism that holds local authorities to account more than once every four years at the ballot box. The change fund is clearly important to the way in which we move forward. The fact that 18 per cent of the current funds are spent on preventive measures and 19 per cent on acute care merely illustrates the fact that we are still not shifting the balance in the way that we want. Despite reassurances from the minister and others, I hear that funds from the change fund are being used to replace jobs that have been cut. The minister said that the third sector will sign off all delivery change plans, and we will hold him to that. We will also ask the third sector to hold the health boards and local authorities to it on his behalf, because that is crucial. A number of speakers referred to carers’ rights. Margaret McCulloch, George Adam and Mary Fee all said how important it was to clarify and consolidate those rights and marry them up to patient rights. If, as Alison McInnes reported, action on carers’ rights is to be delayed, I hope that the minister will make that clear in his closing speech and explain why the delay is occurring, because those rights are important. Personalisation is clearly important, and a number of members spoke about treating people as equal partners. The debate has been consensual. Siobhan McMahon, Nigel Don and others gave us many examples of caring. Nigel Don said that having two carers is a huge advantage, and I concur with that. There are problems in rural areas that require special attention. Delayed discharge is important. There is no doubt that there is pressure on family members to take people back into the community when they are not fit. I have experienced that. In fact, a social worker recently informed me that the Government had issued a directive that people had to try being cared for in their own homes first. I reminded him that that had to be done only if it was safe and if the person desired it; it was not a directive from the Government. He also said that there was a Government quota on admissions to care homes. That, too, was incorrect. Social workers must tell the truth, even if they are faced with difficulties. The Government’s aspirations are clear and we share them but, if we are not able to translate those aspirations into reality, we shall be letting carers down. None of us would wish that.

I join other members in congratulating Siobhan McMahon on securing the debate, which is worth while. The British Heart Foundation’s heartstart event, which many of us attended recently, was excellent. It raised awareness of the importance and effectiveness of emergency life-support training among Scotland’s youth. Other members have referred to the excellent presentations that we had from teachers and young people in the programmes in North Lanarkshire and Skye in particular. Siobhan McMahon mentioned the extent of the heart problem in Scotland. We should not lose sight of the fact that the number of heart attacks is down by something like 40 per cent over the past 25 years, so we are making progress. However, unfortunately, that progress is not taking us ahead of other countries; we still lag behind. Premature deaths are of particular concern because they continue to occur in significant numbers. The British Heart Foundation Scotland, Chest Heart & Stroke Scotland and Lucky2BHere have made significant strides in their campaign for implementation of emergency life-support training in Scottish secondary schools. It is an invaluable programme that will equip as many of our young people as possible with the simple skills to save lives if they are confronted with such a situation. Every child should leave school with knowledge of the vital skills for saving a life. Beyond that, the support education is designed to teach people not only to keep someone alive until professional help arrives, but to assess an unconscious person, to perform CPR, to respond to choking and serious bleeding and to use a defibrillator. The modern defibrillator is pretty foolproof and is not something to be afraid of, but people are still afraid because they think that it is some high-technology piece of machinery. It is, but it has been simplified to the extent that anyone can use it, and they will not do damage as long as they follow the instructions. That is a critical message that we need to get out. Heartstart notes that the survival rate is under 10 per cent—or even less, depending on where one is; David Stewart mentioned the problems in rural areas. CPR can more than double the chances of survival, and it buys time for professional help to arrive. Beyond that, we need to know where the defibrillators are. It is important that we map locations and use social media with young people so that they can find out immediately where the nearest defibrillator is and obtain it. The ambulance service is already doing that in an area in Argyll, and I hope that the minister will tell us that the mapping will be extended with the Government’s support. Other countries including France, Denmark and Norway have made emergency life-support skills compulsory in school curricula. I understand Hugh Henry’s slight concern with regard to Scotland’s tradition of not making such things compulsory, but when one hears statistics such as the 52 per cent survival rate from witnessed cardiac arrests in Norway, one has to ask what should be compulsory and what should not. I congratulate Madras college in my region, which has trained a number of third-year students and continues to train students. However, I cannot find any schools in the Forth Valley area that are participating—I may just have been short of time for getting that information, but I will raise the issue with the health board’s chief executive tomorrow. It would be very welcome if all MSPs were to encourage their local shops—perhaps eventually a local shop on every street in their constituency—to have a defibrillator. I found it quite easy to persuade the Thistles shopping centre in Stirling to get a defibrillator, and although I am glad to report that it has not been used in the past four years, people nevertheless feel more confident. I welcome the motion, and I thank Siobhan McMahon for giving us this opportunity.

How does Maureen Watt square the fact that the Government repeatedly says that there is a real-terms increase with what she has just said?

I hope that we all agree that the debate is extremely important, even if it has been fractious. It centres on the fact that there is a denial of the reality of what is happening on the part of the SNP. It is not that Labour is saying that budgets are not tight—we know that budgets are tight—but let me add to the facts that have been read out so far. In 2007-08, the gap between expenditure on the health service in England and expenditure on the health service in Scotland was £216. In the coming year, it will be £26 and, in 2013, it will be a negative balance. That is the reality.

That is the reality of the per capita spend. Regardless of what we said or what the SNP purported to say, the reality is that, year on year, the cash increase in the SNP’s budgets in the times that were good was 2.4 per cent less than the increase in England. [Interruption.] You can shout from a sedentary position as often as you like, but the reality is that we had an advantage in health service spend, which you have taken away during the good years.

I am sorry; I am trying to make it clear—

Labour spent considerably more when it was in government in England and Labour would have spent more if it had been in government in Scotland, so we would not have been at the same starting point. I say to the cabinet secretary that the issue is not the amounts of money that are spent. We know that budgets are tight; we also know—every speaker has said this—that in Scotland, unlike in England, productivity has been going up. The fact that our staff are doing a fantastic job is reflected in parts of the SNP amendment. I accept that things have improved—I am not saying that they have not—but that is down to the fact that staff are working extremely hard. We are asking the SNP to join us in starting from a position of reality. The SNP’s complacency in saying that all the cuts are due to change is breathtaking. The reality is that, as of June 2011, the number of nurses, who are critical to front-line delivery, was lower than it was in 2006. [Interruption.] The figures from ISD Scotland show that the number of nurses is down. If ISD is wrong, the cabinet secretary should correct it, but she should not come to the chamber and tell us that the figures that she has published are not correct.

So the numbers are down. You said that the numbers would be up, but they are down. As Hugh Henry and others said, the reality is that NHS staff are coming to our surgeries to tell us their concerns—perhaps it is because we are the Opposition that they have more to tell us than just complaints about car parking charges, which is what the SNP’s back benchers are getting. My postbag is increasingly full of worries and expressions of distress from staff. In the short time that remains, I will deal with some of those. I will start with the position that we are trying to get to: everyone wants us to increase prevention. If we are to improve prevention, we need the number of specialist nurses to increase rather than decrease. The number of specialist nurses who deal with heart failure, whose work prevents readmissions, reduces costs and improves patient quality, has gone down since 2008. The number was 50.5 and it is down to 46. The cabinet secretary might say that that is a reduction of only four, but it is a reduction of 9 per cent. The cabinet secretary can play with figures all day, but the fact remains that, instead of increasing, the number of specialist nurses is decreasing. There have been cuts of 20 per cent in speech and language therapy for adults with learning disabilities. Jim Eadie referred to that yesterday and that is a concern that we share. Argyll and Bute is planning cuts of 50 per cent in its speech and language budget, and there are other cuts. According to a report from the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists, there is a reduction in service, a reduction in budgets and a reducing workforce. Is that not a reality? Are we being fed misinformation? Are we being told the wrong thing? I do not know. The statistics are difficult. We know that the ISD statistics on speech and language do not count frozen posts, maternity leave or family-related leave. They do not reflect the changes in skill mix and they do not expose the long-standing gaps in provision, which go against national guidelines. We have a dearth of good statistics, but those that we have tell a clear story. The Government’s response to Harry Burns’s concern about early years is interesting. The Government’s response is against the background of an increase from 54,000 to 58,000 in the number of births and of prenatal, antenatal and immediately postnatal stages being recognised as crucial to the development of children. It is against the background of increasing recognition of the problems of drug and alcohol misuse and of the recognition by midwives that they do far more child protection work than ever before. It is against the background that twin births are rising and that more older women are having children. Against that background, and with a static neonatal death rate, what has the Government done? It has cut the midwifery intake by 40 per cent. I am sure that the cabinet secretary would say, if she got in, that the Royal College of Nursing agreed to that. To be frank, the RCN did not look at the wider picture. Since I raised the issue in a parliamentary question, midwives have been coming to me. I am getting a lot of mail saying, “We are in real difficulty.” All that we ask is that the Government recognises that. There is a problem. Take the example of radiography, which is one area where there has been a substantial increase, where we have improved things and have improved the skill mix considerably. However, in my own area, NHS Forth Valley, only one radiographer is qualified to read plain films. What happens if she is off sick or goes on holiday? The responsibility goes back to the doctors, but are they not doing other things? Of course they are. They are doing other things, because the skill mix has changed. We are not saying that things are not tight, that things are not difficult and that there are not problems, but we are saying two things. First, in the good years this Government spent less on health, as a proportion, than it received. The reality is that England, which was always behind us in per capita spend, will have a per capita spend greater than Scotland’s in 2013-14. That must be down to the decisions of the SNP Government. No matter what the cabinet secretary says that Labour said or did not say, or would have done or could have done, the SNP is the Government, not us. The reality is that the cabinet secretary has eliminated the per capita spend difference, that there are 1,700 fewer nurses today than there were two years ago and that there are 230 fewer allied health professionals than there were two years ago. That is the reality that she must face up to. She is simply in denial and that should stop, now.

I agree entirely with the point that the member is making. The current Government continued the previous Government’s falls initiative, and falls co-ordinators have been established, but that has tended to be in the health service. Are practices being properly spread out? Is that the member’s experience?

We are all genuinely concerned about it. We had a plan to reduce it to zero in 2008, and that is what happened—it was our plan and our resources—but in 2008, the ministers promised that the numbers would not rise above zero after March 2008. The problem is not only that that has not been fulfilled but that, according to the Audit Scotland report, the numbers of delayed discharges of under six weeks have doubled, so we have gone backwards. We welcome the new promises, but we have been going backwards since 2008.

This has been an important debate. Although it has been slightly acrimonious at times, on the whole it has been consensual. Rehabilitation is important in relation to illness and reablement is important in relation to the maximisation of independence. Maintaining independence, especially in the elderly, is critical. As Malcolm Chisholm said, it is also important that people can return to work or be maintained in work through the healthy working lives initiative, which was established by Labour. The minister gave an excellent description of the problems that we face. Life expectancy has increased enormously, but healthy life expectancy has not increased to the same extent. Sixty per cent of hospital beds are occupied by people who have long-term conditions, which illustrates the challenge that we all agree is facing us. Unlocking funds from the acute sector is critical, as Jim Eadie and Malcolm Chisholm reminded us, and making shifts within £4.3 billion must be a challenge, so we welcome the change fund. The funds that are being drawn together might not be new, but the concept is new and it might serve us well. It is critical for local authorities to be in partnership in that regard but, as Mary Fee and Jackie Baillie emphasised, the voluntary sector must also be fully engaged. I will illustrate that point a little later. Like Jim Eadie, I welcome the change fund’s emphasis on carers and I share his concern about those with learning disabilities who have complex needs but who will benefit most from the required integration. The issue of delayed discharge led to some acrimony in the debate. We all agree that progress has been good. The critical point is to look at where we started from and where we finish, and the SNP’s ambition is not in doubt. As Mary Scanlon said, the move to a two-week target is very welcome, not just because it will save costs but because it will reduce institutionalisation and loss of independence. We are one with the Government on that, but the fact remains that there has been a problem since 2008. Audit Scotland reported a doubling of the numbers whose discharge was delayed for more than six weeks. The figure has not stayed at zero because of the problems that some local authorities face. Many members referred to the partnership between users and carers that is required. We are not talking about something passive but about something active. That partnership must involve a multidisciplinary team of occupational therapists, speech and language therapists, social workers, podiatrists, nurses, dieticians, mental health nurses, psychologists, pharmacists and doctors. They all have to be involved. I welcome the proposal for a further national implementation plan for allied health professionals, against the background of a loss of posts since 2009. That was when the SNP achieved an excellent high point, but 230 posts have gone and others are frozen—although those posts are not included in the posts that have been lost. Band 8 posts are being reduced at the very time when we will need leadership to fulfil the SNP’s ambitions.

I accept that there are more than there were in 2006-07, but we shall see whether that will be the case in a year’s time. The fact remains that numbers are reducing at the very time when the Government’s ambition is to increase the use of reablement and rehabilitation. Malcolm Chisholm remarked on the continuity of policy. The framework that was started by Labour in 2007 was targeted at older people, people who have long-term conditions and people who are returning to or maintaining employment. Following consultation, that framework had six statements, five key actions, a national implementation group and rehabilitation improvement programmes, and local co-ordinator posts were set to be established. I was not able to find a single report from the national implementation group. Does it still exist? What progress has been made? No significant movement has been made to integrate care across Scotland. Indeed, history shows that Mary Scanlon and I sat on the Health and Community Care Committee in the first session of Parliament and called for integration of services. We actually made the joint future programme: we gave money to Perth and Kinross and Tayside health boards to integrate, and although it took them two years, they achieved it through establishing lead commissioning, which is now being proposed again. However, within three years, that integration had broken down. Labour’s ambition was to have national care standards and a national, statutory approach, but not one that created a global agency. Our ambition was to reinvigorate the community health partnerships, which have withered, and the local healthcare co-operatives, of which there were 85; there are now only 40. Primary care physicians and their primary care teams have become disengaged from the process. There has not been integration; rather, there has been disintegration. We need to have a far more vitalised approach. It is not the case that there is not good practice; indeed, many members have given good examples of good practice. Clare Adamson referred to North Lanarkshire. A relative of mine works in the rapid discharge team there. It is highly effective in getting people out of hospital quickly and in providing ablement. She described other initiatives that provide continuity beyond that, preventing emergency admissions. She also mentioned the use of intermediate care units. We stopped the reduction in community hospitals that occurred until 1997. They have a critical role to play. Clare Adamson said important things about early work to prevent falls as opposed to work after falls. Such early work is critical. She also reminded us that domestic sprinklers may be critical in keeping people—and their neighbours—safely in their own homes. Mark McDonald gave examples of collaborative rehabilitation using adapted flats in Aberdeen, and Malcolm Chisholm referred to a programme in Lothian under the leadership of Peter Gabbitas, whose appointment was made jointly by the City of Edinburgh Council and Lothian NHS Board. That has led to teams of nurses and social care workers providing six weeks of intensive support. Mark McDonald reported on enablement in Tayside.

I cannot, as my time is running out. I want to add something about voluntary organisations. Physical activity is a critical part of reablement for some people. There are 160 therapeutic horticultural projects in Scotland, most of which are voluntary or social enterprise projects. The voluntary sector is critical. I refer to the example of Penumbra’s involvement in the housing sector. Members have said that the work of Care and Repair is vital. The organisation is undoubtedly under attack. I attended its national conference this year, at which it indicated that it was being cut. From his extensive experience, Dennis Robertson referred to the fact that small changes in lighting and décor, for example, are sometimes needed. Rhoda Grant and other members referred to the need for more e-health and telecare services. I pay tribute to Helen Eadie for her work in the important field of musculoskeletal disorders. Jim Eadie talked about a programme in the Borders. Some 38,000 people in Scotland have musculoskeletal disorders, which are critical in respect of returning to work. I pay tribute to Kevin Stewart. He was absolutely right that the Welfare Reform Bill is very important, although otherwise I pretty well disagreed with what he said. We need to consider the effects that the Welfare Reform Bill will have on all our shared ambitions. We agree on the route map, and we pay tribute to the Government for its ambition and hope that it is successful. However, we need to see effective leadership at all levels. The centre needs to spread good practice and manage integrated care, backed by integrated resource framework budgeting, which no member has mentioned. That demonstrates where areas are succeeding and where others are not. I welcome the opportunity that I have had to speak in the debate.

In 2001, the Labour Government, in trying to do what the SNP is now trying to do, set up the joint future group. Does it still exist and, if so, will it deal with the spreading of good practice that the minister rightly talks about?

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing an important debate, and I commend the NHS Forth Valley eWARD scheme, to which she referred. It is quite disappointing that the majority of NHS boards have not collected and held information on prescription medicine waste, or evaluated its cost to them. The findings of Margaret Mitchell’s freedom of information request offer the Scottish Parliament an opportunity to be innovative in implementing effective national policies for collecting information, minimising waste and improving medicine management. The NHS Forth Valley eWARD scheme serves as a model for all health boards. Its capital costs have been recouped already, as a result of the destocking that it has allowed. The improvement in patient safety because of the data flow and tracking system, which means that pharmacists are not constantly interrupted by phone calls from the ward, has been an important element of the scheme. It has also allowed for the integration of medicines that are brought in by a patient, which can then be used or not used. If they are used, they are simply topped up so that, when the patient goes out, all their medicines are at the same level and there is not a discrepancy. That co-ordination with what happens in the community is the third element of an extremely important scheme, which I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy has seen. I expect that the minister has seen it, too, as it is in his constituency. Community Pharmacy Scotland supports the innovative practice of transferring discharge information to pharmacists, to which Gordon MacDonald referred. That is important, because the sharing of electronic information fosters the practising of safe medicine. Community Pharmacy Scotland credits the reductions in waste that have been made to the sharing of information between hospitals and community pharmacies. Pharmacists will not supply medicines that have changed if they are made aware that a prescription was stopped or altered during a hospital admittance. There may be outstanding prescriptions that may be dispensed if the issue is not dealt with properly, so electronic sharing of information is critical. Mention has been made of the University of York study, which quantified prescription medicine waste in England as amounting to about £300 million a year. Medicine waste Scotland estimates that, in Scotland, prescription medicine waste costs about £44 million each year. We can all suggest what that could be used for. I suggest that some of it could be used to provide some of the newer drugs that we need for patients, which are expensive. With cuts in Government spending and the provision of free prescriptions in Scotland, it has never been more crucial for the Scottish Government to recognise the cost of medicine waste and seek a solution. I hope that we will hear something from the minister on that. The Welsh Government has recently implemented a discharge medicine review that is similar to the NHS Forth Valley eWARD scheme and has also implemented a policy that is designed to ensure that medicine information is transferred between the secondary and primary care services. The role of pharmacists and their access to patient records is pivotal in that regard. They should have access to electronic records, but at the moment they do not. However, I suggest that that happens only with the explicit permission of the patient. Another possibility for Scotland is not the French scheme but the Inter Care scheme, which was referred to by Margaret Mitchell. Inter Care is a UK-registered charity that collects selected prescription medicines from registered GP practices and reallocates them to more than 100 health centres in six sub-Saharan African countries. I suggest that the Government considers the possibility of taking a much more active role in that regard. A pilot that has been run in a number of practices in Lothian—the minister might speak about it later—has demonstrated the capacity of the system to achieve savings at all levels. In 1980, I began my life in committee work in the health service as the chairman of the pharmaceutical liaison committee in Forth Valley Health Board, collecting unused medicine. That amounted to tonnes, which were then incinerated. I welcome the motion and I acknowledge that we need to do more to solve this major problem.

I welcome the debate. This Parliament is accused of having meaningless debates, but this is certainly not one of them. The issue is important and I want at the outset to acknowledge not only the Government’s role over the past few years, which has been exemplary, but also Keith Brown’s personal experience and commitment. It is not often that an Opposition member can say that; I am pleased to be able to do so, because I think that a great job has been done, although I have some minor criticisms—members would expect nothing less. As the minister said, there are 400,000 ex-service personnel, whose ranks are joined by another 2,500 every year. Beyond them, of course, are their families. There is probably not a family in Scotland that has not had a veteran in it or in the extended family. I was born during the second world war and I understand that my father was killed on active service. I was adopted into a family. In my adoptive family, my grandfather was gassed at Ypres in the first world war and my uncle was killed at Monte Cassino in the second world war; throughout my childhood, I was aware of the marked effect that that had on my cousin, his son. It is not an untypical story. Current and recent wars have increased awareness of the role of the armed forces and have, I believe, substantially increased their standing in the public mind. That is evidenced by the response to armed forces day and the response to the various parades that the armed forces have conducted throughout my constituency, many of which I have attended. As I said, the Government has made a good start. I particularly praise the veterans fund and its encouragement of control, self-reliance and development, which has been welcome. The deaths in Iraq and Afghanistan and, previously, in Northern Ireland will obviously have had a profound effect on the families of the men concerned. A growing number of personnel are seriously affected in a variety of ways. Improvised explosive devices are a horrible aspect of current wars. They cause serious damage, such as loss of limbs and damage to sensory systems. I very much welcome the fact that, as a result of that horror, there have been advances in medical treatment of trauma and in development of prosthetics, in which Scotland has played an active part. That work has benefited not only those who have been injured on active service, but others who have trauma-related problems. The University of Strathclyde, among others, has made a significant contribution in that regard, and the unit in NHS Lothian, which the minister mentioned, has played an effective part in the practical application of such treatment. It was partly in recognition of such serious disabilities that the Labour Government increased considerably the compensation package, which I understand is now being curtailed somewhat. The difficulties around that package are regrettable. I very much welcome the proposal at UK level to legislate for what has until now been a voluntary military covenant. The bill is to include healthcare, education, housing and inquests, but it will also include power for the UK Government to add additional measures if it feels that to do so would be appropriate. It is particularly welcome that the covenant will be subject to an annual report to the UK Parliament by the relevant secretary of state and that, additionally, there will be an independent review group. That will mean that it will be a case not just of the Government saying what it is doing, but of the independent review group saying whether what the Government is doing is appropriate. The UK Labour Party’s desire for pensions to be included is particularly relevant, given the move from use of the retail prices index to the consumer prices index. That may be justifiable during the debt crisis, but making it a permanent move will, in the long term, remove hundreds of thousands of pounds from some of our most seriously disabled veterans, so the issue needs to be looked at again. We also want compensation and mental health provision to be included. Even if a person is not directly affected at the time, witnessing the horrific events that take place can have an effect later—sometimes many years later. During my time as an addiction consultant in West Lothian during the four years for which I was out of the Parliament, I was struck by the number of veterans whom I saw who were suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder but who presented with problems to do with drugs and alcohol, which they were using to ameliorate their symptoms. Recognition of that issue in the addictions field is important. The support that I got for my patients at Hollybush house was invaluable, and I acknowledge the additional support that the Government has provided to that unit and, in particular, its outreach service, which is a welcome development. My colleague Margaret McDougall will deal with the matter of the Ministry of Defence hospital unit in Scotland, issues to do with combat stress treatment and the issue of remote and rural resident veterans and how their services can be handled. Neil Bibby will refer to Erskine, which is another valuable resource that we have in Scotland. I am concerned that we do not pay enough attention to the consequences of leaving the services. Of necessity, the services are highly institutionalised organisations. Individuals within the organisations are supported and protected, but when they leave they are on their own, except for the organisations that support them. Mark Griffin will enlarge on that. As the minister indicated, housing remains problematic for some veterans. Elaine Murray will talk about a local housing association in that regard. I am proud of the fact that when it was in government, the Labour Party built or refurbished 40,000 dwellings for serving personnel. However, that does not address the issue of those who have left the services. In all of this we must not forget the effect on families and on children. The existence of voluntary network support organisations can be of great help, but as with the veterans themselves, we should consider being more proactive in ensuring that if help is needed, the contacts have already been established, if only in a very light-touch way. It is appropriate to discuss supported employment today, given that Poppyscotland, which is the Parliament’s charity, supports veterans who work with it. Scotland faces the potential closure of the eight Remploy factories as a result of the UK Government’s response to the Sayce report. Here comes my criticism, minister. I regret that the Scottish Government did not appear to respond to the Sayce report and failed to respond to the UK consultation on the report before 16 October. A substantial amount of supported employment grew from the first world war and it remains important to veterans. I was surprised that with everything that the Government has done and with its focus on the issue, it did not respond. There are many examples of work that is being done. There are therapy and rehabilitation developments, including a centre in Midlothian. There is also a project that is close to my heart for various reasons, which is the Gardening Leave charity which was started by Anna Baker Cresswell in Ayrshire. Therapeutic gardening is not a new concept—indeed, there are about 160 therapeutic gardening organisations in Scotland under the umbrella organisation Trellis, which is based in Perth in my constituency—but its application to veterans with combat stress is new in the United Kingdom. The approach was developed in the United States to help Vietnam veterans and has been of great value. I pay tribute to Anna Baker Cresswell and to the current extension of her work; I believe that her work has a valuable role to play. I pay tribute to the poppy project that is run by Gardening Leave. The project is creating Scotland’s only collection of poppy varieties, which is to be dedicated to the fallen of conflicts that tend to be forgotten, such as those in Malaysia and Aden, and others to which the minister referred. Each veteran will find their own way; the important thing is the contacts. I welcome the debate and what the Government has done. I hope that it will not be too late for the Government to look closely at how Parliament responds to the issue of supported employment, which I believe is of considerable importance. As we approach remembrance day, we should all feel proud of the contribution that service personnel have made and continue to make. As a Parliament, we should today reconfirm our determination to recognise and support veterans. This is not a party issue but one on which the whole Parliament can unite. We support the Government’s motion. I move amendment S4M-01218.1, after “physically” to insert: “; notes that veterans of the regular and territorial services are affected and recognises the importance of supporting the families and children of all of those veterans; further recognises the historic and continuing value of supported employment for some disabled veterans”.

Will the minister consider whether the anti-stigma campaign that the Government funds could specifically deal with stigma in relation to veterans, to try to improve the situation that several members have mentioned?

I welcome that interplay between Alex Fergusson and the cabinet secretary. I ask the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to look at another licensing issue. The guidance that the Scottish Grocers Federation has received from its legal advisers indicates that the discounting ban can, in effect, be disregarded in respect of multipacks. Will he join the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy in relooking at the recent legislation on discounting, the spirit of which is clearly being broken by the retailers?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will investigate claims that patients are being offered unrealistic surgery appointments in England in order to circumvent waiting times targets. (S4F-00205)

I thank the First Minister for that most helpful reply in resolving the situation. The new ways waiting times initiative, which was actually an initiative from Labour that was then implemented fully by the Scottish National Party and is therefore a scheme to which both parties have joined up, has resulted in more than 100,000 patients being removed from the waiting lists every year. Many of those have been removed for valid reasons, but—

My question to the First Minister is this: given the large numbers that are being removed from the waiting lists and the evidence that the NHS Lothian case shows of new gaming, which led to the problem of hidden waiting lists, will he ask the cabinet secretary to undertake a review of the new ways waiting times initiative to ensure that no gaming is taking place in other areas of Scotland?

I welcome the good statement by the cabinet secretary. The case in Crieff to which she referred involved a constituent of mine and of Gordon Banks. Will the cabinet secretary provide a guarantee that the standard operating procedure will not in any way involve a return to one-person-manned ambulances as a way of coping with the breaks issue? Will she also look at ensuring that all publicly accessible defibrillators are known to the Ambulance Service, so that if an appropriate event occurs SAS can tell the member of the public who called 999 where the nearest defibrillator is? Such an approach is taken in a number of areas but is not yet taken throughout Scotland.

I was.

I welcome the fact that the Conservative Party has raised what is an important issue. Although it could have been an emotive debate, it has been conducted in a sober manner. That is only as it should be. As the cabinet secretary, Jackie Baillie, Mary Fee and Mark McDonald have all said, and as others have alluded to, early diagnosis and treatment must be our priority. We have agreed that, and the funding has been put in place. We may slightly disagree on how that funding is being applied, but nevertheless that is the priority, which is very important. As with everything, we must start with the needs of the patient. New medicines for cancer are in the pipeline—possibly eight more this year, and many more to come—but new medicines for other conditions will also be in the pipeline. The Scottish Medicines Consortium has served us extremely well. As Alison McInnes and Malcolm Chisholm indicated, it has been highly praised and internationally accepted for its speedy work. The industry has also been happy with the SMC and the interactive approach that it has adopted, apart from some problems around orphan and ultra-orphan drugs. We cannot ignore the fact that, unlike the equivalent situation in England, SMC approval does not mean automatic availability. In Scotland, we have the additional hurdle of 14 area drug and therapeutics committees, which can make different decisions on licensed and approved drugs. As my colleague Jackie Baillie said, it can take between one and—in at least one instance—16 months to introduce an approved drug. That variation is unacceptable, and it is questionable as to whether the system is fit for purpose. Why is that relevant? If not approved by the Scottish Medicines Consortium, a medicine enters what was known as the exceptional needs system. If the area drug and therapeutics committee does not approve a medicine that is licensed and approved by the SMC, it also enters that system. The approach in England of a transitional fund followed by value-based pricing is wrong. The fund will almost certainly be inadequate. The number of drugs in the pipeline will outstrip demand and England will be faced yet again with the same problems that we face. A further reason why the fund is inadequate is that, as many members have said, it discriminates between cancer and other conditions. New drugs will be developed for many non-cancer conditions. Will they, too, be given specific funds? Discrimination, as opposed to some form of clinical rationing, will not be tolerated for long. As George Adam and Kevin Stewart indicated, discrimination could be a major problem. England has not eliminated the regional variation. The equity to which Alex Johnstone referred is not occurring in the cancer drugs fund in England. We need to look at that. Is there a problem? Yes—there is a problem, if Scots are obtaining substantially fewer cancer drugs than people elsewhere. A petition led to chief executive letter 17 in 2010. The new system of individual patient treatment requests, or IPTR, came into effect only in April. I have a number of questions for the Government about the IPTR system. Is it in place across all 14 health boards? Is the whole process, and not just rejection and acceptance, transparent to the public and individuals? Is it fair to the individual patient, their family and their clinician? Is it uniform and consistent both within individual boards and across Scotland, or is it yet another postcode lottery? To whom is the system accountable in the community? Is it accountable to Parliament? Do the 14 health boards have the capacity to consider the complex issues involved? Is the membership of the panels broadly similar? Is the community represented? Is the cost-sharing mechanism adequate? I hope that those questions will be answered openly and transparently.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive whether negotiations have been concluded and a date set for the transfer of medical nursing and pharmacy services from the Scottish Prison Service to the national health service. (S4O-00230)

Is the cabinet secretary prepared to publish the details of the funding arrangements and the precise services that are being transferred to the NHS for each health board area? Subsequent to the transfer, will the Scottish Prison Service have a general memorandum of understanding with the NHS, and will each prison have a local service level agreement with the NHS to ensure that the new service provides effective services to offenders, particularly those with mental health problems, learning disabilities, personality disorders and drug and alcohol problems?

I understand why the minister quotes percentages all the time, but the hard figures would be a little more meaningful and would be helpful.

I declare that I am a fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists and I have an honorary professor appointment in psychology at the University of Stirling. I agree with the minister that there is not enough time in the debate to cover in detail the full panoply of mental health. My party and I very much welcome the consultation, but I gently point out to the minister that his referral to the suicide rate in his written introduction to the consultation is slightly misleading because, as he sort of hinted, the suicide rate is again rising after a prolonged slow fall. The consultation document refers to 14 high-level outcomes and has 35 questions, but it focuses on four particular areas. I want to cover some of those areas, although colleagues will go into greater detail. The Government has set new targets for psychological therapies. That is welcome, but I cannot but reflect that the dropping of the target to reduce antidepressant medicine levels perhaps came just in time to slightly alleviate the Government’s embarrassment about the very large rise in overall prescribing that has occurred. No matter what the minister’s explanation is about daily doses and so on, antidepressant medicines are still being used extensively for the treatment of moderate to mild depression rather than only for moderate to severe depression. The inability to provide adequate numbers of psychological therapies at present, which I understand is a capacity issue, means that those medicines are still being used more extensively than they should. My colleague Mary Fee will have a bit more to say on that. Dementia has been quite rightly identified by the cabinet secretary and the Government as a particular area of concern, and I welcome the work to achieve early diagnosis and good information for patients and carers. I applaud the continuing work of the world-class, internationally renowned dementia services development centre at the University of Stirling. The information, support and training that it provides make a major contribution to the management of dementia in Scotland, the United Kingdom and beyond. However, I am concerned that the impact of this centre of excellence could be diluted by spreading the funding to develop expertise to other Scottish universities that, hitherto, have had little expertise in the field. I am not convinced that new players will be able to deliver the training that is vital to achieve the response to dementia in general hospital settings that the minister and I both want. The suicide reduction target towards which some progress was being made is now in serious danger of failure. I wonder how long it will be before that target is also dropped. I have made freedom of information inquiries to find out whether the removal of ring fencing from the choose life programme has led to a reduction in funding, and indeed it has. The Government has a duty to at least audit that in light of increases in suicide rates. Some local authority expenditure is being replaced by NHS expenditure but, nevertheless, the fact is that that money was given to the local authorities for that purpose. Attempts were made to reduce the funding in the Western Isles which, in view of its small population, has one of the highest suicide rates. That is of concern. According to evidence from Professor O’Connor at the University of Stirling, self-harm in teenagers is running at 14 per cent. Its prevention requires a whole-system approach, so I will concentrate much of the remainder of my speech on early years, childhood, adolescence and young adulthood, which are stages at which, as the Government’s paper says, we need to respond quickly and improve short and long-term outcomes. We have had two expert reports that indicate clearly what the Government’s general direction of travel should be. The Christie commission clearly pointed to a major shift to prevention and was in line with the work of the chief medical officer, Sir Harry Burns, on early years and children. I believe that, with limited resources, it is necessary to focus any new resources on children and young people We need to tackle the issue of mental health in the antenatal and post-natal stages. Issues ranging from serious and enduring illness to problems with drugs and alcohol and post-natal depression all contribute, if untreated, to a poor start for the child. At present, mothers are discharged from supervision in the post-natal phase at around eight weeks, whereas post-natal depression maximises at twelve weeks. That is a problem. Treating those adults—ensuring not only that any mental illness is diagnosed but that the mothers achieve the highest level of mental wellbeing—is critical to a good start for the children. We know that about 125,000 young people in Scotland experience mental health problems that interfere with their daily lives. How many of those cases could be prevented if the measures that I have outlined were put in place? I believe that four groups should be given greater prominence in the strategy. The first is looked-after children, around 50 per cent of whom will have a mental health problem. That is a significant area. As we know, the number of looked-after children has grown from just over 11,000 to nearly 15,000. It is an increasing problem for us. The second group is children of offenders in custody, who are at particular risk. The third group is pupils in primary settings who face general familial problems, rather than those problems that require the intervention of the specialist child and adolescent mental health services. The fourth group is young offenders. Along with Barnardo’s and others, the charity PIace2Be focuses on preventive work in primary schools in deprived areas, encouraging problem-solving skills and providing a place to talk. In the schools where the charity has intervened, its services are used by 70 per cent of the children annually. It also supports the teachers and parents, where appropriate. That early identification prevents child and adolescent mental health services, which are undercapacity, from having to deal with the problems that would develop if a situation were left alone. I believe that the Government should establish clear targets and put in place systems to measure the outcomes for the most disadvantaged children and young people in general terms as well as the outcomes for those accessing CAMH and pre-CAMH services. The commitment in “Towards a Mentally Flourishing Scotland: Policy and Action Plan 2009-2011” was that “NHS Scotland will work with key stakeholders to develop a set of national indicators for children and young people’s mental wellbeing, mental health problems and related contextual factors”— all of which are relevant to the area that I have just discussed. Will the minister tell us whether that work is complete and whether it has been published? The fourth group that I mentioned is young offenders. If the Government is looking for efficiency savings, it might want to address that area, because research estimates that those in contact with the criminal justice system are three times more likely than those in the general population to have a mental health problem. If we address the problems with young offenders in particular, we will be able to prevent people from going into prison, which will reduce our costs. I visited Cornton Vale last week and found that many of the young people there had mental health problems. I was also told that many of them abused alcohol. There is a lack of screening for and detection of such mental health problems at present, which needs to be addressed. I know that there are problems of capacity in CAMH services, which is why the 18-week target is set for 2014, but it is not acceptable that children have to wait 18 weeks for treatment. I know that the Government agrees and I appreciate the difficulties that it faces. Students’ mental health is important, so I welcome the emphasis on it in “Towards a Mentally Flourishing Scotland”. I welcome the fact that 200 students and staff have now been trained in the think positive programme and that 10 universities and colleges have signed up to the healthy body healthy mind awards in recognition of the importance of sport and exercise. Siobhan McMahon will talk a bit about that, as well as about health inequalities. As far as mental health in minority groups is concerned, I think that addressing mental health in the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community is important. I hope that that will be part of the see me programme in future, and I ask the minister to confirm in summing up whether it will be. I ask him also to undertake discussion with the higher and further education sector and the NHS to make sure that counselling services in colleges and universities are not cut, because they are vital to promoting good health. I do not have time to look at drugs and alcohol today, but I want to contrast the Government’s approach on drugs, where we have a cross-party consensus and are moving forward almost as one—there is slight criticism, because progress is slow, but we are nevertheless on the same pathway—and the approach on alcohol, where we do not seem to have a meeting of minds at all. I hope that the alcohol bill will be broad enough to allow others to make a significant contribution. The minister mentioned smoking. Given that 80 per cent of people with schizophrenia smoke and there are high levels of smoking among people with other severe and enduring mental illnesses, I hope that the move to smoke-free zones in hospitals will happen. I praise the state hospital, which is the only hospital that has achieved smoke-free status overall. I will conclude as I began, by welcoming the consultation and expressing this party’s support on a range of issues, on which we will work with the Government. We will also continue to scrutinise closely what is happening, given the need to move to prevention at a time when mental health services are under enormous pressure and are being subjected to the same sort of cuts as the rest of the health service. I move amendment S4M-00949.2, to insert at end: “and recognises that the strategy should embrace action to support positive mental health in the community and in employment and seek to invest in preventative spending and protect local mental health services from cuts that impact adversely on the local community.”

I thank the minister for allowing me to intervene. We will be happy to take up his kind offer, as we wish to make a positive contribution to this meaningful consultation.

The figure of 48 was a reduction, as the minister said. However, the Royal College of Psychiatrists has been talking about a figure nearer 80, so 48 may not be adequate. Will the minister give us an assurance that the figures do not represent an increase on the year before the year for which he provided the figure? In other words, are we following an upward and then a downward trend? It would be reassuring if the trend was steadily downward. Will the minister give us an assurance that those who are admitted to an adult ward are admitted on the basis of appropriateness? If it is not appropriate, there should be an immediate and automatic referral to the Mental Welfare Commission, so that we can keep abreast of this issue. I know that, as much as I do, the minister has concerns about this.

I congratulate James Dornan on securing the debate. It is interesting that the BMA has repeated its statistic of 5,500 general practitioner consultations a day but says that that equates to 1.4 million consultations annually, at a cost of £28 million. It is not at all clear to me where James Dornan got his figures from. When the BMA originally published the statistic, it acknowledged that it was based on 3 per cent of practices and should be treated with caution. I agree; a study that is based on 127 consultations across the whole country should be treated with considerable caution. However, the motion throws caution to the four winds. Nigel Hawkes, of Straight Statistics, who I think has e-mailed most members, accused the BMA of abusing statistics to create a moral panic to justify a minimum unit price. He went on to say that the trends are in the right direction, which confounds the Sheffield modelling. There is no doubt that Scotland has a significant problem, which we all have a duty to try to tackle. The Government has a majority in the Parliament—plus the backing of the Liberals—so it will achieve minimum unit pricing. However, I strongly urge it to do two things. First, the University of Sheffield should be invited to remodel its data on the basis of the most recent statistics, to ascertain whether the model produces the results retrospectively. The evidence is that that is not the case, and it ill behoves us to introduce a measure that could be misleading if the figures do not prove that the outcomes are correct. In the latest brief from Scottish health action on alcohol problems, discounting and its effects are compounded with the effect of a minimum price—albeit at only 40p. Given that the discounting ban will have a greater effect than a minimum unit price of 40p will have, it is important that evidence that we collect when minimum unit pricing comes in shows that the measure has been effective, before we herald it across the world. Secondly, I hope that members agree that it will be important to have a prospective randomised controlled trial. That will be perfectly feasible, because Scotland will introduce the measure and England will not do so. It will be possible to examine harmful and hazardous drinkers in the two contexts, to determine whether minimum unit pricing is having an effect, given that most of the other variables will be common to both contexts.

The Health and Sport Committee in the previous session of the Parliament took evidence from a number of people in Canada, where there is an absolute Government monopoly. I do not think that even this Government is proposing that there should be a Government monopoly on sales. In addition, social responsibility pricing, which is what happens in Canada, is not identical to minimum unit pricing. I have always said that the arguments are balanced. There is not an absolute yes or an absolute no. However, the Government has failed to answer this point: minimum unit pricing affects only the lowest three income deciles; it does not affect the majority of hazardous drinkers—hazardous drinkers, not harmful drinkers—who are to be found in the top 30 per cent. The argument is about culture—James Dornan’s motion is correct in that regard. We have not answered the question on why the clear and undisputed increase in consumption that followed reduction in price in Finland was not mirrored by a proportionate decrease in consumption when the price increased again. We do not know why there has been a decrease in consumption in France from a level that was equal to the current Scottish level to a level that is half the current Scottish level, although the price of alcohol in France has not gone up. There are issues to do with price that make the matter much more complicated than is suggested by the simplistic approach that has been adopted.

Will the member take an intervention?

Under the Patient Rights (Scotland) Act 2011, we have introduced a new system of complaints for the public. Following on from the Mid Staffordshire inquiry, what steps will the cabinet secretary take to ensure that all national health service staff in Scotland understand that they have an absolute responsibility to report concerns about practice that might affect patient safety? Has the Government considered introducing a whistleblowers helpline for staff to contact if they feel that their concerns are not being addressed by local management?

I hear what the minister is saying, but there has been a joint futures unit in the Scottish Government since we set it up in 2001 to integrate care. Is that unit still in existence? What is it doing? Where is the compelling vision coming from in practice?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The debate has been a bit like the curate’s egg: there have been some very good speeches from members of all parties, but others have been—frankly—somewhat below standard. We need to start by looking at similar situations overseas. For example, Sweden went through its banking crisis in the 1990s, a consequence of which was, we now know, a significant deterioration in care of the elderly. That is what this Parliament faces, and it is the Government’s responsibility. You must make the choices that you must make within the budget that you have. We cannot accept your amendment, because there is a factual error in it. It states that the budget to the Scottish Parliament decreased in the last two years. That is just incorrect. In a good speech, Jim Eadie talked about the efforts to achieve joint futures—I think that Dennis Robertson also referred to that.

There was no reduction in the budget for Scotland in the last two years of the Labour Administration. That is a fact. Turning to the question of integration, I will not get into the debate about the national care service just now, because that is for another day. However, I have to say to you that your suggestion that we wanted to create a super-quango is completely and utterly erroneous. If you looked at our manifesto, you would see that it was all about local democracy and community health partnerships. So, I think that you just—

Sorry—my apologies, Presiding Officer. To return to the question of integration, Perth and Kinross was the first area to integrate services back in 2001, but it has just been given a change fund to achieve integration for the second time. The community health partnerships in Glasgow attempted to achieve integration, but they fell apart. Our point is that there have been attempts by us—and I am sure that there have also been attempts by this Government—to integrate, but they simply have not been successful. In the current climate, the attempt is even less likely to be successful, unless it is underpinned by a new commissioning framework.

I am sorry—I do not have time to take any more interventions. Although the third sector is critical to how we move forward, the lack of a true partnership with it is extremely evident. Dennis Robertson mentioned the 60 per cent cut to training budgets and Duncan McNeil referred to the 79 per cent of the third sector that has been subject to a pay freeze. Such cuts are hugely significant to the sector. Other colleagues have already dealt with the issue of Quarriers but, after 150 years, the organisation is clearly facing a difficult situation if its dedicated staff feel that they have to go on strike. However, it is not alone. Epilepsy Scotland has reduced its monthly running costs by about 30 per cent from £90,000 to £60,000; even though every single member has taken a pay cut, it is still in very grave difficulties because of the cuts that have been imposed. The cuts range from the 5 per cent that has been imposed on local authorities to more than 20 per cent. Why should the third sector have to bear much more of those cuts than other areas? Despite what Derek Mackay might have said, the cuts to the local authorities are quite real; indeed, Mr Mackay must know that. However, they vary across the country. Argyll and Bute is facing a 7.3 per cent cut, while Stirling and Clackmannanshire, which are quite different councils, are getting the same level of cuts. That is just not fair. Mary Scanlon’s comments about the variation in charges are absolutely valid.

I am sorry—I just do not have the time to take an intervention. Because the minister ran over by a minute and a half, my own time has been cut. Members: Aw. The massive variation in charges has been going on for a long time and we accept that the issue needs to be looked at closely as part of the overall examination of the situation. However, as Jackie Baillie pointed out, there are substantial variations in charges between authorities that are very close to each other. The hourly rate in Angus, for example, is £22.10; in Glasgow, around £16; and in West Lothian, £7.76. Those variations are huge. The Welsh Assembly has capped charges and I suggest that the chamber look very carefully at doing the same. We should not stop all localism, Mr Mackay—[Interruption.] I am sorry for addressing Mr Mackay, Presiding Officer. [Laughter.] We should not stop all localism but charges need to be capped because some of them have become quite excessive. [Interruption.]

I would welcome it if they were going to have a sensible conversation—but I doubt it. I have to say, though, that Duncan McNeil welcomed the Government’s ban on reverse tendering; however, it has not gone far enough. There is still a race to the bottom. The promotion of low pay is bound to affect quality and such a situation cannot be tolerated. If we are going to ensure dignity in the care of our elderly, we have to provide decent pay, conditions and training, and that can only happen through the introduction of a new framework. In the minute that remains, I stress that we must have a new contract with the third sector. The Government has said that that will be introduced through its change fund, but the fact is that the third sector is really suffering. If the Government does not recognise that now, it will reap a significant reward for that later. After all, in the care home sector, the number of trained nurses has fallen from 34 per cent to 25 per cent. How can that happen without a change in quality? It simply cannot because the complex needs of those who go into care homes are increasing, not decreasing. We must examine the issue very carefully. We do not deny the financial difficulties of the situation. Nevertheless, the time has come to open up the debate and introduce a new national framework that respects and has a genuine partnership with the third sector. I commend our motion to the chamber and welcome Mary Scanlon’s amendment.

The cabinet secretary stated that two homes that are owned and operated by Southern Cross are unlikely to have new arrangements in place by the stated date. Which two homes are they? What are the separate arrangements for them to which the cabinet secretary referred? Can she now give an undertaking to all the residents in all the homes that continuity is going to mean that they will not have to move because of the changes that are being made?

Taking the example that the member has highlighted, I point out that tobacco companies, for example, take us to court to delay the implementation of legislation. What would happen if the Supreme Court did not exist? Would the matter not go to Strasbourg? If so, would that not result in much longer delays?

I, like many others, pay tribute to Lord Rodger of Earlsferry, who shared with me a love of the east neuk; indeed, he derived his title from that very area. Rightly considered to be one of the finest legal minds of his generation, he made a profound and outstanding contribution to the Scottish legal system and the Scottish legal profession is poorer for his passing. I want to consider the role that the UK Supreme Court should play in Scots law. Some of the comments made by the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice have been unhelpful; to be frank, I think that some have been disgraceful and certainly amount to nothing more than constitutional wrangling with an incorrect understanding of the real issues. I accept that, historically, only civil appeals from Scotland went to the House of Lords and that the final court of criminal appeal was always the High Court of Justiciary. However, one should not be surprised that, with the advent in 1999 of devolution and a new legislature and Executive, there needed to be a fundamental shift in the legal system to accommodate such things. It remains the case that the Scottish Government is accountable to a legislature with limited powers; as a result, it is more limited in power than the UK Government, which is accountable to a sovereign legislature. Under section 57 of the Scotland Act 1998, the Scottish Government is prohibited from carrying out any act that would be incompatible with the ECHR. Originally, an appeal on such grounds would have been made to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, but that responsibility was transferred to the UK Supreme Court when it was set up. I do not think that such a change was as groundbreaking as Gil Paterson has suggested. Given that the judges who were on the judicial committee are the same as those who now sit on the Supreme Court, the power that is being wielded over the Scottish Government is not new, and the only conclusion that we can draw is that the Government is behaving in this particular manner because of the Cadder appeal and, more recently, the appeal by Nat Fraser. However, I believe that, instead of accusing the Supreme Court judges of being “ambulance chasers” and threatening to cut funding, we should engage positively with a system that protects the human rights of everyone in this country. In our manifesto, Scottish Labour pledged to set up an audit of Scots criminal law to ensure that we never have to repeat the rush of panic legislation, costly compensation claims and mass appeals that followed the Cadder judgment. I hope that the Scottish Government will take that plan forward. We support the European convention on human rights. Some members seem to be implying that they do not. I am sure that that is not their intention. Those rights have made a huge contribution to justice throughout the 46 jurisdictions in Europe, which remain distinct.

I will answer that question a little later. The ECHR has made a huge contribution to justice throughout the 46 different jurisdictions in Europe and has established an appropriate set of principles. There is a requirement for consistency across vast areas of the European jurisdiction. Scottish Labour welcomes the McCluskey report’s support for the Supreme Court to continue to hear criminal appeals on human rights grounds as “a necessary means for securing ‘consistency’ throughout the distinct jurisdictions within the union that constitutes the UK.” We accept that there is room for improvement and we hope that the McCluskey group now engages in much wider consultation on how that can be achieved before it makes its final report. Far from encroaching on the independence of Scots law, that approach simply means that the ECHR is one of the latest improving influences on our unique—but not isolated—legal system, which has evolved from a huge number of different sources and traditions. Indeed, as Lord Hope pointed out, Scotland’s early exclusion of evidence elicited under torture demonstrates the way in which Scots law has evolved over the years; presumably, it will continue to evolve. Some SNP members have implied that our legal system is preserved in aspic. I disagree. That was not the case when it said that we should not take evidence elicited under torture and it will continue to evolve and to recognise the ECHR.

I think that it was Professor Neil Walker who talked about interpenetration between the English and Scottish systems, rather than one dominating the other—one does not tell the other what to do. It is about retaining our uniqueness while nevertheless accepting that there will be a degree of alignment and interpenetration. I understand fully that there is understandable public concern, referred to by other members, about the uncomfortable imposition of coherence associated with the ECHR, and the apparent greater protection given to the accused than to the victim. While we probably all feel that to some extent, it is not an excuse for attacking the system. The first act of this Parliament was to deal with the Ruddle case. As those members who were here at the time will remember, the case presented us with the serious prospect of serious and violent offenders being released from our state hospital. It was the incorporation of the ECHR that led to that situation, and a number of uncomfortable decisions have been made since. However, that does not make these decisions inappropriate. That is important. We take a risk if we begin to suggest that, because of their uncomfortable nature, such decisions are wrong, which is what some members have implied in today’s debate. I suspect that the intemperate language of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has more to do with the campaign for independence than that justifiable public concern or the protection of our system. As an independent state, we would still need a supreme court or to revert to Strasbourg. Strasbourg has a massive backlog of cases, so the Government party intends to subject us Scots to inordinate delays in achieving justice under the ECHR by removing or changing the Supreme Court. I welcome the McCluskey judgment that we should continue with it, and I hope that there will be wide consultation in trying to reduce some of the anomalies. I support the amendment in Johann Lamont’s name.

The minister will be aware that I raised the issue more than once in the previous parliamentary session and that I have done so in recent parliamentary questions. I welcome the fact that uptake levels have always been higher in Scotland than in the rest of the UK and that the figures are approaching a satisfactory level, but I ask the minister to reconsider a written answer that I was given in the previous session to a question about England’s catch-up campaign. I admit that the situation there started from a lower base, but we have not had such a public campaign to encourage parents to vaccinate children whom they did not get vaccinated—partly because of the approach of Opposition parties during our time in power of attacking the combined MMR vaccine. Will he reconsider the approach, which led to low uptake? Significant numbers of older children are unvaccinated.

I accept those comments, but I want to press the cabinet secretary a little further. The problem is one of repeated failure—that is not a criticism of the inspectorate. Professor Hugh Pennington says that we must have a much more proactive approach. Will the cabinet secretary at least consider the possibility of having, in addition to the HEI, a hit team that can go in to manage a situation when there has been repeated failure in a hospital?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish its proposals for the future of prison visiting committees. (S4O-00064)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer, in addition to the written answer that he gave previously. Does he agree that the prison visitors’ independent role is critical to the way in which they help to reduce tension within the system? Does he accept that the overwhelming majority of responses were against a merger with HM inspectorate of prisons for Scotland? Will he help the prison visitors, who are becoming rather demoralised by not knowing whether there is certainty about their future, and give me an indication of when he thinks he will conclude his review of the consultation process?

Does the member accept that the Audit Scotland reports have been clear that all local authorities are moving the care that they provide to the much more intense end and that we are losing exactly what she is trying to promote?

One of the reasons why we proposed a national care service was that attempts to form CHPs have repeatedly led to situations similar to that in Glasgow, to which the member quite rightly referred. Because partnerships are voluntary, they fall apart when the personnel do not agree.

Notwithstanding the cabinet secretary’s initial comment, the tone of the debate has been exactly right. All members have reflected on the fact that there are excellent care homes out there and that many people are being looked after in an excellent way in the health service and the care home system. Michael Matheson is absolutely right that we do not have a crisis, but I fear that, with the demographic pressures and the austerity measures that are coming in, we could have a crisis if we do not examine the issue closely and stay on top of it. Therefore, I welcome the cabinet secretary’s determination to make care for the elderly a personal priority, as she did for healthcare-acquired infections. We will see whether she takes the issue forward and makes greater progress in meeting some of the promises that her deputy made under the previous Government. Hugh Henry, Claire Baker and a number of other members talked about the general regime under which we provide care in our care homes and in the community. That is important. As Hugh Henry indicated, the issue is not the profit motive but how the system is managed. Southern Cross went for an asset-light approach, which is topical in the private equity sector at the moment. That approach means, first, that assets are stripped out and, secondly, that companies are at risk of breaking their covenants with the banks and getting into the trouble that Southern Cross did. Southern Cross is not alone in that respect, which is why I warn that we may face further crises. The Government’s contingency planning must therefore be robust and engage fully all local authorities so that, as the cabinet secretary and Murdo Fraser rightly said, we ensure that individuals can be kept in their own homes. Malcolm Chisholm made an excellent intervention using his experience as health minister. He took the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 through the Parliament, and he will remember that I was critical of a number of issues and, in fact, voted against my own party. One does not do that too often, but at the time I felt strongly about some of the issues on regulation and how the care commission would work. It is clear to me that the care commission talks not just about risk management, which is entirely appropriate, but about reducing the level of inspection and inspecting companies only in respect of some elements, provided that they have had a previous good inspection at an individual level. I suggest that that is a highly risky procedure. As I have said, with groups such as Southern Cross, some of the homes are not well managed. A reduction in staff of 400 has been proposed in Scotland today. In my view, that cannot occur without degrading the quality of care, so we must look at the issue carefully. The fact that there was a good report on Elsie Inglis care home, that complaints were then made that seem not to have been followed up as quickly as they should have been, and that we now find that it is one of the worst homes in Scotland does not give us confidence in the system. We will need to come back to the issue and look at it carefully. I welcome the fact that unannounced inspections will be the predominant route, although I think that they should be the universal route. I am sure that we will get reassurances on that in due course. We were all disturbed by the case of Mrs V, but unlike others I do not believe that such cases are uncommon. I regret to say that we have not moved forward in recognising that the 160-year division between mind and body, which is part of the health system and the whole medical approach, is a false dichotomy. In the current situation of an ageing population, with an increasing number of confused and demented elderly going into hospital care, we will face a really dangerous situation. It was entirely inappropriate that the mental hospitals could not cope with the woman and had to shift her to an acute hospital. We must look again at the issue. We must ensure that the promise that the Government was given in the previous session of Parliament that all patients at risk would be admitted with at least some form of short questionnaire will now be fulfilled. I tell the cabinet secretary that that does not occur universally, so I ask her to look at the issue closely and to make sure that health boards ensure that it happens. We must ensure an end to boarding out except when it is in the interests of the patient. I suggest that we look at models such as the one in a hospital that I visited recently, which has an overspill ward rather than patients boarded out all over the place. That is more efficient and means fewer moves—moves that should not occur unless they are needed. We need a further review and we need Health Facilities Scotland to concentrate on hospital design in relation to dementia. I will shortly visit Larbert hospital. I have heard criticisms from patients that its design is not adequate. It is our newest hospital, and we must learn from it in relation to the Southern general. We received a promise from the Government that it would ensure that all new primary care premises would be dementia friendly. That is not occurring: health centres that are not dementia friendly have been built. In order to reduce unplanned admissions, we must ensure that there are planned alternatives for all those with dementia who are currently living at home, including those in care homes. At present, a general practitioner who is faced with a patient with a relatively modest problem still has no alternative to admitting them to hospital. That is bad for patients in general and expensive for the taxpayer, but it is particularly bad for those with dementia. Murdo Fraser referred to delayed discharges. I will not deal with that issue in detail today, but I refer back to the cabinet secretary’s statement. I will question her closely on whether some of the measures in response to the deaths of people awaiting discharge have been properly examined and are now part of the governance system. There is no doubt that those with incapacity represent a significant number of delayed discharges—207 in the last census—and many are in hospital for more than six months. It is not good for dementia patients to be in such a setting. We have promoted the idea of having an old person’s champion, and I urge the Government to take a close look at that. The main theme of the debate has been whether we should have much more prevention and much less emergency and acute care. We all agree with that, but in reality we are moving further towards providing care only for those who are at the most intense end. I do not have, and I will not pretend to have, a solution to reverse that, but we need to look at the situation closely. Dennis Robertson, Mark McDonald and others have suggested that we need to look more closely at the involvement of carers and the voluntary sector. However, the voluntary sector is increasingly being squeezed by local authorities—that is moving in the wrong direction. We need to support those organisations and support carers with training, but that area has been cut back. John Finnie, in an excellent first speech, spoke about a number of issues. I wrote down his name against 12 sections of my summing-up notes, and I am sorry that I cannot pay adequate tribute to his contribution. He made the pertinent and important point that while we need more telehealth and telecare, it should not be a substitute for social contact. Care and repair services are also under attack. They were ring fenced by our Government, but that is not the case under the current Government. Those services are undoubtedly being reduced, but they are crucial to keeping people in their own homes. I turn to what so many speakers have referred to as a national care agency. I stress that it is not about creating a new agency—I am sorry that we have not got that message across—it is about having national care service standards for services that are delivered locally, in the same way as in the health service. The health service sets standards at a national level and delivers services locally, and the Government is hugely engaged in that process. We have moved from 86 local healthcare co-operatives, in which health professionals were fully engaged, to 41 and now 36 CHPs, which have fallen apart repeatedly because they are not underpinned by legislation. The Audit Scotland report is damning, because it clearly shows that CHPs are bureaucratic organisations that often duplicate integration measures from community planning partnerships and other areas. The system is simply not working, and I urge the Government to carry out an urgent review. It undertook its own report on CHPs, but it was relatively laudatory in comparison to the Audit Scotland report, which is much more damning and incisive. We know that the system can work on a voluntary basis. In Clackmannanshire, in my constituency, there was a 35 per cent reduction in psychiatric referrals as a result of fully merged budgets rather than lead commissioning. It is crucial that the system is delivered locally, and we do not disagree with Alison McInnes in that regard. Sir John Arbuthnott’s expert group showed that local delivery is the way forward. Joint futures and CHPs have failed, and local healthcare co-operatives have been destroyed. Professionals, particularly GPs and primary care workers, have become disengaged. We need to return to those issues and ensure that we have local, integrated services, because otherwise we will face a crisis in the delivery of elderly care in the next two years.

I join Humza Yousaf in supporting carers and acknowledging the enormous part that they play in Scottish society. Will the First Minister guarantee that the additional funding for respite will be additional to the existing system? The previous promise of 10,000 weeks’ respite did not result in any increase despite, I am sure, the Government’s best intentions. Will he also ensure that all carers have emergency plans in place in case anything serious befalls them? At the carers’ national hustings that were held during the election, only 5 per cent of the carers in the audience had such a plan in place. It is particularly important that we provide carers with the security and knowledge of such a plan.

I welcome Michael Matheson to his new post. I look forward to working with him in as collegiate a manner as we did when we worked together on the Health and Sport Committee, which was a very successful committee in the previous session. This has been a wide-ranging debate, notable for some excellent first speeches. It demonstrates the challenge that lies ahead for the SNP Government, for the new Health and Sport Committee and for the Parliament as a whole. It is evident, as Colin Keir and others said, that there are many areas in which we can work together constructively if the Government wishes to engage with the Opposition parties. I say to Sandra White, however, that if laying out the facts is negative, she will be very disappointed in the course of this session, as it will be the duty of the Opposition to lay out the facts clearly, particularly where they are irrefutable. We can agree on the extent of the democratic challenge that faces us. We can also agree that, whereas life expectancy has increased and improved under both Administrations since devolution, there has not been an improvement of any great substance in the quality of life. That is what is important—it is one of the big challenges that face us. The next five years will be a period of unparalleled austerity, notwithstanding the intention of the Government to protect health spending. Good progress has clearly been made, and I agree with the cabinet secretary that a good foundation has largely been laid. Huge progress has been made, in particular, on waiting times. The patient experience, to which the cabinet secretary also referred, is really good in Scotland—it is better than in the rest of the UK. There is common purpose, certainly between Labour and the SNP, on the way forward and on the general direction of not engaging in the sort of mass privatisation and engagement of the private sector that is occurring south of the border. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary has dropped some of the pledges that were made in the SNP’s manifesto of 2007, which were not appropriate. One example was not reducing the number of acute beds. They were actually reduced by 4,000 in the course of the previous session. The cabinet secretary has now dropped that target, which is correct. If we can shift the balance of care—almost every speaker has referred to that—it could result in a reduction in the number of acute beds. We will see. It is important that the Government comes clean about the nature of finance. John Appleby, the chief economist at the King’s Fund, to whom Margaret McDougall referred in her maiden speech, made clear the differences between England, where there is a predicted reduction of 0.9 per cent, and Scotland, where there is a real-terms reduction of 3.3 per cent. The Scottish Parliament information centre has said that the reduction is 0.3 per cent. I call on the Government to make clear the likely and predicted reduction in expenditure, because we must start from a basis of clarity if we are to identify the challenges ahead. Central to forward planning will be tackling workforce issues and efficiency savings, to which the cabinet secretary referred. To those issues I add tackling variation, which is fundamental. As Murdo Fraser said, there is already a lack of employment and opportunity for many graduates. We have heard about the 56 out of 80 speech and language therapy graduates who were chasing one job, which none of them got, because a band 6 from England got the job. There are clearly problems. I recognise that the Government is not responsible for admissions to the allied health professions, but we must make common cause with the universities so that admissions policies reflect the workforce that we are likely to need. Neither Audit Scotland nor the Health and Sport Committee in the previous session of the Parliament was able to determine whether efficiency savings are real—the committee was very critical of that. We need to identify what are real savings within the £300 million figure and what are not appropriate savings. For example, simply not replacing staff when vacancies occur, without undertaking adequate risk assessment, is dangerous and places enormous stress on front-line workers. Members mentioned the RCN briefing in that respect. The issue is important. Variations are massive, as is shown by Audit Scotland’s report, by the Scottish patients at risk of readmission and admission data and by the prescribing data—there is massive variation in levels of prescribing. There is also massive variation in referral data. The data on day-case surgery also vary hugely: NHS Fife has achieved the 70 per cent target for the 19 procedures, whereas Tayside’s rate is much, much lower, at 20 to 25 per cent. The continuation of unnecessary surgical procedures in Scotland must also be addressed. We will debate care of the elderly tomorrow in detail, but on bed blocking, the setting in 2008 of the target of zero for what is described as delayed discharge was not followed—in a period of growth—by an attempt to tackle the fact that people who had not reached the six-week limit were still waiting to be discharged. Those numbers have doubled, from 439 to 780. The area is important and needs to be looked at. Malcolm Chisholm referred to lead commissioning and how we can work with CHPs. I will talk more tomorrow about CHPs and the really unwelcome failure to integrate services that we all wanted. Joe FitzPatrick talked about the case of Mrs V, to which we will also return in tomorrow’s debate. We can make common cause on cancer. There has been a welcome reduction in cancer waiting times. Early diagnosis, to which the Government has committed substantial funding, is important. Three elements are equally important in that regard: public awareness; GP access to testing—it is important to consider variations in GP recognition of signs and symptoms in that regard; and delays in seeing a consultant. Labour thinks that there can be a reduction in delays without the need for massive funding. However, that will require improved access to testing. A number of members mentioned health inequalities. Bob Doris made a notable intervention on the matter and Jim Eadie mentioned it in his welcome first speech. Premature deaths in areas of deprivation are strongly linked not just to health but to housing, unemployment, intergenerational attitudes and poor access to healthcare at primary and secondary level. The report of the Westminster Public Accounts Committee, “Tackling inequalities in life expectancy in areas with the worst health and deprivation”, was one of the most incisive and devastating analyses of failure that I have read. We have all failed to tackle health inequalities—I do not exempt any of us. We have all had the desire to tackle health inequalities, but we have not done it. The GPs at the deep end steering group, to which members referred, said that we must look not at equality but at equity of distribution of resources. We must focus resources on areas of deprivation. That might involve revisiting the technical issues to do with NRAC. I do not have time today to discuss many issues, but dealing with smoking remains our number 1 priority. On issues to do with alcohol, we will work with the Government—but I am fed up with people talking about there being political opportunism on minimum unit pricing. Those who say that there is should read the new paper by Jonathan Chick on harmful drinking in Edinburgh, which is absolutely fascinating. I hope that the Government will publish the affordability index with the Seabrook amendments, test the Sheffield formula against the most recent data, and publish details of the research to be undertaken.

I will wind up as I started—by saying that there are many areas in which we can co-operate. I hope that the Government will work with us in those areas, but there are other areas in which we will remain a critical, if constructive, Opposition.

I welcome Shona Robison to her new post. I look forward to supporting her and the Government in those areas where we can agree and to providing some constructive suggestions, and—dare I say it—even some criticism where that is appropriate. The appointment of a minister specifically for sport and the Commonwealth games is certainly a clear statement of intent, but it will be how the minister works together with the games committee and Glasgow City Council—which won the bid with the support of the Parliament—that will demonstrate whether the new role works in practice. The concept of creating a lasting legacy is welcome, but it will be very challenging. Apart from the physical assets, there have been no Commonwealth or Olympic games that have left much in the way of an enduring health legacy—and not much even in the way of a sporting legacy. My first question to the minister is whether she will confirm that the sole instrument that she has devised to measure any health legacy is the Scottish health survey. It is expected to show improvements in physical activity and wellbeing and improved attitudes to physical activity, but will that be based against previous trends, or will there simply be an increase? A very small increase is pretty meaningless. I look forward to her giving us more detail on that, either in her winding-up speech later today or in the proposed debate that she mentioned in her opening speech. I am old enough to have attended the Commonwealth games at Meadowbank. That was a joyous occasion, marred only by financial problems. I am glad that Glasgow City Council, the games committee and the Government have said clearly that the games are on target and on budget, which is important. Labour was keen to establish Commonwealth legacy schools if it got into power, so as to focus on the new emerging talent, to be matched by creating Commonwealth champions. My colleagues Drew Smith and Patricia Ferguson will say a bit more on that later. In its evidence to the Health and Sport Committee in session 3, the Government listed the intended legacy targets. That list was modest and vague, however, and I hope that the minister will publish more details sooner rather than later—for example, about the baseline against which the legacy will be measured and about what will constitute an acceptable increase in the numbers of sports and physical activity clubs and groups, and in their active membership and numbers of volunteers. Unless we have the baselines against which to measure the legacy, as well as some idea of what constitutes a reasonable and acceptable increase as a legacy, we cannot measure it. We also need detail on how “an increase in ... quality, affordable local facilities” will be measured—and I emphasise the terms “quality” and “affordable” as used in the evidence that was presented to the Health and Sport Committee. My colleagues Mary Fee and Siobhan McMahon will outline some of what is happening in their regions already, which contradicts the clear hope and aspiration of the Government and of the Parliament. I look forward to seeing how the Government will take those issues forward. Amid the excitement of the games, we must not forget the underlying problems. The SNP made some progress on the provision of two hours of physical education per week, although the baseline of its own choosing was 2005, not 2007, interestingly. The commitment that Keith Brown outlined—hoping to achieve that goal in 2011—has now been put back to 2014. The question that remains is how it is to be delivered in these times of austerity. It is the councils that will deliver it, not the Government, unless the Government adopts a new approach to ensuring that it is delivered. Discussions—which the minister has mentioned today—are welcome, but surely there should have been discussions already and, surely, an outline of how to achieve the aim should have been in place already. More needs to be done. I welcome the fact that the Government has agreed to maintain funding for the active schools programme, but will it also commit to maintaining the number of active schools co-ordinators? The Health and Sport Committee’s pathways into sport inquiry found that many of them were working on short-term contracts. Will the Government support those contracts being made permanent, as has happened in some local authority areas? They should be permanent, or at least the contract should last the lifetime of this parliamentary session. The number of PE teachers is important. We have already learned of a cut in intake at the University of Edinburgh, following several years when it has been increasing. The Scottish Parliament information centre gave me information today from the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, showing that the only reduction in teacher intakes was in that area. I find that difficult to accept, as I think that the number of teachers is going down generally, but in any case there has been a cut of 18 per cent or thereby in the intake of PE students.

Margo MacDonald’s intervention was helpful. There is a major problem in many sectors. In future debates we will come back to workforce planning. Will the Government publish a workforce planning report? Before Margo MacDonald mentioned the situation in the Lothians I was about to make the more general point that many graduates are finding it difficult to get jobs. It continues to worry me that there has been a fall in the number of PE teachers year on year since 2007. Will the Government maintain the number of primary teacher places on the training modules? Alongside the work of PE teachers, primary teachers’ confidence in their ability to deliver is important. The Health and Sport Committee was keen on the concept of a physical literacy report—I am talking about not just the reports by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education on individual schools, but assessments for each pupil, so that parents are aware of whether their child can do the basics of running, jumping, catching and throwing. I want to move on from schools and staffing to consider the wider community. Under Labour, voluntary organisations were helped with disclosures. Will the Government ensure that free disclosures are made available to volunteers in sport and that the new streamlining of disclosures is effective in supporting the 150,000 volunteer coaches who are the life-blood of sport in Scotland? The Scottish National Party has modified a number of commitments that it made in its 2007 manifesto, and I hope that the minister will clarify the Government’s intentions. First, the 2007 manifesto promised free access to council swimming pools. Labour wanted all primary pupils to have free swimming lessons. However, the SNP now refers only to seven-year-olds. Why does it specify an age? Seven is too old for some and too young for others. Surely what matters is not the age but the opportunity for every pupil to receive free swimming lessons. Will the Government fund the policy or does it expect councils to do so in a time of austerity? Secondly, the 2007 SNP manifesto contained bold proposals for five days of outdoor education, but the commitment appears to have been dropped altogether. I will address the final part of the motion, which my amendment seeks to amend. Physical assets are important and I welcome the Government’s aspiration to secure greater community access to sporting facilities. I welcome the minister’s announcement on a social enterprise fund, because community control can be helpful, and I hope that she will give us an indication of the amount of money in the fund when she sums up the debate. I also welcome the specific commitment to a target of 100 hubs, but will the minister say where the hubs are likely to be? Will she indicate—or place in SPICe—the principles that underlie the strategy that will lead to their placement? There are already problems with the maintenance and upgrading of facilities in some of the smaller local authorities. Local authorities always cut maintenance in times of austerity. How will we ensure that facilities will be maintained? I mention three areas in that regard. First, ice rinks remain a problem, as the committee noted in its report on pathways into sport and physical activity. Curling should be one of our national sports.

I do not have time, I am afraid. I do apologise for that, but I must try to get through my speech. The European Union regulation on R22—a chlorofluorocarbon used in ice rinks—is a big problem. Will the minister comment on that? Secondly, investment in expensive new artificial pitches is great, but if such pitches are not maintained they do not have a long lifespan. Some form of inspection is important. Thirdly, I give an example from my area. Alva swimming pool has been scheduled for closure. As a result, Clackmannanshire will have only a leisure pool and no swimming pool. The Olympic pool at Stirling is oversubscribed, as is the facility at the Peak in Stirling, and the pool at the Scottish Police College at Tulliallan, which was a possible alternative, is to close. There is a waiting list for swimming lessons at the leisure pool, so not just talented swimmers but people who want to learn to swim cannot go swimming. I hope that the minister will agree to meet me, the local authority and the local member—if he wishes to meet—to discuss a way forward. The issue ties in with the point that I made about ownership, which is important. I wanted to talk about the cashback for communities scheme, but I do not have time. The scheme should be focused on communities where there are problems of deprivation and drug use and where intelligence has led to confiscation. Cash should be ploughed into activities for the local youth in such communities. I wish the minister well in her endeavours and I promise her support from my party in making the Commonwealth games a success that benefits Scotland’s sport and Scotland’s health and wellbeing. I move amendment S4M-00168.1, to leave out from “acknowledges” to end and insert: “notes that the commitment to deliver two hours of PE has been extended to 2014 and that Active School Coordinators can play an important part in delivery of this pledge, and notes the intention to make progress in community access to sports facilities.”

I congratulate the many first-time speakers in the chamber today. The quality of the speeches and the evident commitment to individual communities that has come through in almost every speech have been extremely welcome and bodes well for the chamber in this session of Parliament and for sport. Sometimes, sport does not get the priority it should. My job has been made more difficult by Ruth Davidson’s eloquent summing up—it is the first time that I have heard a member sum up for their party in their first speech. Where to start? We are all agreed that the Commonwealth games are important. Many members have alluded to the contribution of the city, the committee and the Government to making the games a success and achieving a legacy for Scotland. Patricia Ferguson referred to the premature deaths that are associated with a lack of activity and to the growing epidemic of obesity. Those things cannot be tackled overnight, or by targets at 2014; the work must begin now and continue throughout the coming years to ensure that people get active. Liz Smith referred to veterans, but the participation of all people with disabilities in sport is important. Various games now have disabled games alongside them, which allows those people to have aspirations along with the rest of the community. I refer briefly to the Scottish Association for Mental Health’s get active programme. Many people with serious mental health problems are the least active in our communities yet benefit the most from activity, as people’s mental health and general wellbeing can be improved by becoming active. Members have referred to female participation in sport and the fact that girls participate equally with boys up to the age of 12 but not beyond that age. That is a particular challenge that I am sure the minister will make a great attempt to meet. Many specific sports have been mentioned. Mark McDonald invited me to go to Aberdeen. I say to Mark—sorry, to Mr McDonald; we are not allowed to use first names, as I should know—that I do not need to go as far as Aberdeen; Stirling has a new curling rink, which has been very successful. I learned at an event I attended that 70 youngsters are participating in early training in the sport. Some of them use devices to throw the stones. They are obviously enjoying the activity a great deal. I believe that there is to be a new centre at Kinross, as well. The establishment of new centres reflects an important development, but the trouble is that ice rinks are declining, and there are serious problems with curling. The Health and Sport Committee heard evidence in that regard from various people. A lot of members have spoken about swimming lessons. I hope that the minister will consider the issue of lessons not being age related. The fact that one in three children cannot swim needs to be considered. Margo MacDonald referred to the fact that many golf clubs are in trouble. Audit Scotland predicted that 35 per cent of golf clubs will cease functioning because of financial difficulties. That is a challenge for us in relation to a sport in which we have a long and proud history. Graeme Dey referred to the women’s open and the Ryder cup, which present us with opportunities to encourage more youngsters to participate. I know that the Government has done something in that respect, which I welcome. A lot of youngsters are now involved in the sport. We heard about the club in Newton Mearns that allows youngsters to try the sport out. Trying sports out is important. Tavish Scott and the minister referred to the deficit in broadcasting. We invented the sevens, yet the BBC chose not to broadcast the event. I was there on Sunday and it was a great and joyous occasion in which many countries participated. Scotland did not win; we were beaten by Kenya in the final of the bowl. Nevertheless, it was a great day out and one that should have been celebrated by our broadcasters. If our rugby is not broadcast, it will not improve. The Government has done its bit by providing cashback funding and development officers that are increasing the number of basic players, but unless we get the participation of the BBC there will be problems. I join the Government and the Liberal Democrats in saying that the BBC must broadcast our rugby. Sectarianism in football has been mentioned, but we know that it is present in other areas. My son, who works in addiction services in Glasgow, says that he cannot go into work wearing either a green shirt or a blue shirt because he knows that he will be abused by people in the clinic if he does. Sectarianism is extremely difficult to tackle. We will support the Government’s efforts in renewing the commitment to tackling sectarianism, and I hope that we will be successful. We talked about the target for PE in schools. I reiterate the difficulties of delivering it when the Government is not directly responsible, but it must take some responsibility for the delay. I would like to hear how it will go beyond discussions, which is all that was mentioned in the minister’s opening speech. We heard about PE teachers not getting places. I can say to Margo MacDonald that the intake has already been cut. There are problems with workforce planning that need to be considered. We need to maintain the number of active school co-ordinators. I know that because there are more full-time active school co-ordinators the number has fallen but, as I said in my opening speech, we need to ensure that they have contracts of a length and permanence that enable them to participate to as great a degree as possible. I welcome the money that is being given to the active schools project and the fact that active schools are to be encouraged. I hope that the combination of my party’s concept of the Commonwealth legacy schools and the minister’s announcement of a national award system can be in some way combined to provide an effective encouragement to schools that are participating. Mary Fee and Siobhan McMahon introduced a dose of reality into our discussions. We all feel warm about sport and are keen to encourage it, but the reality is that councils are faced with serious financial difficulties that are already being reflected in increased charges. If charges are increased, the poorest in our communities will have the most difficulty accessing facilities. That will be a challenge for the Government as well as councils, and I hope that the Government will be able to meet it. The Government announced its 100 hubs today. I hope that it will tell us where they are and the basis on which they will be developed. I welcome the hubs that have been developed so far, but we must also ensure that those pitches are properly maintained. George Adam emphasised the importance of the hubs and the contribution that has already been made in his constituency. Alison Johnstone talked about safe walkways and cycleways; I do not think that anyone else mentioned cycling, which is another important area in which general participation can be improved and increased.

Yes—I have 10 seconds left. The cashback scheme is clearly important, and James Dornan and Humza Yousaf referred to the social integration it fosters through the sports it helps to provide. I am sorry if I have not been able to mention all the first-time speakers, but I will end where I began, by saying that their contributions were truly excellent and that I hope they will continue to enjoy their time in the Parliament.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress there has been in implementing the change fund. (S3O-13362)

Tonight, more than 700 mainly elderly and mostly vulnerable patients will be declared fit for discharge by health professionals, but will face the prospect of an average wait of 26 days for the community package that will herald their release from hospital. That figure does not include what are defined as delayed discharges, for which the wait must be for more than six weeks. More patients will be readmitted while they wait for that package and some will die waiting for it. Does the minister now have the data on that? What outcomes on tackling the issue has the minister established for looking at and approving projects under the change fund? Will she publish the outcome data against which those projects must be held accountable?

My point has been made, Presiding Officer.

Amendment 7, which follows on from the Health and Sport Committee’s stage 1 report and observations that I have made at each stage of the bill’s progress, has two interconnected purposes. First, I wish to test whether the minister has taken on board the need for urgency in moving from a 19th century paper-based system to a 21st century electronic system, and I hope that she will indicate either now or in the following debate progress in and the potential timelines for developing an electronic system. I believe that any hasty move to a set of paper pilots that would have to be followed by an electronic certification system pilot would be a duplication that we can ill afford and might indeed be counterproductive. That would be true in times of plenty, but these are times of austerity and the waste involved could be significant. The second purpose of amendment 7 is to point out that this is an opportunity to modernise the certification process not only by making it electronic but by ensuring that the data can truly inform our health planning. Despite certain doubts about the potential to analyse certification in electronic form, I believe that individual doctors could be shown to be outliers on the basis of the cumulative analysis of their certificates. At present, the ability to link data from such sources to 2001 census data is inadequate, and I hope that the minister will take note of the difficulties in that respect for future reference. Cumbersome bureaucratic elements make that linking difficult to deal with. That is important, because the 2001 census is one of the main sources of ethnicity data, and we know that we will be able to plan our services better if we have good recorded ethnicity data. I will give an example that was given in a debate that the minister, Ross Finnie and I were involved in last night. According to research, there is a much higher level of diabetes in the south Asian community, but we do not know whether that finding is valid in a Scottish context. If we had good electronic data in which ethnicity was always recorded, we would have the opportunity to examine that matter. Another issue is health care acquired infection. Having notes on death certificates that say whether health care acquired infection was present and whether it contributed directly or indirectly to the death is important in ensuring that the excellent progress that has been made in dealing with MRSA and Clostridium difficile is maintained in dealing with VRE, NDM-1 and all the other new challenges that are now coming along and rearing their ugly heads. Things can be done much more easily on electronic forms. It would simply be a matter of saying whether there was or was not infection; if there was, there would be further drop-down boxes for answers. That is difficult to do with paper. The consent of next of kin suggestion is to ensure that, in the reduced review climate, which remains one of the committee’s concerns, the next of kin acknowledge that they are content with the death certificate. Such an approach would be welcome. I realise that there is the opportunity in the bill for kin to require or request a review, but the proposal would go further than that—it would trigger the next of kin to think and to indicate whether they were content. They might not have thought of the matter, but if they were asked to think of it they could say, “Well, now you come to mention it, actually we’re really not that happy because something has been omitted from the death certificate.” The final proposal would allow ministers to add any information that they thought was useful. Familial screening is mentioned. If there was electronic linkage, there would be the ability to ensure, for example, that familial hypercholesterolaemia, which is currently poorly screened for, was screened for. We could have a system that automatically sent a trigger to the general practitioner when a person with a condition for which familial screening was appropriate had died, to suggest that family members be contacted and screened. I would make it an absolute requirement that the community health index number be entered. That is fundamental to the data linkage system that we must have in Scotland. Without a CHI number, a big piece of the jigsaw is missing. Requiring it is of great importance. I recognise that there is a difficulty with that, as the hospital side is not yet 100 per cent using CHI numbers and junior doctors are filling in things. Nevertheless, having access to the emergency care record that every doctor should have access to, that should be available for every patient, and that should have the CHI number recorded on it will allow us to have a modern, 21st century system. As I will say in the final debate, I remain disappointed by the bill. It was introduced as a result of Shipman, for many good reasons, but by moving so quickly to a paper-based system we have failed to take the opportunities that we need to take. I move amendment 7.

I am slightly disappointed by the minister’s response, but I will seek to withdraw amendment 7. Subsection (1) of the amendment states: “the Scottish Ministers may provide for medical certificates of cause of death to be created in an electronic form.” We already have an electronic form—we are not starting from scratch. ISD Scotland enters the data in an electronic form. The Health and Sport Committee received evidence from Colin Fischbacher that he must make 2,000 inquiries a year about deaths, although he does not get information back, because there is no compulsion to change the current paper reporting, which is bizarre. Nevertheless, a system exists that ends up with an electronic form. Given that we start from that point and given—I assume—that all deaths will have to be coded, it does not seem that we should not make progress. That is why I am disappointed. In rejecting my amendment, the minister used words like “will” and “can in the future look at”. The committee said clearly in its report, which was published on 21 January, that technology was important for the future. I believe that the minister should have said, “We have already commenced the process of examining the issue.” However, I will seek to withdraw amendment 7. Amendment 7, by agreement, withdrawn. Section 28—Orders and regulations Amendments 4 to 6 moved—[Shona Robison]—and agreed to.

I would like to add to the minister’s thanks by thanking the witnesses who appeared before the committee. They were extremely helpful. In the Scottish Parliament, we go through a particular process with bills. First, there is a review by an expert group—in this case, there was a United Kingdom review of death certification, which led to changes being made in England. The review is followed by a consultation document, and then by a committee’s taking of evidence. It is often during those face-to-face evidence sessions that significant problems become apparent in the bill proposal. We probably need to examine carefully how often that has happened, and to consider what might have been done during the consultation process. The major flaw with this bill was the level of scrutiny. Originally, the bill arose as a result of the Shipman case. Although the committee and the Government agreed that no system could ever have prevented someone as devious and psychopathic as Shipman from operating, public confidence must be retained. As the bill has gone through its stages, we have reached a point at which 50 per cent of death certificates will be scrutinised. That is a satisfactory move, but we will have to review and examine it in future. In England, a 100 per cent review rate has been adopted, but the costs of that are very much greater. We have a lower-cost system, but it has yet to be demonstrated that it will fully retain the confidence of the public. The procurator fiscal review—half of cases are to be so reviewed—can be quite cursory, I remember, and I will be interested to hear the views of my colleague Dr McKee on that, if he speaks in the debate. I found that there were occasions on which a death occurred somewhat more suddenly than had been expected, although there were no suspicious circumstances. Nevertheless, because the death had occurred more suddenly, or because we did not have adequate information, since the person was a visitor to our committee—I mean a visitor to our practice area—

Yes. Thank you, Stewart—I have lost my train of thought now. In the case of a sudden death where we did not know a lot about the patient and we did not have a huge amount of information, our phone call to the procurator fiscal would prompt the question whether we had any real concerns. My response would typically be, “No, I have no real concerns,” so we would then be told, “Thank you very much—go ahead and do the certificate.” That is not a review. We will need to consider the provisions carefully. We will need to consider the training of procurators fiscal and of doctors so as to ensure that, if we are to rely on half of all reviews being undertaken by the procurator fiscal, an adequate process is followed. I do not wish to reiterate all the arguments that I advanced in earlier debates on the electronic aspect, but I remain disappointed that, in her opening speech at this final stage of the bill, the Minister for Public Health and Sport yet again did not mention electronic certification. I urge the Government and the minister, even at this very last, dying stage of the present Government—I had to get that in—to commit civil servants to commence consideration of the electronic aspect during the forthcoming interregnum period. We have had two months already; let us have some urgency on the matter. Let us consider what currently exists in the Information Services Division and let us begin now to examine the possibilities for developing a modern system. Although the minister said in her speech that we have a modern system, it is not—it is a revised system, based on an old paper system, with all that system’s flaws. I still have concerns about the signature on the certificates. Previously, two thirds of them would be reviewed by a second and third doctor. Now, a junior hospital doctor will be able to sign the certificates, and no further review will occur in 50 per cent of cases—although it will vary from individual to individual. I would like the guidance or the regulations to provide for a system that specifies that no foundation year 1 or foundation year 2 doctor should be able to sign the certificates; only those with specialist training in the hospital—what used to be called registrars—should be able to do that. Alternatively, there should be a counter-signature from the responsible consultant, to make sure. Furthermore, doctors should go through a specific training module. All of that underlies my concern about retaining public confidence, which is fundamental to the revised system. Two thirds of individuals will welcome the fact that costs will go down from £160 to £30. On the subject of costs, I ask the minister to clarify something that she said earlier when she sums up: that there will not be a charge in relation to overseas deaths. I assume that there will still be a £30 charge—or will there be no charge whatever for people who die abroad? If that is the case, we will perhaps, as with the Eskimos, start to ask our elderly relatives to go to another country, albeit briefly, so as to save some money. That will not happen, of course, but I ask about the possibility of there being no charge. The system for overseas deaths that is now being put in place is a good one, with the central review, which I think will work well. We have dealt reasonably well with expedited certification for faith burials, particularly for Jewish and Muslim groups. As we come to scrutinise the regulations and guidance, we will have to invite the Subordinate Legislation Committee to examine the matter carefully, with our colleagues in the Jewish and Muslim faith groups, so that the regulations ensure that the post hoc review system will be appropriate. The bill has been amended appropriately, and I am glad that the Government responded entirely appropriately to the committee’s initial serious concerns. We will now have a modern, proportionate system—except for the fact that it should have been an electronic system from the outset.

The bill began rather like the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, looking rather flawed and weary, but it has been resurrected through the useful process that we have gone through. Nevertheless, doubts are still being expressed about whether the bill will introduce a fully robust system that will retain public confidence. The debate has been useful in suggesting that the pilot should be conducted almost as a research exercise, with not only 25 per cent of deaths being reviewed by medical reviewers, as is required by the act, and approximately 25 per cent of deaths being reviewed by procurators fiscal—accounting for 50 per cent of deaths—but 100 per cent of deaths being reviewed on a post hoc basis to determine whether the system that we are putting in place is error strewn. If we are concerned about errors, we need look no further than two quotes from Professor Stewart Fleming. He told the committee that, “in cases in which a post mortem was performed after a death certificate had been completed, the inaccuracy rate was about 20 to 30 per cent.” He also said that, every year, around 30 “unnatural causes of death are picked up only at the confirmatory medical certificate on the cremation form.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 1 December 2010; c 3756 and 3746.] Some of those deaths might be due to road traffic accidents rather than something more serious but, nevertheless, they are missed. Those are a few of the issues that we need to examine, apart from the general issues raised by the Harold Shipman case, which are almost a distraction. However, I should say that the care home deaths in England gave rise to considerable public concern. Therefore, an analysis on a geographic basis, which the bill provides for, is important. If there is a higher than normal proportion of deaths in one care home, that might lead to much more detailed scrutiny, which would be welcome. I suggest to the minister that the details of the pilot should be brought before Parliament so that we have the opportunity to see precisely what is proposed. The Subordinate Legislation Committee or the committee that is responsible for health should have the opportunity to scrutinise them and make helpful comments to the minister and the team that is running the system. Rhoda Grant raised the situation in remote and island communities. Clearly, those concerns are important. In her evidence to the committee, Ishbel Gall, from Aberdeen, gave us some classic illustrations of the practical difficulties that will need to be explored in the new system. A pilot, perhaps involving Aberdeen, that might address the issues around the island communities would be useful because a lot of people from the island communities die in hospitals on the mainland. The majority of such certifications take place in hospitals—hopefully we can change that, but it is not happening so far. Rhoda Grant also referred to the problem of fee collection, and I will be interested to hear the minister’s comment on that when she sums up. Ian McKee stressed the importance of accurate data. In that regard, I conclude by repeating what I said at the start of stage 1, which is that—Stewart Stevenson’s concerns notwithstanding—electronic data are the way forward, because drop-down menus allow people to be interrogated in a much more detailed way when completing the certificate and, far from adding time, can save time. With regard to the ISD checks, which I presume will still occur, will the minister ensure that the regulations make it compulsory for there to be a response to an inquiry? In other words, if Colin Fishbacher or his successor has a query about the certificate, the doctor should be required to respond; it should not be voluntary. With regard to public confidence, it will be interesting to see whether the number of queries drops from the current level of 2,000 to a much lower level. If, under the new system of ISD checks, the number of those queries drops as a result of the accuracy of the data, it is possible that the system will have the public confidence that we all desire.

We have a better bill now, although it still needs to be reviewed and we will examine the pilots as they go through. I support the passing of the bill.

Although we agree that the initial move by the UK Government on floor pricing is insufficient, it is at least a start, as it will have an effect on harmful drinking. According to the latest Scottish research, harmful drinkers drink a disproportionate amount of cider sold at prices below duty and VAT. Why does the Scottish Government not adopt that policy, at least as a starting measure—a uniform measure across the UK—rather than leaving Scotland behind?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the future role of community hospitals. (S3O-13151)

I agree entirely with the cabinet secretary’s answer. In 2010, general practitioners and community councils in Angus condemned NHS Tayside management’s lack of engagement on proposed changes to community hospitals. The subsequent lack of response led to a formal disengagement by GPs. That situation has been resolved, but does the cabinet secretary agree that, after that experience, NHS Tayside could have been expected to avoid the repetition of it that has resulted in a petition on Blairgowrie community hospital, signed by about 2,000 of my constituents? Should the public meeting that has been arranged for 10 May have been held at the beginning, rather than the end of the process? What did she learn from the earlier political intervention in Angus that resolved the situation? What instructions and guidance did she subsequently issue about consultation on modernising community hospitals?

I congratulate Kenneth Gibson on bringing the debate to the chamber. I believe that the cross-party group on epilepsy has one of the highest numbers of MSP members—I am included—so I know that it is an issue that members agree requires some attention. As Kenneth Gibson said, epilepsy affects different people in different ways. There are more than 40 types of seizures and epilepsy syndromes, and some people may experience more than one kind. That is why training for people who may come into contact with those who have epilepsy is extremely important. Kenneth Gibson’s motion deals with the subject of epilepsy training “becoming an integral part” of student teacher training, and I whole-heartedly agree that teachers should have that training. It is important to remember than many teachers may themselves have or develop epilepsy, so awareness training can be doubly important. After all, it is primarily a matter of threshold, and any of us at any time could have an epileptic seizure. However, I will talk about training in the justice system, which includes police, fiscals, defence lawyers, sheriffs and criminal justice authorities staff. I have had the good fortune to have worked with Epilepsy Scotland during the current session of Parliament on some of those areas. Epilepsy Scotland’s work has been facilitated through meetings that we have held with the Solicitor General for Scotland, and I acknowledge his input, advice and help. Every year in Scotland, people with epilepsy are charged with minor offences and misdemeanours. Most of the cases relate to actions that are carried out when someone is having, or has just had, a seizure—the post-ictal period—during a state of confusion or automatism. Cases usually relate to a minor offence such as resisting paramedics on entering an ambulance, resisting the police, urinating in public, removing clothing in public, being aggressive in a shop, banging dustbin lids together in a lane, sitting in a taxi refusing to pay the fare, walking up and down the aisle of an aeroplane and refusing to fasten a seat belt, and fire raising. The list is limitless and reflects disturbed behaviour when a person with epilepsy is confused, and often when attempts at restraint are made. The general public is not fully aware that one should not attempt to restrain anyone during a post-ictal state. Epilepsy Scotland has done a great deal to educate police officers about epilepsy but, sadly, people are still arrested for minor offences. Many have to engage in a prolonged legal process before the case is—more often than not—dismissed. The stress and delay that are involved in that process can have a significant effect on people with epilepsy, such as by increasing anxiety levels, worsening seizure control, which is important, inducing a loss of self-esteem, producing family conflict, and leading to depression and even a risk of suicide. Indeed, we should note that persons with temporal lobe epilepsy are at 25 times greater risk of suicide than are people in an age-matched control group. Such individuals have worsening job prospects and a change of employment is impossible when a court appearance is pending: then, of course, they might be criminalised. The legal process can sometimes take more than a year to conclude and sometimes the individual is urged to plead guilty just to reduce the stress, which leaves them with a criminal record. I have to say that there have recently been positive signs of progress. Instead of remanding individuals, sheriffs are proposing that there be bail support, with the support of Epilepsy Scotland. Unfortunately, however, bureaucratic problems have made progress difficult. If the Cabinet Secretary for Justice is serious about reducing the numbers who are inappropriately placed on remand because they have epilepsy, there is an opportunity here for him to act. I am pleased to report that training for probation officers is being provided at the Scottish Police College, and that there is training for procurators fiscal. Epilepsy Scotland is also developing training with the Law Society of Scotland. This is an important additional area to look at when considering future training and support.

I will speak to amendments 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 9 to 11, 25 and 32. Amendment 1 removes section Z1 as inserted into the bill at stage 2 and replaces it with a requirement on the Scottish ministers to publish a charter of patient rights and responsibilities within six months of the section coming into force. The charter must set out a summary of the rights and responsibilities, extant at the date of publication, of patients and relevant persons. The charter may also include a summary of the duties on relevant national health service bodies, a summary of the behaviour that is expected from patients and relevant persons, and any other information that the minister considers to be relevant, such as waiting time periods. Relevant persons are defined as persons who have a personal interest in the health care of a patient, such as a relative or carer, and such other persons as the Scottish ministers consider to be appropriate. The charter cannot create new rights and responsibilities, or alter existing ones in any way. It must be published in such a manner and form as ministers think appropriate. Before publishing the charter, ministers must consult those whom they think appropriate and must also lay a copy of the charter before the Parliament. Ministers must tell the relevant national health service bodies about the publication of the charter. Relevant NHS bodies must make the charter available without charge and, in doing so, must take into account the particular needs of those who will be using the charter when they consider the form that it will take. Amendment 2, on the review and revision of the charter, states that it must be reviewed at least once every five years to ensure that the rights and responsibilities contained within it are still accurate, and to assess how effective the charter is at raising awareness of the rights and responsibilities of patients and relevant persons. When a review is carried out, ministers must also consider the effectiveness of the distribution and publication arrangements for the charter and they must improve those processes where appropriate. When carrying out a review of the charter, the Scottish ministers must consult those whom they think appropriate. Following a review, ministers must revise the charter if they consider that it does not accurately summarise the rights and responsibilities of patients, or if they consider that it is not effectively raising awareness of the rights and responsibilities of patients and relevant persons. Ministers may also revise the charter at any other time that they consider to be appropriate. When ministers revise the charter, they must publish it as so revised and notify each relevant NHS body of that publication. Before publishing the revised charter, ministers must consult such persons as they consider to be appropriate and they must lay a copy of the revised charter before the Parliament. Amendment 3 deletes section 1(2)(e) of the bill, which says that health care is to “have regard to and respect for the rights and responsibilities conferred on patients by the Charter to be made by the Scottish Ministers” that was referred to under what was previously section (Z1)(1). Amendments 5 and 6 remove the reference to the charter having to be upheld by relevant NHS bodies and having to be upheld in turn by any person with whom the relevant NHS body enters into a contract agreement or arrangements to provide health services. Amendments 9 and 10 remove the reference to the charter from sections 5(1) and 5(2) of the bill, which are about the duty of NHS bodies to have regard to any guidance that the Scottish ministers issue and the duty of the ministers to consult such persons as they consider to be appropriate before providing such guidance. Amendment 11 removes the power of the Scottish ministers in section 5(3) to give directions about the practical application of the charter. Amendment 25 specifies that the patient advice and support service, in promoting awareness and understanding of the rights and responsibilities of patients, should, in particular, “promote awareness of the Charter” of patient rights and responsibilities. I accept that the wording might be subject to slight criticism—it is a little cumbersome—but it gets the point across. Amendment 32 is consequential on amendment 1. It inserts a provision that means that reference to “the Charter” under the bill is a reference to the “Charter of Patient Rights and Responsibilities published under” the section that amendment 1 inserts. The affect of amendment 1 will be that the charter will be an information document, summarising the various rights and responsibilities of NHS users. It will not be a Scottish statutory instrument, so it cannot itself confer rights and responsibilities. The charter is designed to bring together a user-friendly summary of the rights, responsibilities and entitlements of patients and other relevant persons such as carers or relatives and other family members. The charter will be drawn up after consultation with relevant people and organisations, and it will be laid before the Parliament when it is finalised. Under amendment 2, the charter must be reviewed every five years, or more often if appropriate, in order to take account of significant change. When it is reviewed, ministers must consider how effective the arrangements for the publication of the charter are. They must consult those whom they consider appropriate. After review, the charter might have to be revised and, if it is revised, ministers must consult relevant people. Amendment 3 is consequential on amendments 1 and 2, with section Z1 being removed from the bill. Amendment 1 means that the charter will no longer confer any rights or responsibilities on patients, and it would therefore be inappropriate for section 1(2)(e) to remain in the bill. I commend the amendments in this group to the Parliament, and I move amendment 1.

I acknowledge the cabinet secretary’s support for this group of amendments, especially amendment 1. On amendment 1A, despite the fact—as Ross Finnie points out—that amendment 1 seems to cover all the bases, the specifying of that example is welcome. Dementia will be one of the main health challenges that we face and we know that there are existing problems with the management of patients within the system. Although amendment 1A is perhaps gilding the lily, such gilding is not inappropriate and I will, therefore, support amendment 1A.

I will speak to amendments 4, 16 to 22 and 26. We are in the process of devising a comprehensive NHS system of complaints and, as the cabinet secretary said, although a complaints system has already been in existence, this will be the first time that it is placed squarely within primary legislation. Some of the amendments are technical, and are designed simply to improve the quality of this section, which was debated at stage 2. Amendment 4 is a technical amendment to correct a grammatical error. Amendment 16 ensures consistency of language throughout the bill in terms of complaints, feedback and so on, in line with changes. Amendment 17 widens the scope of the section to refer to feedback, comments and concerns as opposed to simply concerns and feedback, as currently drafted. Amendment 18 removes the reference to patient rights officers and replaces it with a reference to the provider of the patient advice and support service, in order to take account of the deletion at stage 2 of section 17, which referred to patient rights officers. Amendment 19 widens the scope of the section to include feedback, comments, concerns and complaints, as opposed to concerns and feedback, as is currently drafted, and also removes the reference to the patient rights officer and replaces it with a reference to the provider of the patient advice and support service. Amendment 20 ensures consistency of the language that is used throughout the bill, in terms of complaints, feedback and so on, in line with the changes that were made at stage 2. Amendment 21 clarifies the stage 2 amendment about the identification of best practice, and should be read together with sections 11(1) and 11(2), which set out the relevant NHS bodies and, in turn, the service providers, which are to use feedback, comments, complaints and concerns that are received to identify best practice. Amendments 22 and 26 ensure consistency of language throughout the bill in terms of complaints, feedback and so on, in line with the changes that were made at stage 2. Essentially, the amendments ensure consistency of language, broaden the scope of the bill, remove the references to the patient rights officers and replace them with references to providers of the patient advice and support service, and place the appropriate duties on the relevant NHS bodies with regard to the use of comments, concerns, complaints or, indeed, positive feedback. I move amendment 4.

The minister has outlined the effects of amendment 12. It is important for the Parliament, in supporting this section of the bill, to recognise how far we have come since 1999. This section of the bill will now ensure that, once a patient has begun the specialist part of the clinical journey, they will not be sidelined so that another patient can be promoted to meet the guarantee, within any tolerances set by the health minister at the time. At times in the past, an unintended consequence of targets has been that once a guarantee was broken, new patients would be favoured. Now that we understand fully the purpose of the treatment time guarantee, I hope that the Royal College of Nursing and the British Medical Association, which have opposed the treatment time guarantee section of the bill, will understand that it is a long stop that is highly beneficial to patients. It is interesting to speculate, for example, how the treatment time guarantee might have affected the patient in my constituency who was reported this week in the cancer statistics as having waited 178 days for melanoma treatment from a maxillofacial unit. I suspect that if the treatment time guarantee had been in place, that waiting time would have been considerably shorter. I am pleased to support amendment 12. Amendment 12 agreed to. Section 9—Treatment time guarantee: guidance and directions

I support this group of amendments. If we had had a serious pandemic and the bill had been in place, exactly this provision would have been required to give the minister the necessary flexibility. Admitting patients when our intensive care units are already loaded with pandemic flu patients would be a serious problem and we would be in danger of breaching the legislation. I welcome the amendments. Amendment 13 agreed to. After section 9 Amendment 14 moved—[Nicola Sturgeon]—and agreed to. Section 10—Treatment time guarantee: key terms Amendment 15 moved—[Nicola Sturgeon]—and agreed to. Section 12—Encouragement of patient feedback etc Amendments 16 to 19 moved—[Dr Simpson]—and agreed to. Section 11—Arrangements for handling and responding to patient feedback etc Amendments 20 to 22 moved—[Dr Simpson]—and agreed to. Section 14—Patient advice and support service: establishment and funding

I support the Government amendments to section 16 because they will allow us to achieve our common objective of establishing a system independent of the health board, readily available to the patient and integrated with other advice systems linked directly or indirectly to advocacy. Previous amendments on this matter referred to citizens advice bureaux, which have provided an excellent service since their commencement. Although it would not be appropriate to name one organisation in connection with the proposed patient advice and support service, I point out that CABx embody a holistic approach that is appreciated by patients. I also welcome Mary Scanlon’s amendment 28, as it will underpin patients’ confidence in a system of support that will identify need and assist in a holistic way. Amendment 23 agreed to. Amendment 24 moved—[Nicola Sturgeon]—and agreed to. Section 15—Patient advice and support service Amendments 25 and 26 moved—[Dr Simpson]—and agreed to. Amendment 27 moved—[Nicola Sturgeon]—and agreed to. Amendment 28 moved—[Mary Scanlon]—and agreed to. Amendment 29 moved—[Nicola Sturgeon]—and agreed to. Section 18—Protections and limitations

Principle 9A uses the term “unnecessary harm”, but it is not completely clear what that might mean. In the quality strategy, the safe quality ambition uses the phrase “avoidable harm”. Amendment 7 would make the principle consistent with the strategy and avoid misinterpretation. Amendment 8 relates to the principle that patients should be “cared for in an appropriate, clean and safe environment”. That can apply only when it can be reasonably achieved. What is “appropriate, clean and safe” will vary depending on the circumstances and the location of treatment. The change that amendment 8 proposes should not be interpreted as a softening of Parliament’s unanimous desire to ensure that hospitals are clean at all times, but it is important to be realistic. There are many circumstances in which patients will have to be treated in an environment that is less than fully clean. Amendment 8 will allow that to happen. I move amendment 7.

It depends on how Ross Finnie reads the existing wording and where the word “appropriate” applies. If it applies to the general environment rather than to the two words that follow, there could be some room for debate. Although I hear where Ross Finnie is coming from, I do not agree with his conclusion. The cabinet secretary is right to give the example of a road traffic accident. However, anyone who has been in an accident and emergency ward will have seen that, on occasions, treatments in that situation have to be undertaken that are anything but as clean as everyone would wish them to be, simply because of the need for urgency and speed at that time. As I said in introducing the amendment, it in no way absolves staff from trying to achieve maximum safety and cleanliness at all times. Indeed, that is clearly stressed in the amendment as it is drafted. To suggest that staff would not wish that to be the case is inappropriate, but to ring them with a requirement for absolute cleanliness at all times would also be inappropriate. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s support for these further amendments, which will make the principle appropriate and proportionate. Amendment 7 agreed to. Amendment 8 moved—[Richard Simpson].

I thank colleagues on the Health and Sport Committee and the committee clerks for the help and support that they have given throughout the process. I also thank the cabinet secretary and the Government bill team for the assistance with which they provided me in getting in place some of the language and other aspects of the amendments that we considered today. I am pleased to open on behalf of my party in support of the bill. That is a sentence that I could not have written when first we were presented with the bill. I remember Ross Finnie taking me to task considerably and at some length for my highly critical stance on the original bill. I believe that the bill, as amended, will make a valuable contribution to the important journey that the Parliament has been on since its inception. We have come a long way. The whole culture of the NHS in Scotland has changed and will continue to change. Moreover, my party, the Government party and the Scottish Liberal Democrats—I am less sure about our Conservative colleagues—remain wedded to a modernised but still very public service. Central to that is the concept of partnership, to which all of us are wedded—partnership between health professionals and patients and between the institution of the NHS and the public. We will not embrace the wholesale changes that are now happening in England. However, in the bill, we are aligning ourselves in one respect with the English charter approach of the previous United Kingdom Government. The charter will meet the concerns of the Law Society of Scotland, which at stage 1 identified some 17 rights under statute, common law or NHS practice that were not set out in the bill. As the cabinet secretary said, it will end concerns that there is any form of hierarchy. I am sure that such a hierarchy was not intended in the original bill, but its existence was clearly implied. The charter will provide a comprehensive guide and will have to be in formats that meet the various needs of all our citizens. Today we have agreed that those should include specified formats for people with a degree of incapacity. That reflects the groundbreaking Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, which was followed by our English colleagues a considerable time later. The effect of the charter will have to be monitored. However, no matter how comprehensive or how well promoted it is, we have not yet answered the central question that the committee was posed with, as patients will not have any meaningful redress or compensation if their rights are infringed. That may have to wait for another session of Parliament and consideration of the report of the no-fault compensation group. Elements of the bill may need to be reconsidered in light of that. No-fault compensation will be a crucial further step in moving from a defensive, closed approach, according to which mistakes are not recognised openly as opportunities for individuals and systems to learn but are seen as things to be hidden as far as possible. We did not think that the way in which the treatment time guarantee was originally written, which applied it solely to in-patient treatments, was helpful. There will now be a series of undertakings to patients on what they can reasonably expect and a long-stop guarantee that they will not be passed by so that another patient can be placed within the tolerances of a target. Patients are rarely unreasonable. As one constituent said to me the other week: “when I arrived at the hospital for my scheduled hip operation in the worst of the bad weather it was like a war zone. So when they apologised telling me they had to postpone my operation I fully understood I was then offered a choice of going to the Golden Jubilee or waiting for my chosen surgeon to have a free slot it was my choice and I felt everyone was doing their best.” A charter targets and guarantees to underpin the mutuality of partnership, open discussion, clear information that makes sense and choices wherever possible, but it is not a platform for litigation. In the new complaints section of the bill, Labour has sought to further the same principles of partnership and mutuality. Now there is not just a legalised complaints system but an NHS complaints system that invites patients and their families and carers to be part of a constant cycle of improvement. The four Cs approach that was supported by the Scottish Human Rights Commission’s team and proved so successful in the challenging surroundings of our state hospital is now to be part of the NHS. I hope that the Government will invite the commission and the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman to support the introduction of that new approach. As the cabinet secretary indicated, most patients do not want to complain; sometimes they are fearful of complaining. Frankly, in the past boards have had a tendency often to respond with reports of process, instead of welcoming input as an important means of improvement and then telling the patient what they have done to make changes for the future. I always encouraged my patients to send in compliments or positive feedback if they had had a good experience. Staff respond to that. More important, managers can then see whether positive lessons can be learned that can be applied to other areas. Individually, comments may not amount to much, but when collated they may point to patterns and help to identify problems before they become the third C, that of concerns. A cobweb, a wheelchair left in a corridor or a notice partially hidden—none of those is hugely important but, if on day two, three or four the cobweb is still untouched or the chair still blocks egress, they can become concerns. There are concerns about the 10 per cent of staff who, despite the substantial improvements that have been made, still do not wash their hands before touching a patient or moving a bedpan followed by a food tray—a comment I heard from a constituent the other day. We need to encourage patients to express concerns without having to go through a formal complaints system. There are complaints, though. In the state hospital, those declined as the rest of the system developed and staff and patient satisfaction improved. The feedback loops that we are building in are critical to the success of the system as a means of improving care. All the feedback loops—to the patient, the family member, the carer, the patient advice and support staff, the board, the health department and health improvement Scotland—will be crucial. Finally, there is the patient advice and support system. We now have an independent system capable of an holistic approach. I urge the Scottish Government to ensure that all existing contracts are extended immediately until the act is commenced and new contracts are established. The uncertainty created by the proposal to create a new and expensive raft of patient rights officers has already caused some damage that the Scottish Government must move quickly to repair. I commend the bill, as amended, to Parliament.

I apologise for arriving late for the debate. The point that the member makes about speech and language is even more crucial because of delays in referral. The average age of referral is 15 months older than it was prior to the changes to which he refers.

There will be a personal seminar later.

I welcome this debate and the generally consensual approach that has been taken. None of us could forget the picture that Harry Burns published in his report two years ago of the difference between the brain of a normal child and that of a child who has suffered severe neglect. That is our starting point. There are 100,000 children living in families with alcohol and drug problems in Scotland, and many more that face other serious challenges. There are 210,000 children living in relative poverty, and that number will increase—children with single parents constitute the largest group within that number. If we do not achieve the early identification, which members from every party want to happen, before a child is three years old, the consequences for that individual, society, the taxpayer and the budget are appalling: between 3 and 8 per cent of those children will have behavioural problems; exclusions will be higher; there will be more smoking, drug use, alcohol use, antisocial behaviour, underachievement, poor educational achievement and unemployment; and more of them will go to prison, become pregnant as teenagers and be obese. We do not need any more evidence to tell us that. The Dunedin study, which started in 1972, showed that the overwhelming majority of children who will be in the groups that I have mentioned can be identified before they reach the age of three. Hugh O’Donnell is right to say that we need to get on with the identification process, and I will return to that point in a minute. Dr Wilson, from the SNAP group, also indicated that that is perfectly possible, as Christine Grahame said. If we agree on that point, we must focus the resources on that area. Ross Finnie invited me to give a lecture on RONIC. I will not, but I will say that it was a well-intentioned blind alley that has delayed progress for this Government and has meant that its achievement has been less than it would have liked. I agree with Ross Finnie that the system is highly dysfunctional. We need only consider the fact that we have yet to align budgets. We have not got an integrated paediatric health and social care service. That failure is disastrous for individual families. We do not have workforces that are aligned and focused—Mary Scanlon and Christine Grahame talked about some of the workforce issues that need to be addressed. I want to pay tribute to the Government—as I have done in almost all my speeches—for its attempts to move things forward, including its review of “Health for All Children”, the progress on the early years framework and its work on GIRFEC. However, all of that has yet to lead to any significant achievements. We are only at the stage of refreshing the maternity care framework. Why are we simply refreshing the framework when there are many mothers with drug and alcohol abuse problems and we have only a couple of specialist teams dealing with that? As Rhoda Grant and Maureen Watt pointed out, we should start at the point of pre-delivery, not the point after the child is born, yet we do not focus on that to any great extent. We are losing maternity posts today, even though we have a higher number of births than we had before. There is much activity—a new maternity care framework, NHS Quality Improvement Scotland’s forthcoming pathway of care for vulnerable families, a forthcoming national syllabus for parents and the new guidance on Hall 4—that is about to take effect. However, if we go back further, our teenage pregnancy rates are huge. The healthy respect programme has been in place for many years but it has achieved nothing in terms of outcomes for teenage pregnancy. However, in Oldham, through a focused approach, there has been a 29 per cent reduction in the number of teenage pregnancies, and that is not the only area in England where a similar approach has been hugely beneficial. The family-nurse partnership pilot arose from one of Tony Blair’s papers back in 2004. Here we are, seven years later, with two pilots costing £1.6 million and supporting 145 families. That is great, and in time we might see that the cost is low relative to the costs that would have developed later on, but it is still £10,000 a family. We will see whether the approach works. Reference has been made to the New Orleans programme. As a practitioner in adoption and fostering for 18 years, I was repeatedly appalled by the fact that children went in and out of care again and again, and their attachment was never assessed. Without attachment, individuals will not develop properly, so the New Orleans programme might be helpful to us in that regard. I have had a lucky week, as my new grandson has been born. He is very small—less than 5lb. The breastfeeding nurse in Wishaw general hospital has been hugely helpful in supporting my daughter-in-law, but the nurse told me that the 22 breastfeeding nurses in North Lanarkshire will be made redundant at the end of March—another successful pilot down the tubes. We are pilot-ridden in this Parliament. We have all been trying our best, but the pilots are not good enough. We have to roll things out. The sure start issue is important. If we do what England is doing under the Tory coalition and have a third of our sure start centres close, that will be bad. That was the point that Helen Eadie was trying to make. Hugh O’Donnell talked about Place2Be—I am wearing the badge today—which runs a hugely successful but inexpensive programme that helps schoolchildren. Christina McKelvie, Maureen Watt and others made the point about integration. We have a dysfunctional system that is not integrated. There are separate records on the same child for GPs, health visitors, social work and nursery schools. We must get to grips with that. I welcome this debate and I support our amendment.

I deeply regret the tone in which the cabinet secretary has addressed this serious problem. We at least have transparent data from Fife. We have information on other reasons for removal from the database—which can include death—from only six boards, but that amounts to a further 100 or more patients, many of whom may have died, although we do not know. In addition to the issue of deaths, we have the separate issue of readmissions. When will the cabinet secretary ask the right questions of the boards so that we have clear data? I include in that the issue of people who are waiting for beds and who do not have complex needs but are reclassified as having them. The situation is a mess, but it is a mess in which people are dying, and that is the issue that we must address.

The bill is important, as much of the legislation on burial and cremation is more than 100 years old. Although it was the Shipman inquiry that led to the substantial revision that the bill proposes and to the revision in England, it was increasingly evident that this area of Scots law was no longer fit for purpose. Today, there are many fewer post mortems, which are the most accurate form of diagnosis, although stillbirth remains one of the areas in which that process is frequently recommended to ensure a clear understanding of cause. Moreover, we are in the early stages of a new era of non-invasive post mortems, which may make a major contribution to accurate diagnosis in the future. We know that the accuracy of existing medical certificates of cause of death is not great, although the minister’s suggestion that old age was never acceptable as a diagnosis hugely irritated my colleague Dr McKee; I am glad that that slur on his—and indeed my—past certification was later corrected by officials. Evidence on the current system pointed to significant levels of inaccuracy. Professor Fleming said in columns 3752 and 3754 of the Health and Sport Committee Official Report that in the 62 per cent of disposals that took place by cremation, the required reviews to be undertaken by two further independent doctors resulted in some 20 or 30 post mortems through the procurator fiscal, but more importantly resulted in 15 per cent of certificates being “fine-tuned”. That amounted to 4,500 cases. Dr Colin Fischbacher from the Information Services Division indicated that he has to contact doctors about 2,000 MCCDs annually, which is around 4 per cent of total deaths. I found it disturbing to learn for the first time that those doctors were not obliged to respond to the request for further information, so that needs to be addressed. Despite all that, however, it is agreed that the current system—and indeed any system—could not have prevented Shipman from killing hundreds of patients over the past quarter of a century. Regrettably, it has taken a long time to go through this process in Scotland. It began in 2005, with a group reporting three years later in 2008 and a consultation, which led to the bill, in 2010. When the committee began to consider the matter, it was quickly established that the priorities included the need to retain public confidence, about which we must be very clear. Another issue, which the Government has highlighted, is the need for quality and accuracy. We need a modern system that has some chance of providing Scotland today with legislation that will stand the test of time—if not 100 years, then a reasonable time—but that was not contained in the original bill. I welcome the interaction that is already occurring between the Government and the committee, which has resulted in some improvements. Nevertheless, the removal of the three-doctor review on cremation and its replacement with a two-level review system as originally proposed is wholly inadequate. Around 500 random reviews, and a further 500 reviews that were either targeted or resulted from interested person requests, would have resulted in only 1,000 level 2 reviews, which is 2 per cent of deaths. Some of those reviews could be retrospective, taking place up to three years after death, which is not exactly an immediate response. The increase to 2,000 level 2 reviews, along with an increase to 25 per cent for level 1 reviews, is excellent. As the committee report says, that is a step in the right direction. We have no idea, however, where that figure comes from, and it contrasts with the English proposal to have reviews in 100 per cent of cases—which I acknowledge will be far more expensive. Our system has to be proportionate, but it must be driven by public confidence, and it cannot be driven solely by short-term cost considerations. It must be recognised that all the experts agreed, as I have mentioned previously, that no system could totally eliminate criminal activity. The absence of a requirement to examine the body is still a matter of some concern, and we might need to make that a requirement for cremation if it is not already provided for. If the Government’s other main intention is to improve the quality of the MCCD, it is extraordinary that it has not considered moving to an electronic system from the very start of the process. That we are now going to rush into having paper test sites and will then probably have to consider using further test sites with an electronic system is frankly a sign of some timidity and lack of vision. Let us consider some small elements that would improve our health care system, but that have not been mentioned—the minister can correct me on that. The inclusion in the MCCD of ethnicity was considered at the joint cross-party group meeting by the racial equality in Scotland and mental health groups last night, and that would help us in our understanding of some of the premature death outcomes among ethnic minority groups. The automatic requirement to include the community health index number—the CHI number—would allow for data linkage in a way that is crucial for determining a number of epidemiological factors. At least in the hospital and care-home settings, the requirement to say whether there is a presence or absence of health care-acquired infection would improve the quality of outcome data substantially. As the committee convener mentioned, there is an issue around the experience of the signing doctor. The current system means that 34,000 of the MCCDs that are signed in hospital are probably being signed by an FY2—a foundation year 2 doctor—or another inexperienced junior doctor. It is appropriate that that should be part of their training, but as things stand 22,000 of those cases would be reviewed by a doctor of at least five years’ experience, because of the cremation process. In my view the MCCD must be signed only by a doctor who has completed a module of training specifically on death certification. If an FY2 signs it, it should be countersigned by a consultant. Moreover, there should be a feedback system to ensure that, as part of their training, all specialists and general practitioners have some of their certificates reviewed automatically at level 1. That might require a greater focusing of level 1 prescribing. All of that will be much easier if the MCCD is electronic. I do not have time in this opening speech to review a number of other important issues, including post mortems ordered by the family, the disposal of body parts and foetuses, the certification of the absence of devices that could cause dangerous explosions at cremation, expedited MCCDs for faith groups, the implementation of the eventual act for remote and rural communities, overseas deaths and the whole financial approach, but I know that other members will cover those areas. Labour supports the bill at stage 1.

My colleagues on the Health and Sport Committee are probably booing because they remember the rather long speech I made during one committee meeting. This has been a thoughtful and useful debate. It reflects the Parliament’s scrutiny at its best. The expert group came up with a view on which the Government consulted. We have all been through a fairly lengthy process, but we start from an agreed point. As Stewart Stevenson thoughtfully pointed out, the current procedures began to come into place in 1855 and certainly are no longer sufficiently robust. That is the starting point. They no longer have full public confidence, but the Shipman inquiry was only part of a process that indicated that they were no longer fit for purpose. The accuracy of the data is important to us in epidemiological research, in holding the Government to account on progress on reducing premature deaths and in ensuring that there is equality of treatment in ethnic communities. Those are all dependent on the quality of the data that are obtained. At the same time, we want to prevent the possibility of any criminal activity, although we have all agreed that it is not possible to guarantee that such activity will be prevented. Nonetheless, as all speakers have made clear, the central issue in the debate is that whatever system we come up with at the end of stage 3 must retain public confidence. The easiest way to do that is to have level 2 scrutiny in 100 per cent of cases. That is what has been done through the English legislation and how the English intend to proceed. However, as Michael Matheson and others pointed out, the cost of that per individual will be high—perhaps around £150 or £170—if the system is to be self-financing. The proportionate measure that is proposed in Scotland would cost around £30 or, if it were totally self-financing, perhaps £50. The core issue of public confidence remains vital. Proportionality is all very well, but if we do not retain public confidence, the system will require revision. Already as a result of the debate and the evidence that was received in committee, the Government has moved to increase the level 1 scrutiny to 25 per cent of certificates and the level 2 scrutiny to 4 per cent. The minister mentioned in her opening speech a figure of 50 per cent. I would be grateful if she could explain that a little further, because I do not see how we get to 50 per cent from the 25 per cent level 1 reviews and the 2,000 level 2s, particularly as the level 2s will mostly follow on from level 1s and might not be separate.

I cannot believe that we move from 25 per cent to 50 per cent by including procurator fiscal referrals. There cannot possibly be 25 per cent procurator fiscal referrals. I see that the minister is nodding—I put that on the record. I would be very surprised if 25 per cent of cases are referred to the procurator fiscal, but the minister says that that is the case, so we should accept that. Ross Finnie analysed the situation most clearly. He said that a figure of 4 per cent is better than the previous proposal, and the committee has said that that would be a step in the right direction. However, evidence to the committee suggested that 10 per cent might provide us with a proper statistical basis. If we get somewhere between 4 and 10 per cent, we might have something that we can work with. The minister has given an undertaking that the figure could be adjusted further as we go along and after the test sites have been looked at. That might be practical, but I ask her to produce a little more detail at stage 2 on how the 4 per cent figure was arrived at. What risk assessment was carried out in arriving at that figure rather than 10 per cent? I return to the fundamental problem, which is that, in the current system, more than 62 per cent of certificates are scrutinised by three doctors. The new system will not distinguish between burial and cremation, but that distinction did not arise purely by chance; it arose because the public and Parliament felt that, when someone is cremated and the body is no longer there to be reviewed, a greater degree of scrutiny is required. Many members have referred to the need for improvement in the accuracy and quality of the data. If that is achievable, we might not need to scrutinise 100 per cent of cases, as in England, or even the 10 per cent that it is suggested that we should have here. As Ian McKee and Helen Eadie said, to achieve that improvement, we need to ensure that there is an adequate training process. The training will not necessarily be provided by a medical reviewer—it might need to be devolved to the post-graduate deans, which the bill will need to allow for. As Helen Eadie said, the resources for training must be adequate and ring fenced in some way. I suggest that no one should be allowed to sign a form unless they have gone through a certificated training module to show that they understand what the process is about. Ian McKee said that quality and accuracy are not the same thing. We might end up with what appears to be better quality but, at the end of the day, it might not be more accurate. That is a conundrum that I do not propose to unravel, despite the encouragement of the Presiding Officer to speak for a greater length of time. The most important issue is that of electronic forms, because an electronic system could underpin the whole system. I remain surprised that consideration of electronic forms has not been undertaken—I was even more surprised after Ross Finnie pointed out to us that that suggestion was in the expert group’s report. That is a grave mistake. I would go further and suggest that we should not actually have test sites without having an electronic system. That might involve delay, but I would rather have a delay and get a system that is correct than go to test sites, amend the whole system and then have to come back and retest with electronic forms.

I accepted the approach in the report, but on reflection and after hearing what members have said in the debate I think that we probably have to think again. I will be interested to hear what other members say. We have not addressed some issues, such as the ordering of a post mortem by the family. The disposal of body parts and foetuses, which Stewart Stevenson mentioned, needs to be considered in more detail. The question of ensuring the certification of the absence of devices is important. It was pointed out that devices are sometimes not picked up until the second level of certification, which can be dangerous. If devices get as far as cremation we have—literally—an explosive situation on our hands. The minister said that the certificates that are issued for the 250 deaths that occur overseas should be reviewed centrally. I welcome that. Helen Eadie mentioned the issue. Rhoda Grant and other members talked about the needs of faith groups. I think that we have secured better consideration of the issue, but further issues to do with parallel or retrospective review need to be considered. There is also an important issue to do with deaths in remote and rural areas, as Mary Scanlon and Rhoda Grant, who both represent the Highlands and Islands, said. In the test sites, we must ensure that such issues are taken into account and followed through. Perhaps one of the sites should be in Glasgow, where there is a greater number of faith-based communities. I will conclude—if that is acceptable to the Presiding Officer—by talking about finance. I was originally of the view that funeral directors should collect the fee, but as the arguments have been made I have begun to think that the registrars might well have to do that. Perhaps we can combine the proposed fee and the charge that is currently made for people who want a copy of the certificate, which registrars already administer—I think that they charge £9. However, as many members said, if the death is registered by someone other than a family member, such as a police officer or a minister, there could be a problem. That is an administrative matter, with which I am sure the minister will be able to help us, perhaps through guidance. A fee of £30 sounds reasonable—particularly given that people have been paying more than £150—but it might not be enough to enable the system to be self-funding. In an age of austerity, we must ask whether the Government should be putting a further £1 million or £1.5 million into the system. The approach would be welcomed by individuals but might need to be looked at again. The central issues of public confidence and the proportionate nature of the bill will need to be considered at stage 2 when amendments are lodged. We support the bill at stage 1.

I accept that we need to have a clear understanding of what that would involve, and that we should not delay the whole process unnecessarily with an electronic system. However, I understand that at present ISD, in linking to the registrars, already has an electronic system in place. The 2,000 cases that Dr Fischbacher told us had to be looked at again were brought up because of the electronic system. We may already be part of the way there.

I thank Rhoda Grant for securing the debate on an issue that needs to be looked into. Local community care forums are well utilised and are an integral part of many older people’s lives. As Rhoda’s motion states, they provide support and help to alleviate isolation—actions that most of us would agree with. The 11 community care forums in the Highlands have effectively built up skills and networks in communities and are reaching out to those who do not necessarily want or need a clinical or statutory solution, but who want independent support in their communities. I welcome the research by the Inverness and Highland community care forums that highlights the vital roles that they play. Highland Community Care Forum is now more than a decade old and has, I gather, achieved some pretty good results. The independent support that community care forums provide helps to build efficiency in the statutory organisations, including by saving money on hospital admissions. For example, Nairn, with its set-up of a modern community hospital supporting a network of community care and rapid response systems, is a particularly good model. I understand that the Nairn anticipatory care pilot reported that for every £1 spent on home care, £6 was saved in hospital admissions. We all need to pay attention to the Scottish patients at risk of readmission and admission data that show the numbers increasing, at great cost to individuals and to us as taxpayers. We know that with training, education, support and involvement in service development, the partnership between the community, the carers and the statutory services can have a transformational effect. I have been lucky enough to have the privilege of visiting HUG, which is one of the delivery organisations, and the Aberdeen mental health project for users and carers. Projects such as those have an important part to play. HUG is certainly a vibrant organisation—questioning that was supposed to last 15 minutes went on for about 45 minutes, and I certainly felt grilled. We need to listen to the voices. I pay tribute to the staff for their energy and dedication, considering the fact that in the voluntary sector they are constantly in a situation in which their jobs are not secure, unlike jobs in the public sector—until recently. A needs assessment that was carried out in Smithton, Culloden and Ardersier provided some invaluable insights. I was struck particularly by the observation that hearing problems are a barrier to social inclusion. The general problem is that we have had an astonishing increase in longevity of two and a half months every year since 1997. Now more than ever, we are challenged to meet the needs of older people, not least because the increasing years of longevity are not matched by increasing years of good health. There is another comment in the report that I referred to that is worth recording. It is that the creation of stronger clubs and increased social networks is all about increasing wellbeing and independence and reducing dependency. Part of the approach is to identify and use the skills of the older people themselves to the full in various organisations. If 80-year-olds are serving other 80-year-olds, that is great if they are willing, able and happy to do it; it is not if they are forced to do it. The retired and senior volunteer programme of Community Service Volunteers was curtailed by the Government in its clumsy transfer of resources, with no thought for the consequences—half of the development officers were made redundant. We have also seen the number of healthy living centres reduced from 45 to 25, despite the temporary reprieve that was given by the intervention of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing.

I will not take that interruption at face value. When we debated the issue before, five centres had closed under Labour—so we were not totally blameless—but I am told that in the past two years the number of centres has gone down from 45 to 25. Some of the centres may have been integrated into other care, which is fine, but we are currently investigating exactly what is going on. The centres are an important and integral part of community activity. My point is that all the organisations are vulnerable to the current cuts, which we need to look at carefully. I will finish by responding to Stewart Stevenson’s comment. There is a fundamental difference between what is proposed by the Scottish National Party today and what the Scottish Labour Party proposes. We are not proposing a major organisational change—I cannot repeat that often enough. The community health partnerships, which are statutory bodies that were put in place by the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Act 2004, exist to provide the sort of community partnership that can lead joint social care locally, not nationally. There is no national structure and, however much he cares to mention it, that is not going to occur. The important thing is that what the SNP is proposing today is the alignment of budgets that was introduced in the Health Act 1999. That has not worked except in a few circumstances and it will not work on a voluntary basis. The time for action in merging these budgets has come, and part of it is about protecting voluntary groups of the sort that we are discussing tonight.

I wonder whether the minister would like to comment on the point about the service provider taking things in-house and becoming the organisation that operates the advocacy side. In such circumstances, the advocacy is not really independent. Does the minister think that that is a problem on which some guidance is needed?

I declare my interests as a fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists and a member of the Scottish Association for Mental Health. I very much welcome the debate—this must be the fastest response to a parliamentary question calling for a debate that had been promised. I also welcome the Government’s good record on the issue. Good health is a mirage. As soon as one treats one condition successfully, another becomes a problem. When I was a student, tuberculosis was finally being eliminated as a major scourge and cause of premature death through the introduction of vaccination, and heart disease was becoming the major concern. The rate of heart disease is now declining significantly in all western countries, and cancer is the current major concern, but dementia will be the next one. That was recognised as early as the 1980s by the programme planning group, of which I was a member, which resulted in the Timbury report. The central message of that report was that 30 per cent of people over 80 would have dementia and that creating suitable domestic settings and reducing social isolation would help to ameliorate the condition. At that time, no treatment or cure was available. We now have some treatment, but we have no cure. The number of people whom the report estimated would be affected was too low. We pitched numbers for the early 2000s at 55,000 to 60,000, but the estimated figure now is about 70,000. That reflects a significant increase in life expectancy. What are the challenges, which are for all of us as politicians? Successive Governments have made contributions. In 2005, a commitment was given to an integrated care pathway, which was developed by 2007. Every health board had reached the standard of stage 1 by 2009. We have the new dementia strategy and the charter of rights, which are important contributions that underpin the progress that needs to be made on all fronts. Those measures are important and worth while but, as the minister said, the challenges lie not in words but in actions. First, we must have the data and the evidence base to enable us to delay the onset of the condition, to reduce deterioration, to manage the condition and to treat it. I should probably also declare that I still hold an honorary professorship at the University of Stirling, where I did research on dementia. The dementia services development centre at Stirling is celebrating its 25th year. It is a world-class, world-leading centre. Will the minister say whether its core funding will be maintained as part of the Government’s excellent work on dementia? The practical, evidence-based approach that the centre has promoted has made a major contribution to the knowledge, training and wellbeing of many Scots families and to the knowledge and training of health and social care professionals who provide support. The second challenge is for health professionals to provide early diagnosis. I pay tribute to the Government and my GP colleagues for the increase of 5,000 in registered numbers in the past two years and for the potential for 40,000 of the likely 70,000 to be registered by the end of the year. That shows that we have a long way to go, but the challenge is being met. The third challenge, which families have emphasised and which is underpinned in the strategy, is that of providing good-quality information. That is vital to allow families to adapt the domestic setting early for the dementia patient. Such adaptation is essential to reduce anxiety, distress, behavioural difficulties and deterioration. Early assessment of and support for unpaid carers are important. Unpaid carers contribute about £1 billion of the £1.7 billion cost of dementia, but monetary estimates underrate carers’ true value. They provide continuity, which is a major challenge. If I had one wish, it would be for our services to provide continuity to dementia patients. Community care is hard enough for the elderly. We have seen the shocking “Panorama” programme that showed patients with 30 or 40 carers a month. Last month, a constituent of mine had 11 carers, and that was in an area where social care is regarded as being quite good. For people with dementia, continuity is fundamental. Everyone prefers to remain at home, and two thirds of patients do so, but that means that we must create a new approach in which packages include a rapid 24/7 emergency response component. If elderly patients with dementia fall—even if they do not have a fracture—they are more likely to end up in hospital than are elderly patients with other conditions. We need much more of the intermediate and emergency services such as those in north-east Fife in my constituency and those in Lanarkshire. Rapid response and reablement services can prevent admission. I am not content with the inspection of care homes that takes place. We need to set new standards for training requirements in care homes. We must ensure that every care home has an emergency response arrangement. Scotland has almost no community geriatricians, although England has them, yet 40,000 of our elderly are in care homes and 70 per cent of those people have dementia. Our amendment says that we must consider the specific challenge of palliative care. Far too many patients with dementia enter hospital to die. The position is not good for people with dementia, their families or the health service. We must develop reablement services for when patients leave hospital, such as the highly successful service that Peter Gabbitas runs in Edinburgh. In the hospital setting—which I do not have time to deal with—dementia patients need good nutrition, better pain management and an end to boarding out, which must be banned. We must have dementia-friendly rooms for such patients, so that they have the potential to come out of hospital. I have not had time to deal with alcohol-related brain damage, which is an important and growing problem; antipsychotic medicine, which the minister mentioned; telecare; assistive technology; or rights, which are important. I commend the Government for its work and support its motion, along with the two additions on carers and palliative care that our amendment proposes. I move amendment S3M-7793.1, to insert after “Carers in Scotland”: “; recognises the crucial role played by carers both paid and unpaid; notes also the challenge of ensuring good quality palliative care for people with dementia”.

Let me begin by talking about success in early diagnosis. An additional 5,000 people have been registered during the past couple of years and we are likely to meet the target by the end of March. However, as Mary Scanlon said, if registration is simply a tick-box exercise to record diagnosis, it is not sufficient. We must use the opportunity that is presented by having a cohort of newly diagnosed individuals to ensure that research is undertaken into which non-pharmacological interventions, such as self-help and carer action, work. I hope that such studies will be part of the research that the minister said is being funded through the Scottish dementia clinical research network. Members talked about legality and consent, and Rhona Brankin talked about the inappropriate use of antipsychotic medication. People are regarded as having capacity under the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000; it is only towards the end that capacity is so impaired that people are unable to participate in decisions. We need to address the matter carefully. I welcome what the minister said about antipsychotic medication, the use of which remains widespread. We need to understand when it is appropriate to use such drugs and ensure that they are not used inappropriately. As Jamie Stone said, it is hugely important that we protect vulnerable people. The dementia integrated care pathway, which started in 2007, is an important advance, but standards of care of the sort that the minister mentioned in relation to the Mental Welfare Commission are also important. Irene Oldfather talked about the need to ensure that the standards are applied throughout the area of care. From April, inspection will be undertaken by social care and social work improvement Scotland rather than the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, but it is important that the care commission’s regime of inspection of the suitability of the care home environment for dementia sufferers is toughened and includes a review of the use of antipsychotic medication. There should be a tough regime in that regard. The MWC’s report, “Best of Intentions”, which has been mentioned, showed how far we still have to come. As well as monitoring and annual reports, we must have a close inspection regime. Members talked about training. The joint training by NES and social services is important. When I lectured in social work at the University of Stirling, I found it difficult to get social workers and doctors to undertake training together. We must make the effort to improve multidisciplinary training. Carers also need training. It is not just about providing good information, although that is a good start, which is stressed in the strategy. We need to go further and provide good, effective support to enable carers to develop the right approach. Carers need training, support and respite. The Government has done quite a bit on respite and that work needs to continue. Carers also need emergency plans, because a source of stress is their concern about what will happen to the cared-for person if they are ill. Stewart Stevenson talked about the importance of carers and their need for such support. I welcome the funding for specialist dementia nurses and the pilots for the system—although I must ask what happened after the joint futures pilot in Perth and Kinross 11 years ago, which was supposed to merge elderly health and social care but proved incredibly difficult. Big Lottery Fund funding will be important, as is the research network funding. Helen Eadie stressed the European dimension to collaborative research. In the current period of austerity we need research to be focused and to take place in a number of countries. As Ian McKee and Mary Scanlon said, there are many types of dementia. Only 60 per cent of sufferers have Alzheimer’s. Members mentioned vascular and multi-infarct dementia. There is a form of vascular dementia that is known as Binswanger’s disease, which I do not know much about; there is also dementia with Lewy bodies and frontal lobe dementia. I did a case study on a patient who had alcohol-related brain damage. The individual had 11 separate case records. Everyone was doing their best, but the person was trapped in the revolving door of increasingly frequent admissions to hospital, which were hugely expensive and never resolved the issue. By tagging all the notes and indicating that people should phone or come to me, I was able to get the patient into an alcohol unit pending a guardianship order. I regret that it took six months to get the order and the wait cost the taxpayer £60,000, because the patient would not agree to move to a care home. There is a problem that we need to deal with in that regard. We have not talked about issues such as assistive technology and telecare, which are important. We talked a little about palliative care, which is the new challenge. The dementia services development centre at the University of Stirling will run new courses on the subject. We did not talk about new treatments that are coming along, so I end on a note of hope, as a tribute to Jim Jackson. There is the potential for vaccination against dementia, and if research is successful it might lead to a repeat of the tuberculosis story. Our successors in the Parliament might come to the chamber to talk about the next disease on the list of health challenges that we must face. I welcome the progress that has been made and the efforts of Government. I welcome the support for the motion and for the amendment in my name.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive how many school nurses there have been in each year since 2007. (S3O-12785)

Will the minister join me in praising school nurses for the work that they have done on the human papillomavirus vaccine? That vaccination programme has been a singular success. Are school nurses linked to primary care practices? Have they undertaken flu vaccinations in that capacity for those in the five to 15-year-old age group during the swine flu outbreak and the seasonal flu outbreak this year?

I, too, congratulate Cathy Jamieson on securing the debate. I welcome the new Minister for Transport and Infrastructure to his post. I want to tell him a little story. It is about a company that set up in Cowie in his constituency. When it set up, it was keen to use rail, and some of us argued at the time that with a small amount of what is now called mode shift revenue support, that would be possible. A railway siding was built at the works where the manufacturing process was to occur, but it was never used. The company is still going. It built a special road to access the area. Hundreds of lorries thunder up and down it. The story dates back to a time before climate change or the other issues that we have been hearing about today. If we are serious that £7 million is too much to be our contribution to dealing with the huge global issues that we face, something is badly wrong. I hope that the closure of the FFG scheme is a mistake and that we can address the issue on an all-party basis. In my area, Malcolm transport at Grangemouth has benefited enormously from taking lorry loads off the roads. As Charlie Gordon said, the Highland Spring proposal would take 10,000 lorries off the roads. Highland Spring has a £30 million expansion programme. It is not just the current lorries but the future ones. If we really are talking about the development of the economy, and if companies are going to be expanding, there will be more road traffic. If we can eliminate some of that road traffic now, it will at least arrest the problem with our roads and prevent increased carbon emissions. The fact that the issue has united business with unions, some of which are, I think, quite far to the left, is fairly unique. They have come together and said that although the FFG is a small grant, they all feel that it should continue.  I will ask a couple of questions before I finish. I understand that out of the £68.9 million that the FFG scheme has taken out of our budget since 1997, £10.9 million has been contributed by the Department for Transport. I take it that if we abolish the grant we will lose any contribution from the DOT. Will the minister tell us whether that is the case? Can he confirm that the mode shift revenue support grant will continue? If it does not, there are some borderline schemes in which there may be a return to road from rail. Major projects like the Thornton rail extension in my constituency—I think that Christopher Harvie said that £46 million would be required—are for the future, when things are restored. I am not referring to such projects. We are talking about a modest grant—a small part of the budget—that can have a continuing significant impact. I therefore ask the minister to join us, to tell his budget colleagues about our support for the grant and ask them whether they could not think again.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it has taken to improve the care of people with a learning disability. (S3O-12564)

The minister will be aware of the report by the Learning Disability Alliance Scotland entitled, "Stuck! People With Learning Disabilities Resident In Care Homes For Older People In Scotland". The report shows that there are 2,000 people with a learning disability in specialist learning disability homes, but 1,000 such people in homes for the elderly. Three hundred or more of those people are under 65, and they are much more fit and active than the elderly with whom they have to reside, and for whom the average age of admission is now 90. What steps is the Government taking to ensure that Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland, or the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care as the current organisation, inspects the situation and ensures that those individuals are being housed appropriately? The Learning Disability Alliance Scotland certainly thinks that they are not.

I join the cabinet secretary in thanking all staff for their hard work, particularly during the bad weather when so many of them made such a huge effort to keep the service going. However, I bring us back to the reality of the fact that the workforce group that she set up is faced with cuts of 1,500 nurses, 230 allied health professionals and 68 doctors this year. When will the workforce plans for next year be available? How will the cabinet secretary ensure that medical graduates currently being trained will have adequate job opportunities, given her plans to cut 25 per cent from foundation year 1 and foundation year 2 and 40 per cent of doctors from the certificate of completion of training?

I welcome the fact that Robert Brown has secured a debate on this important topic, not least because ophthalmology is one of a number of national health service departments that are under severe pressure. Dermatology, for example, is under huge pressure from referrals for potential melanoma diagnoses, while ophthalmology is  under pressure from the increase in the number of cataracts, age-related macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy and glaucoma. Moreover, one considerable concern is the increase in cases of type 2 diabetes—and its associated retinopathy, which is still one of the major causes of blindness—as a result of the growing problem of obesity. The situation with visual impairment is improving as a result of the free eye tests to which Robert Brown referred and that stand as one of the best achievements of the last parliamentary session under the Liberal-Labour Government. We need to do more to promote those tests, although I concede that the numbers taking them have grown enormously. There is no doubt that getting tested early will make it less likely that someone will suffer visual impairment, given the number of conditions—including the excellent example of wet AMD—that are treatable. In Dundee, which has a fairly comprehensive service, the number of new visual impairment registrations has fallen by about 20 per cent. That reinforces the point made by Robert Brown and Stuart McMillan that great regional variations are bad, not only for patients but for the health service in the long term and, indeed, for all services, particularly if we bear in mind the fact that someone who becomes visually impaired requires a huge amount of support. Wet AMD is a classic example of the problems that face the health service. Just a few years ago, it was untreatable. I believe that it accounts for only 10 per cent of the total incidence of macular degeneration, not all cases of which can be treated. However, with the very latest treatments, the condition is almost reversible, which is interesting—although I point out that those treatments are even more expensive than those that were introduced initially. I will be interested to hear what the minister says in her summing up, but I believe that the system needs to be reviewed urgently, because departments are being overwhelmed. There is a great need for an effective national optometry contract, as part of the optometry service, to deal with all the follow-ups that will be needed. Robert Brown said that so far there are about 1,100 cases of this condition, but that is only the beginning, not the end, and the numbers will increase hugely. Follow-ups will be required to ensure that the condition has stabilised and to establish that further treatment is not needed, and if monitoring arrangements are not shared with the optometry service, the whole system will simply collapse. In its aims to improve eye health and eliminate avoidable sight loss, RNIB's VISION 2020 UK initiative is extremely valuable and very much to be welcomed and I also praise the Macular  Disease Society for its important efforts to raise awareness of AMD. The last point that I want to make is that the arrangements are a very good example of the procurement risk-sharing arrangements. We need to consider those arrangements regularly to check whether the initial risk sharing has reflected the true risks. That may require an adjustment in the cost-price arrangement with the pharmaceutical industry to ensure that the risks are genuinely being shared.

Ross Finnie's summary was excellent and covered most of the points. I could almost sit down. The Scottish Parliament can be proud that the Millan committee and the principles that it established led to the 2003 act. I have been a psychiatrist—I am sorry; I should have declared an interest as a fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists. We set up a framework, around 1997, and we passed in Scotland the first act on mental health that was our act rather than a tartanised version of an English act. It took the  English some five years to wrestle with producing legislation that is largely regarded by psychiatrists and users as being substantially inferior to the Scottish legislation. Therefore, when we beat ourselves up about the 2003 act—which we are right to do—we should also recognise that it is extremely good. It is the mental health framework that has not made the progress that we want. The Equal Opportunities Committee has served us well in considering whether the 2003 act is working. In 1987, half a dozen women offenders had drug problems but, since then, the proportion has increased to 100 per cent of women offenders testing positive for drugs. That point was reached in July 2004, so there is a massive drugs problem. As the then Deputy Minister for Justice, I introduced the time out centre, which took 500 women out of short-term sentences to treat drug problems, which is exactly what Mary Scanlon advocated. We need to consider that carefully. According to Dobash and Dobash, 70 per cent of the women on short-term sentences who were admitted to that programme had been abused—they had suffered either domestic violence, neglect or sexual abuse. There is a major problem to overcome if we are to address the growing number of offenders who are inappropriately admitted and not treated. Christina McKelvie referred to the independent advocacy service. That is important for prisoners and it needs to be addressed fairly quickly. In talking about advocacy, Elaine Smith mentioned the priority of ensuring that all groups are covered, which is correct. Hugh O'Donnell rightly stressed the need for independence in the advocacy service: if it is too closely connected to the other services, it does not work. The duplication of the documents that we are going to get is an important issue with which, I hope, the minister will deal. The minister dealt with advance statements. They have not been used as widely as one would have liked and I hope that their use will increase. There has been some discussion about local authorities' preventive services. I talked about Place2Be and other services. They must not be cut because cutting them would simply put more pressure on the tier 3 and tier 4 CAMHS, which cannot cope. Learning disability was not widely covered in the debate, but there is a major problem in that area. A substantial number of people with a learning disability also suffer from epilepsy and significant mental health problems, but the mental health and forensic services for them are sometimes rudimentary. Many speakers covered children and young people extensively. Elaine Smith, Ian McKee and  Mary Scanlon referred to the continued problem of admissions to adult units, which is now growing again. We got a balanced debate on that. Localism is important, but so is whether, even if a child or young person is admitted to an adult unit, they are treated by the appropriate service. That—not the adult ward, but the treatment—is the fundamental point and the committee rightly emphasised that. The monitoring of ethnicity is important because there are different patterns of psychiatric illness, which needs to be addressed. As Ian McKee said, it is important for the provider, as well as others. We probably need a further, wider review of the act. Ross Finnie got it right.

I want to focus on the issue of children and young people, which was the focus of the Health and Sport Committee's child and adolescent mental health services inquiry—many of the concerns of the Health and Sport Committee are mirrored in the Equal Opportunities Committee's report. We need to tackle with much more urgency the issue of improving the mental health and wellbeing of children and young people. In the late 1990s, concerns were expressed about the increasing prevalence of mental health problems in children and adolescents. Research shows that, over a period of time, there has been a significant rise in the number of 15 and 16-year-olds suffering from a variety of conditions, such as behavioural problems, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorders. Last week, we saw that the number of Ritalin prescriptions had risen, which is another indicator of the increasing number of such problems. Another indicator was a United Nations review of children, which showed that children in the United Kingdom were doing badly in terms of health, wellbeing and happiness. The degree to which teenagers in Scotland are stressed and unhappy has been shown by a paper on 15 and 16-year-olds in Stirling and Glasgow by Professor O'Connor of the University of Stirling, which I have quoted before and which reports that nearly 14 per cent of those children had self harmed and that a further 14 per cent had had serious and repeated thoughts of self harm. When one in three of our children are having those thoughts or undertaking those actions, we have a serious problem. A factor that has contributed to that significant change has been the growth in drug use. Today, some 100,000 children are growing up in households where there are drug or alcohol problems. We have long recognised abuse, but neglect, particularly in the first three years, has now been identified as having a marked effect. The chief medical officer, Harry Burns, illustrated that graphically in his 2008 annual report. The Scottish needs assessment programme review of 2003 had seven conclusions, two of which were that all four tiers of the services were "working beyond reasonable capacity", and that there was a lack of training, especially in tier 1. The review resulted in the development of the 2005 framework, which the Health and Sport Committee reported was robust and should be implemented. However, CAMHS have never been a top priority. The specific problems identified in the Equal Opportunities Committee report include the  continued admission of children to adult wards; the fact that the 2003 act makes the parent or person with parental responsibilities the named person rather than giving the young person a choice—that will simply need to be addressed by changing the act or in regulations; the lack of tier 1 counselling services; and problems in transitioning from young persons' services to adult services. In its 2008 report, the Mental Welfare Commission said that although it was commendable that the number of admissions of children to adult wards had reduced to 140, the target of complete elimination by 2011 would require considerable effort. It is now clear from its latest report, which shows an increase in those numbers, that that target is unreachable. I ask the minister whether the interim target of 56 beds by 2010 was reached, and perhaps she will indicate what the target and the timetable are for achieving that now. Fifty six beds is half the number recommended by the European Union. Learning disability services also remain rudimentary. Stuart Lennox said in evidence to the committee: "we ... need to invest at an earlier stage and get into prevention much sooner and more constructively."—[ Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee , 16 March 2010; c 1488.] This session, I have worked with an organisation called the Place2Be, which works across a number of local authorities in England and with City of Edinburgh Council, although it now has a pilot in Glasgow and a link in East Lothian. It is funded by health boards and local authorities, as well as by host schools, but most of the funding comes from the charity. The organisation provides counselling to children, who sometimes need significant and intensive work, and also provides the place2talk service, which I want to speak about before I finish. The service, which is based in the school but is independent of it, is used by a staggering 60 per cent of pupils, who have the opportunity to discuss with a counsellor problems and problem solving. The results, which the organisation has audited, are a reduction in exclusions and an improvement in attainment. I find it impressive that not a single local authority has stopped using the service once it has been introduced. I commend to colleagues that service, which deals with the tier 1 problem identified by the committee.

I congratulate my colleague Johann Lamont on obtaining the debate. I regard this debate as being of considerable importance, not least because I was adopted. I was extremely lucky: I was adopted into an excellent family and had enormous opportunities as a result. Subsequently, I became a medical adviser on adoption and fostering and saw some of the problems that foster and adoptive parents face. The changes that have occurred by way of improved pre-adoptive and post-adoptive support is extremely welcome, as is the improved support for foster carers. The group of carers who look after their kin, essentially on a voluntary basis, is the group that we now really need to address, which is what the motion seeks to do.  As Cathy Jamieson said, we now have a charter for grandparents and grandchildren, albeit that access is extremely patchy. I agree with Cathy Jamieson that we need to look at the matter, including by way of future legislation. We need to ensure that the child is genuinely at the centre of things. Too many children are still being separated from their grandparents. I welcome the fact that when Wendy Alexander asked the question of the First Minister in 2007, the response was a financial commitment. If I remember correctly, the commitment was for £10 million. According to my rough maths, an allowance of around £150 a week would equal a commitment of about £75 million. The amount of money that the local authorities have for this area is therefore not significant and that, in turn, is reflected in authorities' responses. Citizens Advice Scotland has helpfully produced its "Relative Value: The experiences of kinship carers using the Scottish CAB Service" report, which includes the example of Ken and Nancy. A projection was done of local authority areas, which showed that a couple in their situation would be better off by £66 in one area but worse off by £22 a week in another. How could they be worse off? It sounds strange, but that is the example that was given and I have no reason to doubt the figures. This is also a gender issue, given that 87 per cent of kinship carers are women. In our society, women already have lower wages and are disadvantaged in many other ways. Many women kinship carers will wish to adapt their working practices to ensure that their grandchildren, nephews or nieces get a proper experience of child rearing. What do we do to encourage employers to ensure that these individuals can go part time? Very few of such carers can work full time. The background of such children shows two areas that are of particular interest to me, the first of which is addictions. As Elizabeth Smith said, the number of children affected by addictions is estimated at somewhere around 50,000 for drug addiction and perhaps as many as 100,000 for alcohol addiction, although there will be some overlap between the two. Those are substantial numbers. Pressure will be put on the Parliament to try to move on taking more of those children away from their parents. We now know that if child rearing is not effective in the first three years of childhood, the damage is almost irreversible. Therefore, we need to encourage grandparents to be deeply involved in the provision of partial care, at least, if not of total care, in that time. I would say that we need a far more sophisticated approach to those early years. The other confusion, as Johann Lamont indicated, is that children who are formally looked  after may receive both support and allowances, but there are many other children who are the subject of informal arrangements. Frankly, I have heard too often of social workers encouraging such arrangements for, I suspect, budgetary reasons, but it is not a good move. I do not have time to make all the points that I would like to make, so I will make one final one. Clackmannanshire Council was one of the first councils to introduce allowances. It did so at a rate of between £121 and £209 a week, depending on the age of the child. It has had to cut that back and has been subjected to the most outrageous attacks by the Scottish National Party, when the neighbouring Stirling Council, whose residents are also my constituents, has failed to provide a single kinship allowance. I echo Bob Doris's sentiments. Let us be above party politics on this issue—although, when a local party attacks a council on a basis such as the SNP has attacked Clackmannanshire Council it is, to be frank, disgraceful. We must rise to the challenge and do better.

Will the member take an intervention?

I might have left the chamber by now. [ Laughter .] All those whom the member criticised for their remarks in response to the weather forecasting comments that Petra Meier made also said that the Sheffield report was an  excellent report that was peer reviewed. Weather forecasting is important. All that we said was that weather forecasts do not always get it right. In terms of emergency planning, a Government ignores a severe weather warning at its peril.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate, and I congratulate Jim Hume on obtaining it and on pursuing the issue.  SADS is a pretty horrendous thing for a family to go through. I will raise a slightly different issue, although Johann Lamont alluded to it: the bereavement that the families go through. Unexpected deaths in young adults are some of the harder bereavements that have to be gone through—they are difficult. Many of us will have had constituency cases in which a young adult has suddenly dropped dead. In my case, a constituent and neighbour suddenly dropped dead on a rugby field in America. Such deaths are absolutely devastating events and it takes a long time for families to recover, so they need adequate support. CRY certainly does some work to provide that. We are told that about 12 young people die every week in the UK of an undiagnosed heart problem. Therefore, the question properly arises as to whether there should be universal screening. However, universal screening is undertaken only if certain rules are complied with and certain precepts are fulfilled. The general view is that, at present, a universal screening programme is not appropriate. That is not because of the reasons that Christine Grahame mentioned about a programme being mandatory, as the programme would always be voluntary, but because it might not fulfil all the precepts and principles. To those who are interested, I commend a recent debate on the issue in the British Medical Journal . It was one of the journal’s yes-no debates, in which one person argues for a proposal and another against.

Yes, certainly. Those of my age can remember a certain footballer—I have forgotten his name for the moment—who, on being transferred to Manchester United, was found to have a heart murmur. The whole process was held up. As part of a contract of employment, the test may be mandatory, but we are talking about the much wider base of amateur sport. As Jim Hume said, Italy has introduced much more general testing, which has been pretty successful. The question then arises of how many false positives there are, and how much distress is caused when conditions that are not serious are found. Both the person and their family can be put through considerable difficulty.  Although I very much welcome the debate, we have to be very careful about how we proceed. In that regard, I welcome in particular the programme that the Scottish Government has set up. It has already had an initial evaluation, which led to an extension, and will be further evaluated. We will see from that exactly how it proceeds. Obviously, the situation needs to be watched.  Organisations such as HART and CRY are essential to maintaining public interest and to ensuring that professionals do not simply dismiss SADS because it involves small numbers. It is important that the issue is looked at carefully. Other measures can be taken on a much more general basis. We have heard about defibrillators in supermarkets. Indeed, I promoted the fact that the Thistles shopping centre in my constituency obtained two defibrillators and trained staff in using them. In my practice, we trained shopkeepers in the village so that they could undertake cardiopulmonary resuscitation. More general CPR of the sort promoted by the temperature post cardiac arrest—TOPCAT—programme in Lothian can produce benefit by way of allowing people to give rapid CPR until the appropriate staff arrive. We do not do rapid CPR well in Scotland at the moment. We need to extend such programmes. Genetics are an important consideration. The future may lie in identifying and examining mutated genes. Further examination of ion channelopathies, as they are called, and the genetics that underpin them may make the condition not one that we have to debate every session of the Parliament but something that is dealt with by way of genetic testing, which may be easier in future.

I thank the minister for the further information that she has given. Of course, the antidepressant prescribing target, which we hoped would lead to prescribing stabilising and then falling, has been summarily dropped by the Government without being immediately replaced by the alternative, although I acknowledge that the minister has just confirmed that the alternative is being considered. In England, 3,000 new therapists have been trained. How many new therapists have been trained in Scotland? In light of the earlier discussion about nurse graduates, would it be sensible to train further therapists who can apply these therapies, and then replace or backfill them with new graduates?

Come on!

We have rehearsed the history of prescription charges on many occasions and I do not think that we should do so again, except to say that they have been in and they have been out. The basic principle is that charging for health care is not regarded as appropriate in this country. On practical grounds, charges have been introduced from time to time and co-payment systems have been used. The privatisation of dentistry by the Conservative party created a massive charging system, whose potential for being rolled back has been difficult to examine.

Contractually they do, but the number of private dentists who were established as a result of the charging system has been massive. Oral ill health has been a real problem as a result and our Government and the SNP have been trying to roll that back. The problem with the prescription charges system is that it is hugely flawed, as many members have said. For example, an MP colleague of mine who does not get free prescriptions on the ground of age does get them because she has diabetes—she gets free prescriptions not just for diabetes drugs but for all drugs. Wealthy people are therefore exempt from all charges if they have certain specific conditions. I am scarred by the fact that, when I was a general practitioner, one of my student patients died because he failed to fulfil the three prescriptions for asthma that had been prescribed for him, and chose the wrong one to drop. He did so because he was one of the 600,000 people who were marginally ineligible for exemption. That is an important group. Those people have low incomes and they are about to have an additional VAT charge of £200 a year on their lives as a result of the Con-Dem coalition. Therefore, measures that we can take to try to relieve that are appropriate. The other point is that the system is hugely bureaucratic, given the massive administration costs. We spend time on addressing fraud in relation to prescription charges, which is a complete waste of time. There are substantial costs. The bureaucratic element is a problem.

I really do not have time. I am sorry. We and the SNP both started from similar positions in our manifestos in 2007. On page 40 of its manifesto, the SNP pledged that it would immediately abolish "prescription charges for people with chronic health conditions, people with cancer, and people in full time education or training."

The cabinet secretary can respond in summing up. The SNP then decided to change to a system of gradual abolition, which was the eventual policy that was to be introduced by 2012 and is now  being introduced earlier. The SNP therefore chose a different route when it came into government. Ian McKee asked why we focused on cancer patients. Read the Macmillan Cancer Support report: when people get cancer, they are so financially challenged, because of their change in circumstances, that we felt that free prescriptions could be extended to that group, even if we could not extend them to all long-term conditions immediately.

No. I am sorry, but I do not have time. I am answering the question that Ian McKee asked. The Government should have introduced that. In Wales, prescription charges were abolished for the under-23s immediately. That was sensible, because the proportion of under-23s who were not eligible for exemption on income grounds was tiny. Again, that step could have been taken immediately. Ross Finnie referred to the Liberal policy that free prescriptions should have been extended to people with long-term conditions. Alasdair Allan made a very cogent point in the previous debate on prescription charges, that there were 2,623 prepayment certificates in the Western Isles. We are talking about people with long-term conditions. A high proportion of the 8 per cent of people who pay for prescriptions have long-term conditions. The policy is unfair and bureaucratic and it does not produce the income that could be produced from that area if there really were a fair policy of charging only the rich, as Jackson Carlaw has suggested. It is appropriate to get rid of the policy on principled and practical grounds. The question of prescribing costs is important. We need to have generic substitution automatically. We need to reduce waste. We need to stop prescribing non-evidenced treatments such as homeopathic medicines, on the health service. We need to stop prescribing medicines that are found not to be working for the patient. There are many things that we can do, but the one thing that we should do now is abolish prescription charges.

It looks like the Liberal Democrat position is now changing. To quote Ross Finnie, who seemed to be fond of quoting me the other day: "The Liberal Democrats would support proposals to give protection to those who have long-term conditions."— [ Official Report , 21 January 2010; c 22953.]  The overwhelming majority of the 8 per cent who pay prescription charges have long-term conditions.

It was January.

The minister will remember that the situation that we started with in 2001 was one in which there were 2,000 blocked beds of more than six weeks. We set a target of zero blocked beds by 2008, which the current Administration achieved, and I give it plaudits for that. However, the Administration set a new policy that the figure would remain at zero, and it has not succeeded in  that regard. It was the current Administration that set that policy, not us.

I will not go into the demographics because they are very clear. There will by 2016 be a rise of 23,000 people who require care. The only thing that I take issue with in the programme outline is the fact that it begins by saying that Scots are enjoying better health; they are not. They are enjoying longer life, but not better health. At one time, I ran two care homes in England on behalf of a Scottish merchant bank, so I have experience of the problems of cost differentials and the care commission requiring adaptation of  buildings. One home was excellent, but it was in an old building and the adaptations that the care commission required threatened its viability. The Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care is one of the best things that Parliament has created. It is driving up standards and, therefore, costs for the independent sector, but that is entirely appropriate. The debate is about costs, and in the social sector, they are approximately £4.5 billion, of which £1.4 billion is in the hospital sector. The debate is primarily about the variation in costs and whether local authority costs, when they are higher than those in the independent sector, add value, and it is about whether there are other reasons for those costs being higher. Mary Scanlon referred to remote and rural areas, where smaller homes can have higher costs. Training provision with local authorities is statutory, and it is growing in the independent sector. The public sector provides occupational pensions, with contributions of 15 per cent to 18 per cent from the local authority, whereas the private sector sometimes does not provide pensions at all, although it will be required to do so in about 18 months. Helen Eadie and Karen Gillon referred to pay levels, which are very important. The minimum wage is being paid in parts of the independent sector. Some of the differentials are accounted for and understandable, but Parliament's job should be to drive up the minimum wage that is being paid in some places to equalise them with the wages that are paid in other areas. I turn to delayed discharges, which were raised by Jamie McGrigor and Helen Eadie. In July 2010, we were back up to 62 delayed discharges. We are all agreed that the target was zero discharges by March 2008, and we have achieved that since 2008. Each year, we achieve zero discharges by March, but as the year progresses and we enter the worst time of the year for the hospital sector, the number of delayed discharges increases. In the July 2010 survey, the number of delayed discharges had increased to 708 from 634 in July of the previous year. Those delayed discharges are predominantly within six weeks. When there are 5,000 empty beds, and 17,000 beds in the hospital sector are being occupied by people whose discharges have been delayed, we have to wonder what we are doing, especially in a period of austerity. The median time for delayed discharges has risen from 19 to 21 days, and the mean time is 24 days. If we could clear some of those hospital beds, we could reduce the £1.4 billion cost and provide better wages for those who work in the public sector. Care must be all about partnership. Our care sector, whether it be private, independent, or local  authority, must provide step-up and step-down care, palliative care, respite care, and enhanced care of the sort that Jamie McGrigor mentioned. The nursing homes that I ran did not have contracts with the local authority but with a hospital, in order to take people out of hospital quickly and provide them with enhanced care, which the nurses in the sector enjoyed providing. We must be able to share the risks, so that there are agreed levels of occupancy, and we do not have all those empty beds. We need joint commissioning. We also need joint inspection. It is a disgrace that the local authority inspects a home on one day and the care commission inspects it a month later. I say to my Liberal colleagues that the Liberal member of the panel at the care conference in Glasgow actually tried to defend that particular piece of bureaucracy. We must get rid of it; it is a nonsense. Karen Gillon and Jackie Baillie talked about lunch clubs, yoga classes, day care and social events. They should all be being provided across the sector, and it should not be purely a matter for the community or the care homes themselves. I will finish by talking about the national care service. We believe that the time has come to enhance the excellent joint working that is being done in some areas by requiring that services be put together. We are not talking about creating a new superstructure at the top: we will work within the existing community health and care partnerships to enhance the excellent joint working that is already being done. I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate.

I am flattered by Ross Finnie's repeated quotes from my attempts to ask questions about the bill in the committee. I think that we all agree that the bill has good intentions, and that we need to improve patients' rights and how they are managed. Most of the witnesses who gave evidence to the committee thought that drawing together patients' rights would be valuable. I do not often agree with Michael Matheson, but I agree with him that there was a clear divide between the approach of the health professionals, whom Murdo Fraser quoted at length, and the approach of the patient groups. Those groups clearly indicated a desire to legislate. We should take account of that. Almost all the witnesses indicated that there are serious problems with the bill as drafted.

I will come back to that. A number of members have referred to the Law Society, which pointed out that there are 17 other rights that patients already have that are not set  out in the bill. Ten of those are listed in paragraph 43 of the committee's report. Some of those rights are fundamental and some of them are very complex. Irene Oldfather was eloquent, as usual, when she said that impaired capacity is an important issue that needs to be addressed. Other members have referred to the GMC's concern that a patient's right to refuse treatment was not made clear. The Scottish health council and Consumer Focus have expressed doubts about the bill, and we have considerable doubts about it. That is not surprising in view of what Ross Finnie quoted. The committee clearly enunciated the central paradox of the bill. We want patients to have clearly laid out rights, but section 18 effectively precludes any significant legal action. However, once again, we all agree on that because we do not want lawyers at the foot of the bed. The lawyers describe those provisions in the bill as not being meaningful. When is a right not a right? If it is enforceable, it is a right; if it is not enforceable, perhaps it is not a right. Jackie Baillie and others have made clear our preference for powers to be developed and published in a charter of rights. However, perhaps that should be dealt with in a bill that has the enabling powers to produce it. It should also contain provisions on patients' rights and responsibilities as well as those of staff. Later sections of the bill deal with the treatment time guarantee. We have considerable difficulties with the guarantee and will seek to amend it. Sections 6 to 10, which introduce the guarantee, present another conundrum. In committee, Ian McKee questioned witnesses repeatedly about the trade-off between clinical priorities and guarantees. When we first debated the subject, I was attacked by the cabinet secretary because I said that clinical priorities must always come first. Her reply was that if a guarantee is not binding, it is not a guarantee, and if it is not binding, will patients not find it meaningless? There is therefore a second conundrum in the bill that we need to address. I say to my Liberal Democrat and Tory colleagues that, although we might not be successful, we will seek to address the conundrum by taking a much more flexible approach to patient guarantees, rather than giving the precise guarantees that the cabinet secretary seeks to embody in primary legislation, which might change. Others have said that the treatment time guarantee, as it is laid out in the bill, is highly discriminatory. SAMH and others indicated their serious concerns about mental health being almost totally excluded from the bill in relation to treatments such as CBT. However, that is not the only area that faces a problem. Why is the national scoliosis service excluded? Assisted conception,  which is a source of considerable delay and problems, is a worry to many patients, so why is it excluded? We need a much more flexible approach in the TTG sections of the bill and we will seek to amend them. Elaine Smith spoke about issues in primary care. Primary care is not covered by the bill, yet many of the delays in cancer diagnosis relate to the primary care sector, about which there are no guarantees in the bill. There are many targets in the NHS that are not just for in-patient procedures. NHS Lothian indicated that procedures that are in-patient today might be out-patient procedures tomorrow and therefore subject to a TTG. The situation will be different in different health boards, so there are real problems in not making the TTG provision more flexible. Turning to the complaints section of the bill, I note that the SNP undertook to introduce no-fault compensation and I know that it is still working on that. That is important in relation to where we are going. It is a pity that it cannot be included in the total package at this point, but I understand the difficulties. We would welcome a much more formal mediation process because, as many speakers have said, patients do not want to enter into a formal complaints procedure; they want something else. In paragraph 136 of our report, we refer to the example of the complaints system in the Equality and Human Rights Commission's evidence. It is known as the four Cs and was developed by the state hospital, as my colleague Jackie Baillie explained. That system encompasses and embodies the approach that we all want to see. It includes compliments, which are about positive feedback. It includes comments, which are simply something in passing such as, "The doctor is wearing a wrist watch," which is against health care-acquired infection regulations; someone in that situation does not want to complain, but they might want to say, "Doctor, you might want to take your wrist watch off," or to say to the nurse, "You know, the doctor was wearing his wrist watch." If they see a commode with blood fluids on it—we have lots of HAI reports—they do not want to complain because it might be just about to be cleaned, but they should be able to make a comment. The system also deals with concerns, which are short of a complaint. The four Cs system has changed the culture, which is what we all want to do, and we can try to embody it in legislation, which would give greater formality to the complaints procedure than there is under the 1985 act. Finally, the bill introduces PASS and PROs. PROs will be expensive and will be a backwards step from the current IASS. However, we heard  evidence that the IASS is flawed, is not uniform and has no national contract. That involves many issues that might be worth being embodied in primary legislation. We need to see what we can do on that. I urge the cabinet secretary to suspend the retendering process that is going on, which is damaging the system that is in place. Staff are leaving, and we will lose the volunteers who are associated with the system. Despite many reservations, Labour will support the bill at stage 1. We offer the Government the opportunity to work together to amend the bill significantly at stage 2. If the bill can be amended to the degree that we want, we hope to support it at stage 3. However, we reserve our position until we see whether the bill can be amended and can meet the serious objections to it in its present form. We need a charter of rights that apply from the bill and other legislation. We need to consider treatment time guarantees. Huge issues are involved. We are prepared to work with the Government in a serious attempt to make the bill practicable.

I join others in congratulating my esteemed colleague Helen Eadie on securing the debate, and I join them in recognising the work that she does in this area. It is an important issue that often does not get the attention that it deserves. Although, as Nanette Milne did, I will focus mainly on osteoporosis, I will also refer briefly to rheumatoid arthritis and make a couple of points. First, the introduction of biologic drugs is crucial because they allow people to get back to work quickly. Far too often, we allow people to drift into situations in which they are imprisoned by their condition and it becomes, if not too late, at least much more difficult to treat them. To do that, we need to establish a much more effective primary care part of the managed care network system. We need general practitioners who have a special interest in rheumatoid arthritis as part of networked practice groups within the  community health and care partnerships, in order to ensure that the information is available. The average GP will not see many cases of rheumatoid arthritis and, frankly, is unlikely to have the sufficient knowledge to treat the condition, to diagnose it or even to make the specialist referral. That is not to cast aspersions on my GP colleagues; it is to recognise the reality that unless a practitioner sees cases pretty frequently, he or she will not keep fully up to date on the issues. We need a different approach, so I will be interested to hear what the minister has to say about that. I will return to osteoporosis. As Nanette Milne said, fragility fractures that result from osteoporosis are painful and debilitating. Hip fractures are associated with high levels of mortality, are costly to treat and can be prevented by effective fracture liaison services. Health boards that implement a fracture liaison service will significantly reduce fragility fractures by up to 70 per cent, which will reduce the number of hip fractures and, in turn, reduce the costs of treating patients. Every low-impact fragility fracture should result in a proper assessment of risk through a fracture liaison service. That would create vital savings in the long run by reducing hip replacement costs, which can be up to £28,500 if we take all the costs involved, including the subsequent community costs. We must do more to prevent falls among older people. For example, Falkirk Council has produced an award-winning scheme in association with Forth Valley NHS Board, with a falls prevention plan. The Falkirk project focuses on reducing the pattern of falls at the earliest stage. The service, which has been going for almost 10 years, has shown a dramatic drop in the number of falls. It has shown that 1,000 or so fewer falls happen per year, which is predicted to prevent some 50 fractures per year, with a saving of more than £1 million. That does not include the savings from other injuries that are associated with falls. As such significant savings can be made, why is that system not being rolled out throughout all the NHS? Today, I had my staff ring round NHS boards to ask about the implementation of the falls report, which this and previous Governments have promoted, and to ask about whether we have taken the work forward. Every health board should now have a falls prevention co-ordinator, but in the phone-round we found that there is little clarity on whether boards have one. There was even a misunderstanding about what we meant: someone thought that we were asking about the chair of a committee that looks at the issue. NHS Lanarkshire said that it has two posts, but that they are both vacant—and we know what is happening to vacancy management in the current conditions. What is the Scottish Government doing  to ensure that falls prevention is co-ordinated by every board? The minister will not be surprised that I want to return to Forth Valley NHS Board. Forth Valley is let down from its participation in the excellent Falkirk initiative by the fact that it is the only health board that still does not have a full local osteoporosis service. I raised the point two years ago in debate, but we still do not have a service despite promises. I have been told that the service has been delayed again because of costs. In funnel plots that have been presented to me, Forth Valley is one of the highest for where there is no medication on a second fracture and for patients who are not on medication pre-fracture, as in-patients and 120 days after admission. It is also one of the lowest on the funnel plot for nutritional assessment. That is an unacceptable position for my constituents. An analysis of a number of hospitals shows the performance of Forth Valley NHS Board to be very poor. Only 6 per cent of all the patients there, during their total in-patient stay, had a falls nursing care plan—compared to 98 per cent at the neighbouring Queen Margaret hospital in Fife. Only 1 per cent of patients discharged to rehabilitation had a falls nursing care plan in both orthopaedics and rehab, and only 8 per cent had a falls nursing care plan in place in rehab. At Queen Margaret hospital, the figure was 100 per cent for the former. In Forth Valley, Only 2 per cent of patients discharged to rehabilitation had a nursing and allied health professional assessment in orthopaedics, and only 3 per cent of patients had a nursing and allied health professional assessment in orthopaedics and rehab. Again, the figures for Queen Margaret hospital were 100 per cent. I have, so far, been unable to persuade the board, which is now delaying the matter again because it says that the cost would be £250,000 to £300,000. I say to the minister that the one area in Scotland that does not have a service must be required in accountability reviews to put in place a service.

The debate has been useful, not least in drawing together the individual experiences of so many MSPs. Indeed, that is a measure of the fundamental importance of this report's main thrust: the need for local solutions to local problems. Liam McArthur mentioned the need for call handling services to have local knowledge of the idiosyncrasies of the area that he represents and Mike Rumbles highlighted the  serious challenge faced by more rural areas where mountain ranges and difficult roads mean that one cannot simply look at a map and assume that the area is flat. Murdo Fraser and Ian McKee dealt in considerable depth with the situation in Kinloch Rannoch, which was one of the factors that stimulated this particular inquiry. Indeed, when one hears that the out-of-hours service in that area is supposed to cost around £500,000, one has to begin to question certain reality factors with regard to the health board involved. People in the boards need to learn that they must talk to their local communities and look at everything: fire, ambulance, police and health services; first responders; and what the local GPs are prepared to provide in the extended round. In fact, Linda Harper from the Royal College of Nursing and lead nurse for G-MED—the Grampian out-of-hours medical service—told the committee: "to deal with Grampian's remote and rural areas, we have developed a team of advanced nurse practitioners, who have a lot of good skills and work well together. As far as the six dimensions of quality are concerned, we certainly provide safe, effective, efficient and person-centred care, which for patients is the most important thing. If the appropriate training is available for advanced nurse practitioners, paramedic practitioners and so on, they can be very supportive."—[ Official Report , Health and Sport Committee , 20 January 2010; c 2582.] We—and indeed our boards—need to think imaginatively if we are to develop the effective co-ordinated and integrated services that lead not to the kind of postcode lottery in which people do not get the care or service that they want, but to a new form of postcode service that is not a lottery but provides care on an individual basis. We are not alone in this—other places face similar problems. The Commission for Rural Communities, which I cited earlier, has said: "Allowing staff to undertake a wide variety of tasks (for example, where nurses from Minor Injuries Unit cover out of hours centres) ... offers opportunities to gain the critical clinical mass necessary to keep a service viable (especially in rural areas), and it allows staff to experience a varied workload." In Fife, which is part of the region that I represent, the health board is endeavouring to co-locate minor injuries units and general practice units. Such an approach can lead to considerable efficiency gains. Most co-locations with emergency units began with closed doors; indeed, I experienced that very situation in the 1990s. There were two entrances, one for accident and emergency and the other for general practice, and before NHS 24 came along the patient had to choose which door to go through. We find in the research that 40 per cent of the accident and emergency attendances in the reported literature were actually for general practice and primary care matters. People went in the wrong door. Many  people who went through the primary care door ended up being admitted to hospital. We need single entrances and an integrated service. No matter what the benefits and gains will be from the coalition budget that we will see next week, members should make no mistake: we are faced with major budgetary challenges for the NHS. Unless we are imaginative and integrate services in a novel way at every level, not just in rural and remote areas, we will be faced with considerable difficulties. I want to speak a little more about NHS 24. I have already expressed concern about call handlers managing minor issues. The cabinet secretary has spoken about the other side of the issue. She said: "A big misconception is that NHS 24 provides out-of-hours services. It does not. Its job is to provide the call-handling service, the triage and the referral to the appropriate services consistently throughout Scotland." I have no argument with that. She then said: "NHS 24 therefore has a key role in ensuring that patients are referred to the appropriate service, which is the Ambulance Service if the incident is immediate ... If the matter is less serious, the appropriate service might be a minor injuries unit, a GP out of hours, a community paramedic or a patient's GP in hours, when their GP's surgery next opens."—[ Official Report, Health and Sport Committee , 3 February 2010; c 2669.] However, NHS 24 provides much more than that. We know that it provides links to social workers and that there are social work experts in the unit at Cardonald. It has much stronger links with the Ambulance Service. There are ambulance workers in the call centre. It has mental health nurses, and it provides cognitive behavioural therapy telephone triage. It also deals with suicide and other mental health issues. It is developing into a much more comprehensive service than one that simply signposts and directs—and so it should. However, we must be careful that it provides appropriate services and that we do not inadvertently again add to the confusion of members of the public about precisely where they should go. That is the fundamental issue in the report. I am heartened by the report and by the many speeches that have been made, as they illustrate members working in a highly consensual way. All members have a common objective that can be met with good will. However, NHS boards must listen to their communities. If they do not, we are in trouble. The Government has tried to democratise at the board level through the health board elections, but there must be democratisation much further down the line at the community partnership level. With that, we can drive forward the sort of care that everybody in every community  in Scotland deserves from their out-of-hours services.

I will try not to repeat the excellent speech that our convener made, in which she covered much of the ground. Instead, I will try to amplify a little on some of what she said. Christine Grahame covered well the development of the service. One model that emerged in the 1990s was GP co-operatives with telephone triage and walk-in nurse-led clinics. General practitioners in rural areas were given the opportunity to have the support of an associate practitioner, which strengthened their role. Models of best practice developed in centres such as Glasgow and Stirling, but in the main the co-operatives covered urban areas. That said, at the time, Grampian came closest to having a more inclusive model. The challenge for us going forward is to understand that the development of out-of-hours services over the past 20 years has, in essence, been provider oriented. The challenges that face out-of-hours care are evident in the increase of 41 per cent in emergency calls to out-of-hours services since the introduction of the new GMS contract. While non-emergency demand on the Scottish Ambulance Service has remained static, emergency out-of-hours demand has risen. That seems to suggest that a proportion of out-of-hours services, which are properly the responsibility of NHS boards, is now being picked up by the Scottish Ambulance Service and may be partly incorporated into its see-and-treat mechanism, which is growing quite rapidly. We know, too, that the level of contact with NHS 24 has grown hugely over the past few years. We should note also that, within that, the Scottish Pharmaceutical General Council contract, which again is a unique Scottish innovation, and which supplies emergency medicines, has also grown. Indeed, 35 per cent of  the calls to NHS 24 are pharmacy related. We should not forget that. Accident and emergency provision, too, is developing and changing. It has evolved from a service that was basically a district general hospital service with one or two full trauma units to one that has a mix of services from minor injury units, through the mixed DGH units, to full trauma units and specialist units such as children's units. General practitioners in out-of-hours services still continue to provide a slightly different type of service with health boards running the primary care out-of-hours services that, in the main, they inherited from the GP co-operatives of the 1990s. In rural areas, there is an absolute need to integrate into the entire service the British Association for Immediate Care-trained doctors who work with the Scottish Ambulance Service. It will be necessary to use all available practitioners to provide a seamless service. The Commission for Rural Communities in England reported: "Those with responsibility for providing or commissioning GP services" in rural areas "did not appear to be using objective evidence about rurality to shape or improve out of hours provision." It came to conclusions similar to those of the committee—that there must be an integrated approach that involves listening to and working with communities to incorporate all the services. The committee felt clearly that there was a lack of clarity—indeed, a great deal of confusion—among the public about accessing out-of-hours services. The first thing that a patient must do is decide what their condition is and which of the raft of possible opportunities—contacting 999, contacting NHS 24, going directly to accident and emergency or, in rural areas, calling their GP—is appropriate. I understand that the Grampian pilot is endeavouring, with some success, to address the failure to integrate services and to give clarity, but the issue is difficult. Christine Grahame indicated that NHS 24 had made considerable progress. Its handling of last year's flu pandemic was evidence of the organisation's growing maturity and credibility, but the evidence that we received indicated that there is further to go. With NHS 24, GPs' surgeries on extended hours so that we do not know when out-of-hours services are and are not available—the arrangements are different in every area—999 calls and testing of 888 calls, the situation is not getting easier and confusion is multiplying. If that were not bad enough, I hear that there is a proposal for NHS call handlers to handle minor  cases. How do we decide what is a minor case? We know about cardinal symptoms, but if someone presents with a headache, it can be anything from a brain haemorrhage that is about to occur, to meningitis, to simply a bit of stress. Will call handlers with no training really be able to handle such cases using a protocol? One bad case will set NHS 24 back on its heels. Christine Grahame referred to the financial situation. I will not go into detail on that but, according to Audit Scotland, it has cost the health service an additional £31 million to switch from the GP-based service in which I practised—for 25 years, I was on duty for 85 hours a week—to a situation in which the work-life balance of the modern GP, along with their pay, has improved considerably. Only 51 practices are providing integrated out-of-hours care. The number of practices using the alternative model, to which Christine Grahame referred, of developing associates or salaried GPs has increased, but only from 61 in 2004-05 to 89 in 2006-07; I do not know the current figure. The model has been developed in the Borders and is worthy of further development. Our other big problem is that GP numbers are dropping. We have gone from 3,500-odd GPs having to provide the service to about 1,800 providing it. The previous audit indicated that the figure is now down to 1,400; I suspect that it will continue to drop. As we have seen in England, when locums are brought in they can cause considerable problems, because they come in without proper review. I know that Audit Scotland looked at that issue. Quality standards are important and must be addressed. However, the message that I have taken from this interesting review is that, unless we have a totally integrated unscheduled care service, we will continue to have considerable difficulties. The report must take us forward.

We all agree that Scotland, along with many northern European countries, has, as Murdo Fraser said, a problem with alcohol. In some respects, our problem is much more serious. We must recognise that there has been a 20 per cent drop in the number of alcohol-related male deaths since 2005 and a stabilisation of the number of female alcohol-related deaths, but we must also recognise that that still leaves us with an unprecedentedly high number of deaths, which needs to be tackled. As I have said many times, when I began this journey I thought that minimum unit pricing was an interesting concept that was worthy of consideration. I spent a fantastic length of time—far too long, really—reading not just the summary of the Sheffield report but the 400 papers in the Sheffield study's literature review. I came to the conclusion that it was not just an untested and untried policy, but one that lacked a serious evidence base. That was a worrying conclusion. I was a researcher—I had my own research department at university—and I recognise that the Sheffield model is extremely complex. I do not believe that many people understand it. What do we do with a model? We apply the existing data retrospectively and see whether it actually works. That is what led to the comment about weather forecasting that Dr Petra Meier made in all honesty: when she was asked why, when the existing data from the past few years are applied to the model, it does not do what it says on the tin, she said that it is because it is like weather forecasting. That does not make it a nonsense—weather forecasting is vital and important, just as this model is extremely interesting and makes a valuable contribution to the debate—but it is completely unacceptable to found an entire policy and debate on it, which is what the Government has done. In March 2009, in the alcohol strategy debate in the chamber, I said that the Sheffield approach was a serious issue and that the Australian colleges approach, which we have never debated, was a serious issue. I ended up by saying, and I quote—

Why not? I said: "Labour is up for this debate and is prepared to try to reach agreement on issues. However, it must be a careful and mature debate."— [ Official Report , 26 March 2009; c 16232.]  What did we get? We got slammed. From day 1, all the Opposition parties were told, "Because you don't agree with us on minimum unit pricing, you're irresponsible and you're playing party politics." That was a totally non-consensual approach and it is why we have ended up with a bill that tackles some problems well and others not so well. As I said earlier, I set a number of tests for the bill. Will it tackle the hazardous drinker in the 18 to 24-year-old age group? Sheffield says that it will not. Will it tackle problems across all age groups? Again no. Will it tackle problems across all income groups? No. Will it harm moderate drinkers who are perfectly responsible? Yes. The example that I gave, which no one has refuted, concerns a couple on an income of £200 a week who drink a single bottle of vodka a week—26 units, which is well within responsible and safe levels. Indeed, it is probably within the healthy levels that Murdo Fraser mentioned. They would be taxed £200 a year. I would not suffer from minimum unit pricing, but those people would be affected. And as if that is not enough, the proposal would give the thick end of £100 million to the supermarkets—leaving aside the fact that the end of discounting would also result in more profits for them—and money would be taken away from the Treasury. The bill contains some significant principles. One is that, as the World Health Organisation says, alcohol is not like any other commodity. It is a principle that we should not sell alcohol on a volume discount basis. People should not be able to say, "If I buy more alcohol, I'll be able to get it at a cheaper price." That is the major achievement of this bill. The second achievement could be the social responsibility levy but, regrettably, the Government was so focused on minimum unit pricing that it has failed to provide any detailed description of the proposal, which means that we will be able to approve only the principle today. I understand colleagues' concerns about the fact that we will need to consider the detail of the proposal. Thank goodness that the super-affirmative approach will enable us to do so, once the Government gets around to thinking about it instead of the issue that has preoccupied it up to now.

I thank the cabinet secretary for reintroducing the proposal in a more appropriate form. At stage 2, I proposed to ensure that health boards are consulted in determining for what purpose moneys that are raised through the social responsibility levy are used, so I welcome the fulfilment of the Government's undertaking to come back with an amendment that not only ensures the engagement of the health boards in the process by requiring them to be consulted but adds the chief constables—an entirely appropriate addition. We will support all the amendments in the group, including amendment 14, which seems a reasonable amendment to tidy up the responsibility of the local authority and licensing board in the collection of the levy.

We will support amendments 10 to 12 because they are tidying-up amendments. The amendments from Murdo Fraser and Ross Finnie arise from the fact that we do not have clarity on the social responsibility levy. I am concerned about Murdo Fraser's amendment 33, because it would bring in—in a reverse way—the polluter-pays principle. Polluters would be the only ones to pay, and we rejected that idea at stage 2. I hope that the Parliament will reject that again and leave it to regulation, by which we can consider a genuine partnership with industry. The discussions with industry did not take place for about 16 months, and we could have advanced that far further.

Murdo Fraser's point about smaller shops and rural pubs is a good point, and when we come to discuss the super-affirmative subordinate legislation, which I hope we will do in due course, I hope that we will seek to protect those groups. However, he is asking us to vote later for amendment 33 and, if we agree to the amendments in the group, we would be offering a discount to people who have committed a criminal offence. That seems to be fairly illogical, so I ask members to vote against the amendments and get rid of them.

I thank the cabinet secretary for taking up the discussions that took place at stage 2 and for lodging amendment 9 at stage 3, which we will of course support. We moved an amendment at stage 2 because we firmly believe that tackling underage drinking and proxy sales—as well as other measures relating to the powers of the police—should be subject to transparent public scrutiny. Reporting to the licensing boards and forums, as is proposed under amendment 9, will achieve that purpose. I am grateful that the proposals are now in a form that chief constables can support. It was under the Labour-Lib Dem Administration that measures were originally introduced and test purchasing started. As Deputy Minister for Justice, I proposed to Colin Boyd that we should do just that. I welcome the Government amendment that will put into the law applying to test purchasing a transparency that did not previously exist. I was particularly concerned that, in one of the local authority areas that is partly in my constituency, Perth and Kinross, there has been no successful test purchasing—at least, successful in the sense of demonstrating that any licensees are breaking the law, although we know that that is occurring. I hope that amendment 9 will help make the public much more confident about the whole process of tackling underage selling and proxy purchasing.  Amendment 9 agreed to.

It is regrettable that one theme of the Government's approach to the bill has tended to be punitive and discriminatory. On the issue that we are discussing, the approach is certainly discriminatory. Along with the other Opposition parties, we have consistently opposed attempts throughout the bill process to demonise young  adults. Such attempts are unfair and unworkable and are not evidence based. The Government is making yet another attempt to introduce its discriminatory measure, having failed to obtain support for a universal ban on off-sales to under-21s. The cabinet secretary says that the bill has no back-door measure, but amendment 46, which is in my name, would ensure that under-21s could not be discriminated against.

We were never in favour of discrimination against young people. We did and will support the universal application of challenge 25 as a positive step. The cabinet secretary tried to say that the issue was to do with underage sales, but it has nothing to do with that; it is about discrimination against people who are aged between 18 and 21. We will support greater enforcement to tackle proxy purchasing and underage sales, as members will see from later amendments, which the Government now supports and has developed. We support greater enforcement of dispersal orders to prevent drinking in public places. However, we will not support discriminatory measures that seek to condemn all those who are under 21, in order to deal with the minority who abuse alcohol. If it is legal at 18 to drink in a pub or to serve or sell alcohol, purchasing alcohol for home consumption should be allowed at that age. The Government called in evidence the two pilots in Armadale and Stenhousemuir, but when the eminent Professor Sheila Bird, who is a vice-president of the Royal Statistical Society, says that those pilots are not statistically significant, they should not be used as justification. However, the evidence is fairly clear for voluntary schemes such as that at St Neots in Cambridgeshire, where the whole community was engaged and the project worked well, without the need for a discriminatory ban by regulation or licensing board decisions. By not supporting amendment 46, the Government has made even more definite our decision to oppose amendment 7, which would delete section 8A, and to support amendment 46. That might be a belt-and-braces approach, but it shows the determination of the Labour Party, which I hope will have the Parliament's support, to stop the attacks on young adults once and for all.

Amendment 28 contains a relatively modest and focused proposal, unlike some others that we have been asked to approve. Not only that, but there is some evidence for it, although it is not totally conclusive.

Why do I say that? That clear and conclusive evidence comes from America where there is a different culture. Nevertheless, evidence from over four years indicates that college students are now drinking caffeinated mixes to a significant extent. As a result, they are 25 per cent more likely to drink excessively, to indulge in sexual predation, to drive when drunk and to drive with someone who is drunk. That is all evidence based, and to deny it is inappropriate. Some 42 per cent of Polmont offenders admitted to using Buckfast. When Bob Hamilton spoke to "Panorama", he expressed a different opinion to that which he expressed to the committee. Scotland will not lead on the issue because legislation has already been passed in Pennsylvania, Oklahoma and Michigan. If, in the next two weeks, the FDA acknowledges alcoholic drinks containing caffeine as a dangerous combination, we will have failed to take action at a point when we could.

At stage 2, along with other members, I raised the concerns of the industry, which presented us with a number of magazines. I therefore welcome amendments 4 to 6, which sort out that issue. It is clear that we must curtail the promotion of alcohol, particularly as a loss leader and as a sole purchase, both within stores and the surrounding districts, and we are doing that. The amendments show a pragmatic approach—on this issue, the Government has listened. However, I urge the Parliament not to become addicted to sunset clauses. Members should, therefore, vote against amendments 24 and 25, although I acknowledge that they at least relate to something substantive in the bill and do not ask us to join the SNP in marching into the sunset on something that has already disappeared into the sunset.

I seek clarification from the cabinet secretary that either the existing licensing conditions or the proposed discount ban will ensure that retailers cannot promote alcohol by  giving customers triple or quadruple points on their loyalty cards.

I am glad that Ross Finnie enunciated a number of the issues that I feel are important. That demonstrates the consensus that can be reached if proper analysis is conducted and members do not indulge in the political haranguing that we have heard from the SNP. From the outset, we have been told that, if we oppose them, we are being party political and that, if we share their view, we are being statesmanlike. That is not what debates should be about. I will set out the tests for minimum unit pricing that the Parliament must agree before it makes the decision on the bill. The measure must be effective across all income groups. Why? Because a greater proportion of hazardous drinkers are in higher income groups than lower income groups. It must be effective across all age groups, particularly younger drinkers. Why? Because the greatest number of hazardous drinkers are between 18 and 24 and the smallest number are in their 70s. It must be fair. It should not have any harmful or unintended consequences. It should have the greatest effect on harmful drinkers and the least effect on moderate drinkers. The problem with the Sheffield study is that, as a population-based study, it therefore talks always in averages.

No, I will not. I do not have time in two minutes.  Let us take a pensioner couple on an income of £200 a week who drink a bottle of vodka between them a week. That is 26 units, which is well within safe and moderate drinking levels. The SNP's MPU tax will add £200 a year to that couple's expenses and yet they are safe and moderate drinkers. Those are the sort of people who will be affected by the measure. The lowest third of income groups will be affected. The measure is not appropriate. [ Interruption .]

For the SNP front bench to shout at me from a sedentary position will not help their argument. It never has. What about the 18 to 24-year olds? By how much does the study say that the measure will reduce consumption in that age group? By 0.6 per cent. That equates to half a pint for every 100 pints that a young person drinks. The policy does not work; it will not work. It is totally flawed. It should be rejected.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Skills and Lifelong Learning last met officials or councillors from Clackmannanshire Council and what issues were discussed. (S3O-11753)

Has the minister had discussions with the council about the maintenance of the primary and special school estate in Clackmannanshire, where only one of the 19 primary schools and one of the four special schools are A grade, two primary schools are C grade and one is D grade, and one special school is C grade? Can he assure us that he is taking steps to protect the maintenance budgets so that those schools do not deteriorate, to the detriment of our children's education? Will he confirm that the funds to build one new primary school in Clackmannanshire are still guaranteed to be in place, if the current consultation on a merged school campus is successful?

If there really is a partnership, what discussions has the minister had, or will she have, with the MS Society?

The latest registrar general report shows a continuing drop in deaths from alcohol-related diseases, which over a number of years have fallen by 20 per cent for men. After rising for 15 years, the equivalent death rate for women has now been stable for a number of years. We all agree that the levels are still far too high. However, does the minister have any idea from her advisers which factors underlie that drop, so that we can identify, support and improve the positive factors?

I will start with the issues on which we are all agreed. There is fairly universal disappointment about the speed of progress on the issue. We all agree that the correct approach is to build up the clinical portal system as gateways to individual suites of software, but there are clear concerns that, in rejecting any sort of centralised system, the procurement should proceed quickly and there should be a decision on which of the four systems in use is likely to be the most effective. We should narrow that down as quickly as possible. Both Christine Grahame, who spoke on behalf of the committee, and the minister agreed that having a uniform centralised system is not appropriate, but we need systems now that share data. As Rhoda Grant said, the inability to share data creates all sorts of problems. An important point that has not been mentioned is the use of open-source software. Procuring commercial software that is based on a particular operating system can be very restrictive, whereas open-source systems can be developed jointly by all the clinicians with an interest and can be cheaper at the end of the day. Ian McKee and others raised the linkage with primary care systems, such as the out-of-hours system that Nanette Milne mentioned. What worries me is that the GP, having entered the general practitioner system, will need to come out of that system and go into another system to enter the clinical portal. That is not good. We all get irritated by slow access, so requiring people to close down one system and open up an additional one is really not satisfactory. That needs to be dealt with. Mary Scanlon talked about the general frustration at the lack of progress, as did Ian McKee, whose comments on pilotitis highlighted the fact that we have plenty of pilots that seem to work but do not make progress. For example, the NHS Highland and Argyle and Bute Council project seems to work, but is it being rolled out to other rural areas? Nanette Milne referred to Dr Ferguson's frustration about A and E telemedicine, from which NHS Grampian has saved massively on patient travelling, but such facilities are not yet available across the country. Although some sort of heart failure monitoring has been rolled out—the West Lothian project to which Angela Constance referred is one of the  best examples—given that the savings in patient admissions and in time and money are absolutely massive, we need to develop that sort of home-care e-care system much more. We have not mentioned prisons, but that is another area in which such data linkage could be of great importance. The national service development is welcome, but I still think that we need incentives to overcome what Michael Matheson graphically described as the professional self-interest that often acts as a barrier to proceeding. He and I share a concern that the good work that has been done on using telehealth in dermatology in the NHS Forth Valley area—and the slightly different system in NHS Lanarkshire—has not been rolled out. Perhaps that is because dermatologists feel under threat from it. Michael Matheson also mentioned his constituents' concerns about records being lost. With good electronic systems, such losses would be reduced. A number of members—Jamie Stone, Ian McKee, Rhoda Grant and others—spoke about the need for patients to be at the centre and about the importance of patient confidence and confidentiality. Others spoke of data security. Has progress been made on the encryption system that was promised two years ago? Is every single case record that is on a disk or USB stick or hard disk now encrypted? Can the minister guarantee that everything is now encrypted and that if a stick is lost—again—it will not be accessible? That should be happening, because it is a simple piece of progress to make. The technology has been there for years, so the matter should have been dealt with. Rhoda Grant and I mentioned tracking for patients. Patients should have access to their own records instead of audit and tracking, as that puts them in control and at the centre. Jamie Stone, Dave Thompson, Murdo Fraser and many others said that broadband was essential to underpin telehealth, telecare and interconnectivity. Unless that is developed, we will face real problems. Mary Scanlon, Nanette Milne and others gave a particularly good example of why telehealth is necessary—the repetition of lab tests. The three of us who are doctors went through the phase of being junior doctors, when we had to keep asking for tests to be repeated because the results had been lost or had come from another department or another hospital, or the GP had done the test and we did not have access to the result. If 20 per cent of lab test results are being lost, we do not need to look much further for evidence of the massive  efficiency gains that must be driven into the system. I will give the minister another example from a case study that I did in West Lothian on an individual who had alcohol-related brain damage, which is an area that expert committees have considered and on which a lot of information has been provided. The man in question had 11 different case records, none of which was linked. He kept coming to see accident and emergency, the psychiatrists, the gastroenterologists, the social workers, the housing department and the police with whom he was involved. All those services had separate records on him and they were all doing their best, but no one had thought to tag the records and to give a single point of connection. Once I added my telephone number, we stopped the process. The next time that he came to the gastroenterology department, instead of being admitted for three days and then discharged, he was held for 10 days before being admitted to an alcoholism unit. Unfortunately, he was there for 10 months while he waited for a guardianship order and his health was permanently damaged. In West Lothian alone, 16 other cases of that particularly severe condition were identified, in which records needed to be tagged and co-ordination was required.

I have only 30 seconds left. If they are successful, pilots should be rolled out. We heard a new word today: pilotitis. Let us see whether we can strike that from the medical lexicon as quickly as possible by rolling out pilots. Helen Eadie gave the wonderful example of the ophthalmology triage, screening and follow-up service, which works extremely well and has prevented people from going blind, but it is a data-linkage work-around system that is not totally secure. It is fairly secure; those concerned have done their best, but the business case needs to be tackled quickly.

We need much more determined and informed leadership. We need a HEAT target and other specific targets that give health boards incentives. In that way, we can make the faster progress that all of us desire, which will enable Scotland to fulfil its potential as a world leader in this field.

I welcome the debate. As the Health and Sport Committee's convener suggested, it might appear to be a dry subject, but it is also a very important debate. I thank her for her opening  remarks, and I thank everyone who gave evidence to the committee. I thank the Scottish Government for responding to the committee, although the minister's speech today has been more helpful, in some respects, than some of the responses that were given to the committee, which were lacking in clarity; I do not have the skills to put that in the way that the convener did, in relation to some of the language that was used. There is considerable consensus on this area of health care and on its capacity to deliver some important advances for Scottish health. In the first session, Labour set out to encourage work in telehealth, with an increase in the use of IT for the benefit of patients. The most notable development, as the Minister for Public Health has indicated, was NHS 24. The organisation has had its troubles over the years, but it is now making a considerable contribution to Scotland's health. I visited NHS 24 at Cardonald shortly after being elected, and was impressed by the recognition there of the problems to be addressed. Telephone advice is not without its risks, but they are now being managed better. Moreover, the integration of telephone advice with other services, its increased connectivity with the Scottish Ambulance Service, its integration with mental health provision, including the development of a cognitive behavioural therapy pilot and the provision of more specialist nurses are all helping it to evolve in a very useful way. The service has now been handed an additional and great responsibility through the merger with the Scottish centre for telehealth. Before I discuss developments in the future, I will consider a few more of the important decisions that have been taken over the years and that have been followed through by the current Government. The Parliament reached a fundamental decision not to adopt the centralised national data spine. I hope that we can all agree that we should continue to adhere to that approach. The BMA referred to and welcomed that in evidence to the committee. In about 2000, our colleagues in England turned their backs on what was happening there. Following Labour's time in Opposition, we developed concepts that were developed in individual hospitals and groups of hospitals for a dispersed system. Under my colleague Alan Milburn, who was Secretary of State for Health, it was decided to go for a grand, all-singing, all-dancing, centralised national database. It was to cost about £12 billion, and the current coalition is trying to rescue and repair it. Scotland chose only two centralised concepts. One was the community health index, which is fundamental to data linkage in the long term, both between primary care and secondary care, and  with pharmacy, optometry and other community services. The emergency care record was to be developed alongside suites of clinical software systems, which were eventually to be linked into the clinical portals, or electronic gateways, as I prefer to describe them—we all have our own names for it. Under three regional consortia there are now to be four different systems, as I understand it from what the minister has said. One of the major concerns that has existed all along with data systems is patient confidentiality. In England, there have been suggestions that access to data from other Government agencies could be permitted. I ask the public health minister to indicate—either now or later—whether we have a form of declaration in general practice that precludes information being shared with agencies such as HM Revenue and Customs, the Department for Work and Pensions, the UK Border Agency, the Identity and Passport Service and even councils. That has been suggested in England. We should remember that the systems were being developed at a time of declining patient confidence, following the issue of contaminated blood products, the Bristol cardiology scandal, the Alder Hey organ retention scandal and—more recently, in a Scottish context—the revelation that a doctor was accessing the emergency care record data of celebrities. In England there are campaigns to encourage patients to opt out of the national system. That is not happening in Scotland. The Health and Sport Committee's report makes clear our collective view that patients must be at the centre of all IT systems. That means membership of the clinical portal programme board, which is now occurring, according to the response that has been received. More important is that it should be ensured that patients retain control. That is fundamental to our system of dispersed e-health and e-care. We have already established the fact that patients can access their medical records, but we now propose going further: we propose that patients should be given access to a credible audit and tracking system, by which they can see who has accessed their data and when it has been accessed. Access to patient records should be limited to clinicians and secretarial staff who need it to provide the patient with a service and, except in primary care and where specified because of the long-term nature of a condition, it should be time limited and specific. In 2003, the Labour and Liberal Democrat Government introduced a code of confidentiality. I am pleased that the Government is updating it and  would be grateful to know when the update will be published. A case called I v Finland was completed last year after a long and winding contortion through the European courts. I will tell members a little about it. It concerned a nurse in a hospital in Finland whose HIV status was recorded without her knowledge on her clinical IT record in the 1990s. That record was then accessible to fellow health care workers. The question was not whether those workers would access the data but whether the data and the potential for access should have existed in the first instance. The European Court of Human Rights decided that it was inappropriate and a breach of the nurse's human rights. It is important that such decisions be taken into account when we develop our systems. Presiding Officer, I am not quite sure how long I have. Do I have a minute or two more?

Telehealth is moving forward, but rather slowly. We have four systems—telestroke, telepaediatrics, mental health and long-term condition management—but, as Mary Scanlon said, there is no HEAT target, which I regret. Even with a Government implementation programme, there is no leverage for the introduction of the new national approaches. Without national approaches, we will not become a world leader, which we have the potential to do. Champions—they are mentioned in the Government's reply—and a new strategy are all very well, but without incentives to boards, we will not make progress in the present austerity climate. The digitisation of radiology has been important and has saved a huge amount of unnecessary travel. The Grampian accident and emergency system, which is linked to peripheral minor injury units, has saved thousands of patients from travelling. Every minor injury unit should be linked in that way. Dermatology clinics linked to the Western Isles and abroad have been established and, in NHS Forth Valley and NHS Lanarkshire, new digitised linked systems for triaging potential melanoma have been developed. Those should be picked up and rolled out nationally, because they tackle a major problem with waiting times in dermatology. There are other schemes, such as those in ophthalmology, to which my colleague Helen Eadie will refer. We really need to take a grip and make progress on telehealth. It is no longer appropriate to have civil servants, however good they are, moving in and out of a unit that deals with the policy area; we must have people with proven  expertise in it really getting a grip of the issue. We have delayed and dallied too long; the time for action is now.

To ask the Deputy First Minister what the Scottish Government's position is on moves to limit the amount of caffeine in ready-mixed drinks. (S3F-2568)

In evidence to the Health and Sport Committee yesterday, Bob Hamilton said that there was no association between violence and tonic wine. However, this is the same Bob Hamilton who told a BBC investigation: "I think it's clear from the figures that there is an association there." The study on minimum unit pricing was an econometric study only. There is other evidence, such as Mary Claire O'Brien's research, which shows a highly significant link between caffeinated alcohol, heavier drinking, more frequent drinking, more sexual predation and more risk-taking  behaviour. That is backed by NHS Scotland, which said in evidence to the Labour commission: "We think there is now sufficient information to restrict the amount of caffeine in combination products." The evidence is available. The Government should support the proposed amendment.

The first three minutes of Ian McKee's speech should be bottled and presented. It was a perfect image of appropriate treatment and how to treat the individual, which is what the policy is all about. There cannot be anyone in the chamber who doubts the continuing effect of drug use on our communities. As Robert Brown has already indicated, there has been a growth in drug use over the past 30 years, starting from practically zero. When I was the minister, I began by changing the policies and telling young people the truth about drugs, which is an important starting point. We changed the strapline from "Just say no" to "Know the score", alongside providing education in every school about the different effects of drugs. I am not saying that that is the entire reason for this, but the latest report from the Scottish schools adolescent lifestyle and substance use survey—SALSUS—on 13 and 15-year-olds has shown a welcome and continuing reduction in those reporting the use of any drug in the previous month, down from 24 to 13 per cent among boys and halving among 13-year-olds to 4 per cent. We can divide the problems of drugs broadly into three areas: recreational drugs, including legal highs; prescription drugs; and drugs of addiction. Most members so far have talked about only the last one. Recreational drugs are important. So-called legal highs are now widespread, and I believe that we are already witnessing this year the core problem that is ahead of us—if we ban something such as mephedrone, a new offer appears tomorrow. We will need a European Union or even global approach to that issue if we are to prevent the harm that derives from those new drugs, but we will not get ahead of the supplier. We need to keep a fast-moving and well-resourced advisory group to look at and deal with the evidence as quickly as possible. Prescription drugs have been in the news again with George Michael's recent conviction, and there can be little doubt that there is a large, growing and substantially unrecognised problem. It involves not only valium and benzodiazepines but  cough medicines and other over-the-counter medicines that contain codeine, all of which are a significant problem. Our approach has been rather unsophisticated. We need to review our strategy. We in this party are at one with the Government's strategic approach, particularly to heroin addiction. We recognise that the road to recovery is not to require abstinence but, as Ian McKee said, to recognise that individual addicts need assistance if they are to progress on a pathway away from addictive use. All too often in the past, drug users got stuck. We need to shift the balance away from harm reduction; progression to a normal life should be the joint objective of those who treat and the treated. Methadone remains one of the most evidence-based approaches to stabilising those with heroin addiction, but it was becoming the only treatment. Ensuring that it is part of a process that addresses the holistic needs of addicts has been a part of successive Governments' policy. Labour promoted integrated care; yet, in too many places, we still have silos of services. Silos remain even in Glasgow, which was one of the first to integrate its specialist national health service services and local authority social work services. Difficulties remain, such as the different approaches of the city's psychiatric services and the Glasgow addiction service to tackling those with mental health problems; integration of the prison service and community justice and community services; and integration of primary care-based support and voluntary and other services. When I was out of the Parliament, one of the most difficult things I did was to try to develop a single status assessment. We have still not succeeded in getting a national one. As I said, too often, users are parked on methadone under general practice care, without adequate support. With Ian McKee, I tried to do more to tackle that in Wester Hailes in Edinburgh. James Kelly mentioned drug deaths, the number of which has doubled since the 1990s. Although the recent reduction is welcome, every death involves a premature loss of life and affects the addict's family. I congratulate the minister on his approach to the naloxone programme, which is evidence based and has the potential to save lives. I have some further suggestions to make in this regard. We need to record more fully the details when any agency is involved in a near-miss overdose situation and then point the client towards the naloxone programme. We also need to reconsider increasing the use of buprenorphine or suboxone. Those alternatives to methadone are widely used in France and are associated with a substantial lowering of the death rate. I welcome in particular the minister's development of a HEAT target within the overall  programme that he is promoting. That said, I have some issues to raise. First, there is gaming around the current waiting list system. When I was a minister, I called for the measure without knowing that it would produce the highly bureaucratic system that we now have. Perhaps a less bureaucratic recording system could be introduced. Closer periodic scrutiny by Scottish Families Affected by Drugs would also be welcome. Secondly, I promoted the 218 centre—formerly the Time Out centre—for women who would otherwise go to prison. If the centre works well, perhaps it should be piloted for men. Thirdly, I am concerned about possible cuts to voluntary organisations. Finally, we must address the damage that drugs do to the foetus and handle better the immediate post-birth situation. We need nationally the programme for pregnant users that Edinburgh has introduced. Undoubtedly, members are at one on the direction of travel. In comparison with debates on alcohol, this debate is a pleasure to take part in. I only wish that we could take the same consensual approach to alcohol. Perhaps that is too much to hope for. I commend the motion and amendments.

Will the member give way?

Although the pilot was welcome, it found that the number of women on DTTOs was much increased, which was a major problem with the original DTTOs. Hopefully, rolling out the pilot will improve the situation for women.

The cabinet secretary has not really explained why she had to be asked for a  statement rather than going public on this issue. The 24 duplicate calls reflect the level of patient concern. Has every category A and B call patient who survived—or the families—personally received an apology for, and explanation of, the problems that arose and the delays to which the cabinet secretary referred in her statement?

Why did it take so long for the First Minister to name the price? Is he completely comfortable with the fact that a minimum unit price, now named as 45p, will hand a windfall of £140 million to retailers, but nothing to the Exchequer—and that it is unlikely to produce much for health either?

I, too, congratulate Gil Paterson on securing this important debate and I welcome the opportunity to discuss the 25th anniversary of the Scottish Cot Death Trust. As members said, the trust has supported many parents who have gone through the sudden and unexpected loss of a child. In its 25th year, the trust has a great deal to be proud of. We should celebrate the massive reduction in cot deaths, which Mary Scanlon and other members reported. The research that demonstrated that it was safer for infants to sleep on their backs, which I think originated in New Zealand, has been the main contributory factor to the massive reduction. That success should be celebrated. However, there are still some 40 deaths annually. We need to consider the residual factors, understand what is happening and see what can be done in a policy context. Issues have been raised by a number of members. One factor is that deaths are much more common in the babies of teenage mothers. It is regrettable that the policy of reducing the incidence of teenage pregnancy, which the Labour Party and the SNP have tried to follow, cannot be said to have been a great success for either party. We need to redouble our efforts to ensure that the number of teenage pregnancies is reduced. A second factor is smoking. It is regrettable that smoking during pregnancy is still significant. I commend the initiative in NHS Tayside, which saw that it had some of the worst statistics in that regard. The board set up a scheme whereby mothers who made and succeeded in the significant attempt to give up smoking were rewarded. The scheme was criticised in parts of the media, but Tayside's smoking cessation statistics have moved considerably. We need to redouble our efforts to ensure that people stop smoking during pregnancy and continue not to smoke afterwards. The smoking issue is related to the third factor, which is that there are more sudden unexplained infant deaths in poorer socioeconomic groups. We  must continue to consider health inequalities and look at the balance between the universal provision of health visitors, which I think that everyone wants, and a focus on people from poorer socioeconomic backgrounds. Such matters need to be addressed. An issue that concerns me in relation to the subject that we are considering and other areas in health is that the information that is available on the web is not always the best. Much of the information on the internet is discursive and not evidence based. We need, for example, to consider—I will use the biblical term, as Mary Scanlon did—overlying: that is, sharing a bed with the child. I do not think that it would be correct to give universal advice that that is not appropriate. However, it is probably appropriate to say that people who smoke, drink, use drugs or sedative medicines should avoid the practice. I am not an expert in the field, but we need to give clear information to parents. Members referred to what happens after the death. Many deaths remain unexplained after a post-mortem. A post-mortem is important, but it is a cold and frankly unpleasant thing to have to go through. A very close member of my family experienced a sudden infant death, and—although I was on the periphery—to go through a post-mortem with my own family was very different from doing so with parents as a doctor. Part of the reason for that was that the post-mortem was not handled in a particularly sensitive way—this was some 30 or 35 years ago. Sensitive handling by paediatricians, the police, pathologists and other professionals is important. I commend the Scottish Cot Death Trust for its work during the past 25 years and for continuing to try to meet the challenge of further reducing the number of infant deaths.

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing the debate. Like Ross Finnie, I declare a long-standing interest in the sport, initially as a player, although not at a very high level, as in those days Stirling County was in a very low division. Nevertheless it is nice to be associated with that club, as a player for a few years and as someone who, to this day, provides medical support. The problem, as David McLetchie pointed out, is that rugby in Scotland went through a pretty lean time between the arrival of the professional game in 1996-97, and the middle of the last decade, when, thanks to the combined efforts of the clubs and the SRU, rugby began to grow significantly again. Audiences are important, and it is perhaps understandable that, because of that lean period, broadcasters became less interested in the game. However, we are no longer in such a lean period. In the UK as a whole, the sport has grown significantly—and the figures for Scotland are themselves quite significant. Of course, I am talking not only about core rugby; we should not forget women's rugby, which other members have briefly mentioned. Stirling County's recently established women's team this year won the national plate, came top of national league 2 and was awarded the SRU's best team  prize. Moreover, the under-16s team won the top trophy. It is clear that women's rugby is growing significantly in Scotland. Indeed, other forms of rugby are growing. The increased interest in sevens, which, as Jeremy Purvis pointed out, was invented in and given to the world by the Borders, was evidenced by the response to the recent sevens tournament at Murrayfield, and there will be another tournament next year. Murrayfield will also host the world touch rugby tournament. I do not know whether that will be covered on television, but touch rugby, which is the non-contact form of the sport, is another growth area. It is a very healthy pursuit that, for example, allows rugby players past their best to perform. Indeed, I hope that businesses encourage the establishment of touch rugby teams, which can be mixed or single-sex. I find it distressing that I have to watch the BBC Welsh language programme to see my teams in Scotland playing. I find it appalling that BBC Wales had to send a crew up to Scotland to cover the under-20s international at Perth, which could then be watched only on BBC Wales. That seems ridiculous. We do not have coverage of age-related rugby, and we need that as well. I commend STV for providing some coverage—fronted by Andy Nicol—of club rugby and the Magners league. That is extremely welcome, but we need continued coverage of the teams as they develop. Glasgow Warriors and the Edinburgh team have both had a much better season, with Glasgow Warriors reaching the first ever play-offs in the Magners league. The coverage by BBC Alba for the next four years is also welcome, but we need a much more positive attitude from the BBC with regard to total coverage. For example, the use of BBC online should be considered. I welcome Sarah Boyack's motion and I hope that the broadcasters will improve their coverage of this growing sport within Scotland.

I join others in thanking Aileen Campbell for lodging the motion. One of the most shocking statements at the Families Outside conference last November was from one of Scotland's most respected judges, Lord Cullen, who said that the impact of imprisonment on families is rarely raised in court. With 16,500 children affected by the imprisonment of at least one parent each and every year, the challenge to the Parliament is to ensure that the courts are provided with an assessment of the damage that can be inflicted on those children and whether it is a price worth paying for the imprisonment of the parent. In my view, no social inquiry report should omit an assessment of that impact if children are involved—Anne McLaughlin made the same point. I illustrate that with an example from when I worked in Cornton Vale prison. A woman was admitted for seven days for fine default—it was a very old fine and she had straightened herself out some time previously—who had seven children who were taken into care. I ask members to imagine the effect on that family of that failure to take into account the effect on the children. The judiciary should be given such information and required to take into account the impact on the children of those who are sent to prison—those who are sent there on remand as well as those who are sentenced. As I said in this afternoon's debate on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, the number of people who are going to prison on remand is increasing year on year, and many of them are women. The increase in the number of women who are being sent to prison on remand is significant. At a time when the crime rate is falling and the numbers of short-term sentences and fine defaults are rising, why is there a rise in the number of people who are being remanded? To me, that is incomprehensible. It is not up to the minister to explain that, but other ministers should look at that issue carefully. We need alternatives to custody. As the Equal Opportunities Committee has pointed out, in Scotland we still have only one 218 centre, which was referred to as a time-out centre in the report "A Better Way", which was published when I was the Deputy Minister for Justice. The centre has been deemed a success, so why is it not being rolled out? Why is a similar centre for men not being piloted? The centre treats drug problems and provides a community setting in which the families can be kept together. The same applies to treatment for alcohol problems. One of the community payback orders that can be imposed under new section 227A of the Criminal Procedure  (Scotland) Act 1995 requires treatment for alcohol problems, and I hope that we will get alcohol treatment and testing orders as well as drug treatment and testing orders. That will keep the families together. In the short time that remains to me, I will address the issue of visitor centres. That is a different issue from visiting within prisons being stopped as a punishment when prisoners fail to comply with certain prison rules, which other members have spoken about. In my experience, the Scottish Prison Service seems to be doing all that it can to obstruct the development of external visitor centres. That is certainly the case at two prisons in my constituency: Cornton Vale and Glenochil. In Glenochil, there was a suitable building but, when the community applied for it to be used, it was promptly demolished as part of a redevelopment. At Cornton Vale, the former staff canteen is still there and the prison visitor committee and the community group both want to use it as a prison visitor centre for families, but that is not being pursued. SPS's current policy is not to create more of those facilities "unless facilities within the prison inhibit the provision of support and information to visitors." I am not talking about formal visits; I am talking about managing the families and their children—preparing them before visits and handling and managing them afterwards. Such visitor centres are worth while. Research by Dr Nancy Loucks in Tayside in 2002 suggested that they play a key role in encouraging family ties. All new-build prisons in England are required to include such centres and most English prisons have them. Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons supports their development, but the SPS does not seem to be getting the message that the centres are important. They should be outside the main prison, physically or administratively. They help to reduce tension, prepare visitors for their visit and improve liaison with the prison and understanding of the prison system. I therefore ask the minister to pass on to his colleagues the message that such centres should be allowed. Visits that are made by those who are very young should be frequent, extensive and—when the family wants it—private. The centres should also be made available for play. It is not enough that children are allowed to remain with their parents for nine months after birth. If they are to remain attached to their mothers, the children need to have continued and frequent opportunities for meetings. I hope that the 28 recommendations of the review by the former children's commissioner, "Not Seen. Not Heard. Not Guilty.", will lead to some movement, although I am not sure that that movement will be enough.  I thank Aileen Campbell for securing the debate.

There is a real problem with this debate, because the division between the parties is nothing like as great as people imagine. However, the solution that is offered in the Government's proposal is wrong. In 2001, when I was the Deputy Minister for Justice, there were 6,000 more admissions to prisons for short-term sentences. However, through the provision of robust alternatives such as drug treatment and testing orders and the time-out centre for women, we were able to reduce that number considerably. Robust alternatives will be used by the judiciary and the Labour Party will support that. What we will not support is a presumption that people such as me can be assaulted by drug dealers who will not then go to jail—that is wrong. When people who are involved in domestic violence are not removed from the situation to allow the family to readjust, in many cases that presumption is, frankly, wrong. The main increase in our prison population is not in short-term prisoners; the big problem in our prisons is having to cope with prisoners on remand, whose number has increased by more than 6,000. There are now 24,000 admissions for remand as opposed to 18,000—and dropping—for short-term sentences. There is no proposal in the bill to tackle the fact that we are not dealing with remand. The Equal Opportunities Committee addressed that in its report and referred to Cath Smith of Glasgow City Council, who said that if we could bail just one woman, whether to the 218 centre or on bail supervision, instead of remanding her to Cornton Vale, it would be a huge achievement. The Government's proposal is the wrong proposal and it addresses the situation in the wrong way at the wrong time. Let us have robust community sentences that the judiciary will use, not this facile proposal.

I concur with the minister that, with our optometrists and general ophthalmic services, Scotland's eye programme is a world leader. Can  she indicate whether the innovative link between optometrists and ophthalmology that has been developed at Queen Margaret hospital in Fife, which the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has visited, will be rolled out? Will the Government support the setting up of a robust information technology link to increase the efficiency of that highly innovative and productive programme by replacing the current workaround method that is currently being used to support it?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with local authorities and other bodies regarding the inspection and maintenance of air conditioning systems. (S3O-11068)

The minister will be aware of the fact that commercial properties are responsible for 20 per cent of the United Kingdom's energy consumption and carbon emissions. The EU directive requires inspection prior to 4 January 2011. Air conditioning specialists in my constituency tell me that the rate of inspections is currently less than 5 per cent, due to underfunded and overloaded trading standards officers. Full compliance with the directive would achieve an estimated 930,000 metric tonnes of carbon savings over the next 10 years. Does the minister agree that we need to up our rates of inspection and maintenance? Will he undertake to discuss with trading standards officials the ways in which we can increase the number of inspections of air conditioning units or to explore whether other bodies could also be used to carry out inspections?

The debate has been largely consensual. As Ross Finnie said, the starting point is that older people are an asset, not a liability. That is a fundamental point of which we must not lose sight. The demographics mean that we are faced with increasing longevity and substantial increases in the number of the very old, although it is interesting that those who are over 85 tend to have fewer long-term conditions and can be fairly fit—if we get to 85, we have a chance of living well beyond that. One problem is that healthy living has not increased in the same way that longevity has. We are faced with the major challenge of an elderly population with significant long-term conditions. Many members have referred to the need for effective prevention of emergency admissions, which are expensive and not good for the patient or individual. The figures are clear: 9,500 people receive free personal and nursing care in a care home and 45,000 receive care at home. The budget figures are also clear and show that all that accounts for only 8 per cent of the total care budget, which is a point that is not recognised in England. Although the cost will rise, it is not likely to rise as a percentage of the total care budget. In England, the latest discussion document, which came out last year, indicated that the average cost of care for those over 65 is about £30,000 a year. There is a debate on the issue in England, and a consensus on at least two points. First, there is consensus that there is a problem and that the current situation is not equitable, sustainable or fair. Secondly, there is consensus in the opposition to the uniformity and consensus in Scotland, where all parties support free care. We have a clear dividing line between the Scottish Parliament and the English parties. As those parties debate the way forward, there should be an opportunity to revisit the issue of the attendance allowance, to which Christine Grahame and Sandra White referred. Taking the totality of care, it is clear that including that funding to us would be helpful. Under the Liberal Democrat and Labour Administration that drove forward the free personal care policy—Henry McLeish was the First Minister who was committed to it—we endeavoured to introduce the joint future programme. That was an attempt at the grass roots to introduce unified budgets for health and social care. However, the programme has gone very slowly. The minister might advise us as to whether the joint future programme is continuing, as I have no idea. In  Perth and Kinross, which was the pilot area, it took 18 months even to agree the salaries of two individuals—one from health and one from social work—to do the same job. The willingness to make progress on that has been very poor. When change is driven hard from the centre, as happened with delayed discharges, a particular problem with that interface can be eliminated. Local authorities did not gain from taking people out of hospital—it was a cost on the local authority, so why would they ever do so? However, by driving change from the centre, we have been able almost to eliminate delayed discharges, although it is regrettable that the Government's promise to keep the rate at zero has not been kept. The figure rises to about 100 at the worst times every year. As Helen Eadie said, the history of free personal care started with Bevan's introduction of the NHS. We should not forget that the NHS included long-term care until the 1980s, when almost all long-stay wards were closed and the nursing element was devolved to local authority and private nursing homes. That is when the enormous discrimination began to arise. Someone who was dying of cancer went into a hospice or hospital, but someone who had dementia, for example, had to meet their own costs. We can do without that sort of discrimination, which Irene Oldfather has referred to repeatedly in debates on the issue. In Scotland, all parties are in favour of free personal care. We need to develop that partnership. Government, local authorities, the voluntary sector, users, carers and the wider public must all be involved in the debate as we proceed. We certainly need to squeeze out inefficiencies and shift the care from the acute to the preventive. However, in reality, the threshold for care in the community is rising. People need to have more and more severe conditions to get care, which is the exact opposite of what we need to do. We do not need unilateral action of the sort taken by SNP-led Stirling Council, which tried to close fairly modern care homes, although that was stopped by a public campaign. The council has cancelled support for the Independent Living Association Forth Valley and instead looked at direct payments, but without consulting the two other local authorities that are involved. It failed to repay the meal preparation charges and was one of the last councils to abolish them. I congratulate the Government on correcting that important measure, and I am sorry that it took so long for us to do it. The elderly are a substantial and largely untapped resource and must be engaged positively on the issue of free personal care. We have consensus, we have had a largely  reasonable debate and we need to keep our joint resolve. The Labour Party is committed to continuing free personal and nursing care.

Does the member accept that there are more hazardous drinkers—the people who drink really heavily—in the richer income groups? What happens is that, when people get addicted and have become dependent on alcohol, they lose their jobs, their families and their houses and they drift down the social scale and end up in poverty. That is one of the main reasons why there are much higher rates of death in the lower groups.

All of us in the chamber seek to reverse the 30 years of rising general alcohol consumption and increasing levels of hazardous drinking and harm. We should recognise, however, that 70 per cent of the population use alcohol responsibly. Unlike tobacco, there are health benefits from alcohol taken in moderation. We should not support policies that, although they might—I stress might—tackle the 7 per cent of harmful drinkers in our communities, would have a disproportionate effect on the 70 per cent and would not tackle the underlying culture. The other problems that we all agree need to be tackled—this was reinforced by Chief Constable Stephen House—include those of young binge drinkers causing mayhem in the night economy and alcohol-fuelled crime. We must also tackle underage drinking, the majority of which is parent sanctioned. We do not have a robust test-purchasing programme, those who sell illegally are given derisory fines, and the SNP Government has not even felt it important enough to collect the data on suspensions for 2008-09, which is regrettable. Most of all, the issue concerns the culture. Just as we successfully changed the culture on tobacco and on drink driving, so we have to change the culture on drinking. That could take a generation, but it is a task to which we must collectively apply ourselves. There are many measures in the bill that we can support, but we need to pay heed to the evidence from the Law Society of Scotland, not least on the Labour-Liberal Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, which contained a power unique in the world, on taking into account the public health interest and the protection of children. The 2005 act has yet to achieve its full potential in tackling availability, which is one of the three main drivers for potential change; the other two are price and culture. I  accept the cabinet secretary's arguments about price per se, although there is constant confusion between price and minimum unit pricing. The SNP's other proposal is mainly concerned with discounts and promotions. Labour supports such measures, although we hope to strengthen the provisions at stage 2. As the World Health Organization has stated, alcohol should be treated like no other commodity. A significant reduction in discounts and promotions could reduce consumption by about 3.1 per cent if the level were 40p, which is significant. We do not accept the arguments of experts in the industry regarding the effects on the industry overseas. That is basis of the Conservative amendment, and we do not accept it. We believe that minimum unit pricing fails on many counts. For all the vocal support from health professionals in particular, the issue comes down to one question: does the Parliament believe that a single, untried and untested econometric model provides a sound basis for the main instrument to solve Scotland's drinking problem? Although the model was peer reviewed, it was described to the Health and Sport Committee by its main author as "like the weather forecast". Images of Michael Fish or the forecast of barbecue weather last summer come to mind. Why did Dr Meier say that? Like any good academic, she was responding honestly to a question. The question was why, when real data are applied retrospectively to it, the model does not do what it says on the tin. That point is fundamental to one of our arguments. The cabinet secretary and most of the SNP members who support the minimum unit pricing measures repeatedly talk about "overwhelming evidence". Frankly, that is dishonest. Only one piece of empirical evidence has been published on minimum unit pricing, and it is from an Aboriginal community that is not served by too many supermarkets. There is no other published evidence on it. What does exist is a single model, and that must be the basis of the debate. If it is not, the SNP is obsessing about the matter.

Yes.

No, but what I will do is complete the arguments against minimum unit pricing. On the basis of a single econometric study, Scotland is once again to be used as an experimental laboratory. The last time we were used for the testing of an economic theory was  when the poll tax was introduced. There is no evidence; there is just an untried and untested model. It is like weather forecasting. It is an experiment. Who are the groups with the largest numbers of hazardous drinkers, by income? It is the richest half of the community. Which age group contains the largest number of hazardous drinkers? It is 18 to 24-year-olds. Who will be most responsive to the minimum unit price? It is not the harmful drinker, who, evidence shows, will substitute; it is not the richer half of the community, who can simply switch drinks and who will not be affected one jot even by a 60p minimum price; and it is not the young, heavier drinkers, whose consumption, according to Dr Petra Meier in her study, would be reduced by only 0.7 per cent. It will be the less well off in our community, as more of their spend is on cheap alcohol. The SNP failed to commission any research on low-income groups. Minimum unit pricing fails on lack of evidence. It fails on its lack of effect when real data are applied to the model. It fails to tackle the richer, who consume far more. It fails to tackle the 18-to-24 age group, who have the greatest number of hazardous drinkers among them. It fails to tackle the night-economy drunkenness. It fails to tackle the culture of drinking. It fails to protect the poorest third from what could be punitive tax increases.

I do not have time. If that is not enough, the SNP failed to commission any research on the market response to the £113 million annual revenue windfall. What will the market do?

No. The market will probably reduce to the minimum price the price of high-volume drinks that come just above it. The situation will not change. We still do not know what the SNP's minimum unit price is, so we cannot test its legality. Godfrey Robson, the civil servant who wrote the first alcohol action plan, recently wrote that the unanswerable questions on minimum unit pricing are whether it will be decisive and whether it will be sustainable. The answer is no. I quote what NICE has said on the matter, which Murdo Fraser referred to: "As would be expected, greater overall price increases lead to larger consumption reductions." The NICE report continues: "Policies targeting price changes specifically on low-priced products lead to smaller changes in consumption, as  they only cover a part of the market and induce substitution for other products by consumers." That is from the NICE report that was published last week. MUP is not acceptable.

Will the member give way?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will accept the view of the Health and Sport Committee that the Government should seek to amend the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill at stage 2 to specify its proposed minimum unit price. (S3F-2454)

We already knew that the Government had agreed to make an announcement before stage 3 of the bill. However, if we are to have a proper debate on the whole issue of pricing—as opposed to minimum unit pricing—why will the First Minister not name his price now rather than waiting until the stage 3 debate in the autumn?

I will deal with some background figures first. There is no doubt that the coalition has  promised that the NHS will be protected in real terms by a future increase in the next Parliament. We can all agree on that point. We should also be able to agree on the fact that the relative spend on the NHS in Scotland, compared with England, is less. There is no doubt about that. The SPICe figures make it absolutely clear. The other historical fact on which we can all agree is that the funding for the NHS more than doubled under the Labour and Liberal Administration. We can agree on that, and therefore accept all the points that a number of members have made about the vast improvement that has occurred in the health service during the past 11 years of devolution. There is no doubt about that. As Hugh Henry said, we must also recognise that there are some real challenges with new technology, new drugs and the increasingly ageing population. There is one other financial fact that we need to get out of the way and state very clearly. When Labour and the Liberal Democrats left office, the SNP inherited £1.5 billion of end-year funding, which was banked with the Treasury. It has now been unbanked and spent, so it is simply gone. That creates a problem. If that amount has been poured into the system, we will face problems in the future. Another financial point that we need to get clear is the point about NRAC that Shona Robison referred to and which Rhoda Grant mentioned in her speech. Labour supports NRAC as a concept.

I want to make it clear to the minister—she should not mutter about it—that we clearly support NRAC. However, when the Health and Sport Committee questioned the NRAC people, we required them to examine the data on which NRAC was based. A critical analysis of that needs to be done, and we have not got it yet. Rhoda Grant made the point that the Government has kicked it into the long grass. We were promised a critical analysis of NRAC in the early part of this year, and we have not got it yet. When the economy is growing, NRAC is not so important, but when it is contracting, at a standstill, or has been cut in real terms, as SPICe says that it has been, NRAC becomes fundamental to boards such as the Borders, Grampian, Lothian and Highland. Let us look at the situation around efficiency savings and cuts, which we have to distinguish between. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary has, under pressure, finally published the workforce plans. I regret that that was not done some days ago, because if it had been, this debate might have been based on the facts for all  the health boards and not just those four boards that had presented their findings to the Health and Sport Committee. The Labour Party is accused of being negative about this whole thing. I say to Anne McLaughlin and others that we entirely accept the fact that we must make efficiency savings and changes. As Jackie Baillie said, we are not opposed to changes in the skills mix; however, when changes in the skills mix are presented as a reduction in staffing, with 300-plus qualified nurses being swapped for 220 unqualified ones, that is a cut. I cannot understand why the Government cannot see that that must be a cut. We are not against changes in the skills mix.

I am sorry, but I have very limited time. Other efficiency savings could be made. The introduction of voice recognition software may allow us to reduce the number of secretaries. However, as Rhoda Grant and Hugh Henry pointed out, if that meant that patients did not get the information that they needed, which receptionists and secretaries often provide, that would not be a good thing. We could reduce the number of records that are held, the number of lost records, the number of attendances and the number of did-not-attends, which the Government said that it would do but has not succeeded in doing. We could reduce the number of bank staff and premium-rate locums, but if that were done in the way that it is being done in Glasgow that would be unacceptable. If getting rid of bank cleaners resulted in a reduction in the number of cleaning hours, that would be not an improvement in efficiency, but a cut. Another example is the fact that heart failure nurse specialists in Glasgow are now being required to do 8 per cent of their work on the wards. That might not be a bad thing if they were in the cardiology wards and it kept them connected to their teams, but they are not even in the cardiology wards—they are in totally random medical wards. Were those heart failure nurse specialists whose job is to keep patients out of hospital underworked? No, they were not; yet, they are now being redeployed to save bank nurse and locum costs. The way in which the situation is being managed is inappropriate. I welcome the national scrutiny group that the Government has set up—I suspect as a result of the pressure that we have been putting on it—but how does that work with the nurse partnership arrangement and who will finally sign off the workforce plans? The Government has not made that clear. Is it still to be the boards or will the cabinet secretary have the final responsibility?

I will give way in a second. According to the figures that we have got through SPICe in the past few minutes, 68 doctors are going, 1,523 nurses are going and 230 allied health professional posts are going. Those posts are going—they are not being replaced by more allied health professionals and nurses; they are being removed from the system. In my book, those are cuts. Let us turn to vacancy management. As a doctor, I have suffered under vacancy management. Vacancy management is entirely appropriate when it is decided that a post is not needed any more and it is planned that, when the post holder retires, they will not be replaced. However, we are not talking about that. History shows that, in the 1980s, when vacancy management was a big factor, when a vacancy came up management delayed the appointment of an individual to it. In NHS Forth Valley, a paediatric consultant gave six months' notice of the fact that he was retiring but the post was not advertised until the month after he retired. That post was still necessary, but it took another four months to appoint someone to it, during which time the health board saved four months' pay and great stress was caused to the other professionals.

I apologise. Vacancy management is not planned—that is Mike Rumbles's point. Voluntary redundancies are not the planned cutting of posts; they are asking people whether they would like to go if they are offered good terms. We did that in the universities and we lost people who were really needed. That does not work. We are not against efficiency savings and improvement, but the Government's proposals are SNP cuts. If we get more nats, we get fewer nurses—that is undoubtedly the case, and the Government's figures, which are in SPICe today, prove that. We will have 1,523 fewer qualified nurses in the health service in Scotland this year—more nats, fewer nurses.

Does Mary Scanlon agree that it is quite hard for NHS Lanarkshire to justify the cut in the number of smoking cessation nurses in that area from seven to three? Surely that will affect one of the main issues that the Parliament has been concerned about—the number of people who continue to smoke, especially in deprived communities.

Will the member give way?

I thank Ross Finnie for his thoughtful analysis. Does he accept that when Audit Scotland was invited to look at efficiency savings, it said that it was unable to validate them? That is why looking at them closely will be so crucial.

I draw members' attention to my declaration in the register of members' interests, particularly with regard to psychiatry and membership of the Scottish Association for Mental Health. The debate has probably been one of the most consensual that we have participated in during the current session of Parliament, and that is understandable because the progress that the health service has made since 1997, with the support of successive Governments, has been quite phenomenal. There has been a truly substantial change that has benefited all patients, and it has continued under successive Governments, including the SNP Government. I pay tribute to the SNP Government for the amount of funding that it has put into the NHS and for the direction that it has given. Frank McAveety, Ross Finnie and Nanette Milne all indicated that the targets are not always comfortable, but that is as it should be. Targets need to be challenging and should not be tick box. If waiting time targets become tick box and managers begin to play administrative games to meet them, that is inappropriate. The targets should be and are set in partnership with the NHS staff. The HEAT targets that were generated during the past decade have been excellent in driving us forward. We have achieved times of 12 weeks and nine weeks for in-patient and day surgery. Cancer waiting times are down to two months, and progress is being made towards a single month. Cardiac targets were met ahead of those in England. Ambulance targets, which have not been mentioned, have made a phenomenal achievement of 75 per cent of category A calls being answered in less than eight minutes. Accident and emergency departments have met their four-hour target. Those of us who are old enough to remember the 1990s will remember people waiting on trolleys for hours and sometimes days to get in. That is an interesting area, because it has been one of the most uncomfortable targets. There has been the use of what are called various names, although clinical decision units is probably the most common one. If they are used simply to remove a patient so that a target is met, that is inappropriate. On the other hand, if they are used so that a patient can get all the results they need before they go home, rather than having to go home and come back, that is appropriate.  We have to be more sophisticated in how we do this, and that was the thrust of Ross Finnie's amendment and his quite persuasive arguments. Unfortunately, we, too, cannot teeter quite far enough to support it. A message should go out from here that targets have to remain. Against the standard of patients waiting no more than six weeks for the eight key diagnostic tests, 90 per cent are now waiting less than four weeks, which is another superb achievement that I hope will be continued. However, as we wrap those into a single 18-week whole-journey waiting time target—with a shorter period for cancer—the issue is whether we obliterate the sub-targets within that. It is important that people wait only a very short time for tests so that they get their results quickly and do not mind then waiting a bit longer for treatment within the 18-week period. If the 18-week totality does not contain those sub-sections, it could be problematic. I hope that the cabinet secretary will indicate whether we are going to retain the sub-targets. General practice has not been mentioned, although it is a great achievement that well over 90 per cent of patients are now being seen by a member of the primary care staff within the 48-hour target. That was a sensible target, unlike the target in England, which stipulated that they had to be seen by a general practitioner rather than any member of the primary care staff. However, less than 60 per cent of GPs are offering advance bookings, which is, frankly, unacceptable. The figure has improved, but it must be driven up. It is wrong that someone with a chronic condition cannot make an advance booking for a time that suits them. If self-management and partnership are what it is all about, we absolutely need to drive up that figure. Several members, including Karen Gillon and Mary Scanlon, referred to exclusions from service provision targets. Mental health is the biggest of those and is the most important, in the sense that I think the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill will make that exclusion discriminatory. I question whether, under equalities legislation, that would be practical or possible without clear mental health targets beyond the two existing HEAT targets.

I welcome that intervention. We have HEAT targets for psychologists and for the reduction of antidepressant prescribing. We also have a very welcome child and adolescent mental health services target, although it is still a waiting time of 26 weeks between referral and treatment—but that is more to do with workforce development  and so on. We need to look at some of the early measures that we talked about the other week, the nurse-family partnership being very important. Beyond that, I have been working hard to get the Place2Be into primary schools. It is a tier 2 service that is developing. I am glad to say that several health boards and local authorities are responding positively to that charity, which has a big effect. Assisted conception is another area that needs to be developed. We are going to get drugs targets shortly, and it is important that we also have an alcohol target. There are challenges beyond all the targets that we are setting, which are to do with new treatments that are being introduced. The treatment for heart attacks and the stroke thrombolysis treatment will require us to look carefully at what is happening there and at the standards that are being set by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, which are another form of target. I know that the cabinet secretary and her department will work hard to ensure that the target of 80 per cent of those for whom it is appropriate receiving the one-hour door-to-needle service for stroke thrombolysis treatment is met. Where for the future? We are moving steadily towards the 18-week total journey time target, and I welcome the fact that the cancer targets—-which Labour announced in the general election campaign—have received support from the cabinet secretary with the proviso that whatever we do must be sustainable. It is crucial that people get the diagnosis, the tests and the initial contact with a specialist, and setting a sub-target by which that must be achieved within the month target might be a way forward. Bariatric surgery has been mentioned, and I welcome the Golden Jubilee national hospital's announcement. However, Fife has no bariatric surgery at all; hopefully, people in Fife will be able to get to the Golden Jubilee national hospital. Furthermore, NHS Forth Valley does not have an osteoporosis service, and a lot of members mentioned postcode issues. That is another area on which we now need to concentrate. I finish by referring to the new ways system of defining and measuring waiting times, on which Audit Scotland has reported, which has clearly been a success. It is a fairly bureaucratic system with a big electronic data warehousing section in the middle, but that is appropriate in the management of waiting times and it has definitely been an improvement. Nevertheless, I reiterate a concern that was not totally removed by the audit, which is about those who are illiterate, those who have learning difficulties, those who have early-onset dementia, those who are homeless, prisoners, travelling people, asylum seekers,  refugees and immigrants with language difficulties. I wonder whether we are monitoring closely enough whether those people are among the 100,000 patients who have been taken off the waiting lists for various reasons. I also raise the question of the 300 complex needs patients we now have, which needs further analysis. We must continue to address the balance of quality and speed, but let us today celebrate the NHS's achievement and welcome the continued challenges that we are setting it to improve its services to patients.

The point that the member is making is excellent, but I want to point out that, quite correctly, under their duty of care, health professionals would be acting unethically if they did not treat someone who required that treatment, irrespective of whatever targets were set by us.

I welcome the debate. I proposed an amendment to the motion to indicate that the family nurse partnership is part of the comprehensive consideration of child issues by the Prime Minister's Office under Tony Blair. I hope that the Scottish scheme builds on the successes that are being achieved in the English scheme. As Ian McKee said, the scheme was inspired by a similar approach, over many years, by Professor David Olds. In America at least, the results have been impressive. In 2006, the UK Government announced that it would pilot family nurse partnerships in 10 sites throughout England. Applications were invited from primary care trusts, and local authorities were involved in providing continuing funding and support until the children were 24 months old. That partnership is an important feature that I am not sure is reflected in the Scottish pilot. I do not know whether it is entirely funded by the national health service, or by Government, and whether that will be the case for future waves. The evaluation of the original pilots in England showed positive outcomes, not only for the pregnant women but for their families and the nurses involved. Those who benefited said that in the beginning they thought that the nurse might be nosy or judgmental, but that was not the case, and most got on well with their nurses. Importantly, we found that the fathers were often involved to a greater extent than might otherwise have been the case.  It is important for the scheme that young parents are able to trust those who are giving them advice. There were some problems with workload and the burden of lots of paperwork. Paperwork is a feature of pilots, and I hope that that will not occur when this pilot is rolled out, so we should watch that closely. In England, the scheme has progressed and is now into phase 2, with waves 2, 3 and 4, of 20 sites each, and a planned full roll-out from 2011. As Ian McKee said, England is really going for it—it is not just a one-off pilot. Whether it will continue under the new Conservative-Lib Dem coalition remains to be seen. Scotland appears to be slower, although the minister may be able to give us more information. I have a number of concerns about the Lothian pilot. My colleague Marlyn Glen has asked a number of parliamentary questions about it. I support and commend the project but it has a top-heavy feel to it. There is a 16 to 20-hour clinical lead, a full-time project supervisor and a full-time lead nurse supervisor—I am not sure how many of those are engaged on the front line. Sometimes, such a top-heavy approach is needed in pilots; hopefully it would not be needed in a roll-out. Nevertheless, if we add on six nurses and an administrator, we end up with a cost of £1.6 million for 150 families. Will that be sustainable if the pilot is successful? As Dr McKee said, it is an important scheme. I am concerned about the selection process in the Lothian scheme. It applies to mothers under 18, whereas throughout the UK most schemes have been for mothers under 20, although I gather that some have gone up to 23. It is probably acceptable that it applies only to first-time mothers. However, although the group that is being selected in the Lothian pilot is a vulnerable one, other measures of deprivation are identified in research from the growing up in Scotland project—which has published interesting material today—that surely should have been among the criteria. The current criteria include the single eligibility clause, which I presume is a mistake in the notes from Lothian; being under 18; and being a first-time mother. However, in identifying those who might benefit, other measures of deprivation should have been included, such as a parent having no work, poor housing, no qualifications, long-term illness or disability, income below 60 per cent of the median, and an inability to provide some items of clothing or food. I am also concerned about the failure to identify one issue in particular: poor mental health in the mother, beyond the normal period for diagnosis of post-natal depression. It is important to know whether this family nurse partnership is linking to Home-Start, sure start and  to child and family centres—in other words, the developments that the previous Administration focused on in order to try to create improvement among vulnerable families. As far as I am aware, the Scottish National Party abandoned Labour's pilot scheme on nursery education for vulnerable two-year-olds. What is the exit strategy for these families? They will obviously require continuing support. How does the family nurse partnership link to third-sector support, during and after the period that it is concerned with? How does it supplant or work with midwifery services, particularly in Lothian, which has a specialist service for people with addictions, who form another significant vulnerable group? What other projects for vulnerable groups are being trialled in Scotland? Are we trialling the family pathfinder projects from England, the family intervention project, the family group conferencing project or multisystem family therapy? If we put all our eggs in this one basket—which is a pretty expensive basket—we may have problems. I commend Jackson Carlaw, because the fundamental issue before us involves the question of how we can move from universal health visiting, with screening, to providing actual support for vulnerable families. The previous Administration did not solve that problem and I do not believe that the current one has done so, either. The problem is difficult to deal with in a time of economic restraint, but we must make a serious attempt at solving it.

Will the minister comment on the failure of my proposed limit on trans fat (Scotland) bill, in the light of the support for the measure from Alyn Smith, the Scottish National Party MEP and the recent research that shows that it would save 700 lives in Scotland and prevent around 1,100 heart attacks annually?

I congratulate Malcolm Chisholm on securing the debate. I thank Breakthrough Breast Cancer for its helping briefing. I should declare that one of my staff members works jointly for me and for Breakthrough Breast Cancer, so I am doubly delighted to speak in the debate. I know that lymphoedema has been mentioned in other debates in the Parliament, but I think that this is the first time that we have discussed it on its own. As we can see from the estimated lymphoedema figures, the condition is becoming much more prevalent throughout Scotland as more people survive breast cancer. We know that the number of people who have breast cancer-related lymphoedema will continue to grow. However, as information is not gathered nationally, it is impossible to know exactly how many people have lymphoedema. As a first step, we need to consider getting that accurate picture. I hope that the minister will give an undertaking to ensure that the data are collected properly. As a former general practitioner, I have seen at first hand the effects of lymphoedema. As other members have said, it is a swelling or tightness in the skin that is caused by a build-up of excess lymph fluid in the surface tissues. Lymphoedema is, of course, uncomfortable and at times very painful. It can impact on a person's life in a variety of ways: it can limit their movement and make it difficult to perform ordinary tasks. At times, it can lead to further complications such as cellulitis, which is an inflammation of the skin, particularly if the skin becomes infected. As other members have said, lymphoedema is often a reminder of breast cancer or other underlying conditions. When combined with the debilitating nature of the condition, lymphoedema can lead to low self-esteem, which is distressing for individuals and their families.  Again, as other members have said, lymphoedema is a long-term condition that at present can be managed but not cured, and therein lies the problem. For early identification, people need to be adequately informed and made aware of the potential for developing lymphoedema after treatment for breast cancer. That is also the case for those who have had cervical and prostate cancer. People need to know that lymphoedema is a potential complication of those conditions and that they should seek treatment and advice as soon as the symptoms develop. Once the condition is fully established, it is much more difficult to control. Lymphoedema is not always an immediate complication. The symptoms may present at any point after treatment for a condition—indeed, sometimes years later. It is important that people know that it can present over a period of time. There are many ways to help those who have lymphoedema, as members have described. I pay tribute to healthy steps, which runs a specialist exercise class in Glenrothes in my constituency. As others have said, we need a combination of initial care and advice, followed by specialist care interventions, after which we need to train people at a lesser level and train families to provide support. We need all of that to be delivered in a comprehensive and integrated service. It is sad that, once again, we are discussing the postcode prescribing of heath care. That is an inevitable consequence of the individuality of local health boards, but it is unacceptable in any discussion of a universal basic standard and quality of care. That postcode prescribing of services must end. I support Malcolm Chisholm's motion, in which he calls for "a high quality and equitable service that meets the needs of people in Scotland with or at risk of lymphoedema". I hope that the debate will raise awareness. Again, as in many health debates, a variety of information has been provided, both personal and from our constituents. When she responds to the debate, the minister has the opportunity to consider once again whether national action is required on lymphoedema services and whether the accountability of health boards should be enforced. I support Malcolm Chisholm's motion.

Quality improvement is about the effective implementation of Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guidelines, which we have had since 1997. We are not in a new situation. Quality improvement has not just suddenly landed on the table. As the cabinet secretary said, it is about building on what has been done before. The patient experience, to which Malcolm Chisholm referred, is crucial. That partnership is the new element that has come in over the past few years, although the patient's journey, care and outcomes have long been the NHS's focus. As the cabinet secretary, Duncan McNeil and Michael Matheson said, the initial problems that we as a Parliament faced in 1999—of unacceptable waiting times in accident and emergency, long delays in getting appointments, difficulties in obtaining diagnostic tests and longer delays in getting treatment—have largely been addressed, although there are some exceptions, which a  number of members mentioned. For example, people simply cannot get bariatric surgery, which has not been mentioned, in Fife—the board will not provide it at all. That sort of postcode lottery is unacceptable, given that we are trying to achieve a universal service. However, we have many examples of improved quality of care and improved efficiency. One of the best examples is in renal dialysis. Over the past 13 to 15 years, a trend has developed of providing satellite units for home dialysis, which has transformed the lives of many renal failure patients. It is just a pity that the proposed NHS Ayrshire and Arran unit is now on hold. We must recognise that it will be difficult to address some of the quality issues that we face if new money is required to do so. There are other successes, such as the patient safety programme, the better together programme and developments in anticipatory care, which Malcolm Chisholm mentioned. Iatrogenic problems—problems caused by the very treatment that is being instigated—can sometimes be fatal. Regrettably, those problems have not always been given a high enough priority. In 2008, only one medical undergraduate course in Scotland was teaching patient safety. To embed a strategy in the health service, we have to start with undergraduate training. How many Scottish universities include quality improvement and patient safety in their undergraduate curriculum for medical, dental, nursing and allied health professional students? The Tayside pilot that commenced as part of a UK-wide patient safety initiative in 2004—Tayside was the Scottish representative—has massively reduced problems in Ninewells. Which health boards or hospitals were part of the extension of the original four pilot sites to 20 sites throughout Scotland, and what were the results? We have a lot further to go. For example, there has been a collective failure by all Administrations since devolution to implement electronic prescribing. There is excellent research to show that the reduction in errors that can be achieved by electronic prescribing is substantial. It would also save a considerable amount of funding in a number of clerical jobs, which could be diverted elsewhere. Quality and efficiency should be synonymous, but, unfortunately, they have not been so. Indeed, too often in the past the way to make savings was through cuts, which impaired quality. There have been two streams in existence since 1997: clinical governance and quality improvement, which are not the same thing. Clinical governance is about quality assurance—examining results and deciding whether they were  good quality—whereas quality improvement is about the total effect throughout the system of making change. I regret that the strategy says nothing about the necessary integration of those two streams, which could lead to improvement. We know the risk to the quality improvement agenda of efficiencies and cash-releasing savings—evidence of the dangers of such an approach has begun to emerge. Warnings from the BMA and the RCN herald the renewal of across-the-board cuts, and skill mixes are being used that involve applying specialist nurse skills inappropriately. For example, in Glasgow, specialist nurses are being put back on wards, so their skills are not being fully used. At the other end is the risky deployment of staff beyond their skill level. If that happens, we will be in difficulty. Boards are failing to replace staff who are on maternity leave or long-term sick leave. That places burdens on the remaining staff and increases stress, which leads to additional sickness. The Health and Sport Committee learned yesterday that vacancy management is expected to produce savings of £4 million for one health board that appeared before us and £1 million for another health board that was represented, so that will be important. However, if it simply means stopping the filling of vital posts, it will reduce front-line services. We therefore need to understand what vacancy management is about. My experience of vacancy management was not good. To save money, the posts of people who gave due notice of retiral were not advertised, even when those posts were critical. The consequent delay in appointment—and, sometimes, the necessary appointment of locums when the system was at breaking point—was more costly in the end, so what was intended was not achieved. Substantial stress was also created for the rest of the team. It is clear that we need to consider the skill mix and that reviewing the workforce is important. How we do that is also important—it must be done sensitively. Audit Scotland's report "Day surgery in Scotland" showed that Scotland still lags behind England on the number of day-surgery procedures that are undertaken. At yesterday's Health and Sport Committee meeting, I did not question NHS Tayside's representative on day surgery, but the report says that NHS Tayside is in a low category for several procedures and that it is a long way from achieving the targets on 16 procedures. If we reached the targets, that would save money and improve the experience for patients, as Duncan McNeil said. When patients enter hospital just for the day, they are much less likely to develop hospital-acquired infection.  My colleague Jackie Baillie talked about cuts, to which our amendment refers. It is a fact that the NHS in Scotland has received lower increases than has the NHS in England since the current Government took office. Of the £900 million of additional money that was put into this year's Scottish budget, £274 million will go to health. I welcome that, but SNP members cannot have it both ways. A funding increase should protect front-line jobs. The cuts that my colleague Jackie Baillie outlined of 1,250 staff in Glasgow and 700 staff in Lothian—and other cuts—show that the situation will have to be examined carefully. Cutting cleaning hours at Glasgow royal infirmary is incomprehensible. On cutting volunteer drivers, the Minister for Public Health might confirm in summing up that Duncan McNeil represented his constituents successfully. However, to be frank, the cabinet secretary and the minister do not have enough fingers to stick into the holes that are beginning to appear in the dykes. They cannot resolve such problems one by one—a global strategy must deal with them. We must consider several issues. As Ross Finnie said, we must define front-line care. The response yesterday—"It depends what you mean by 'front-line care'"—was disappointing. I concur with Mary Scanlon and Jackson Carlaw's analysis of the strategy. It is apple pie—it contains nice fluffy aspirations, but it is not even as cunning as a cunning plan by Blackadder's Baldrick. No one could speak against it, but it fails on almost every count. Some counts on which it fails are astonishing. It fails to examine closely the quality improvement actions of the past 20 years. It fails to analyse the hugely successful Scottish pilot in Tayside, to which I referred. It does not talk about the successful lean in Lothian programme. It does not mention quality improvement techniques and tools such as lean, total quality management, continuous quality improvement, the Institute for Healthcare Improvement's plan-do-study-act system, business process re-engineering or six sigma. There is no indication of what is being done. It does not refer to the work, sponsored by the health department and published in 2009, by Powell, Rushmer and Davies, involving Dr Twaddle, which is an excellent summary and review of quality improvement and how it needs to be embedded. It does not tell us whether the health department is supporting the embedding of quality improvement in every board or has a role in facilitating boards' efforts to tackle the barriers that the strategy indicates are present in a number of areas. The strategy makes no reference to training of board members, executive and non-executive, or lead clinicians. It does not talk about the co-ordinators of the managed care networks that underpin the developing collaborative system in  Scotland. Embedding quality improvement techniques in those networks is fundamental. It does not suggest what steps might be taken, after NHS Tayside's success in backfilling in Tayside, to allow staff from there to play a mentoring role in other boards when that work is rolled out, as we have been told it will be. We do not know what quality improvement networks have been established. As Mary Scanlon indicated, we are also concerned about the fact that there is no security for whistleblowers, which will become vital as we move forward into a period of greater austerity. The strategy mentions quality ambitions, quality outcome measures and a quality measurement framework that will be produced. It also refers to a number of committees: a quality alliance, a quality improvement hub and an NHS strategic oversight group. I detect a growing confusion of the sort that we had with HAI. I am very disappointed by the strategy, which is light and weak and lacks the focus that is present in the department. One member referred to it as a "work in progress"—that is exactly what it is. We all want quality. It is vital that we have efficiency, but it is also vital that we do not return to the situation that existed in the 1980s, when efficiency savings meant cuts. Such cuts were made repeatedly across the board, with management presenting clinicians such as me with statements requiring us to cut 3 per cent from our budgets for the year, even if we had made substantial savings in the previous year and had improved efficiency. We must be far more sophisticated than that. Regrettably, the strategy does not provide the basis for such an approach.

Is Mary Scanlon asking members to believe that the cutting of 1,250 jobs in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, including doctors' and nurses' jobs, will have no effect on front-line services?

I join others in welcoming the debate and congratulating Angela Constance on securing it. The issue is important, because although the responsibility for veterans rests primarily with Westminster, the responsibility for many of their services is devolved. When our servicemen and women come home after a period of service, it is vital that we support them during what are often turbulent transitional times. The Mental Health Foundation has said that the challenges that service personnel face in readjusting to home life can have a significant impact on their mental health. If we fail to take proactive care of our veterans, problems such as alcohol and drug misuse, suicide and being sent to prison, which is the subject of the debate, will be  more widespread. Although, as Angela Constance said, no crime is acceptable, we must do our best to understand the causes of crime committed by veterans and to treat them. We have to remember that veterans now include many younger men and women who have served in the five conflicts since 1997: Kosovo, Bosnia, Sierra Leone, Iraq and Afghanistan. The number of veterans is significant, as is the variation in their experiences. Many of us would find it difficult to envisage some of the scenes that they have witnessed during their service. The Mental Health Foundation has said that there is a need for veterans to receive a mental health assessment and the support that is required, which is welcome. Those good services should include housing, to which my colleague Sarah Boyack alluded, because homelessness is an important precursor to some of the prison admissions that we see. We have to ensure that there is not just a good mental health and wellbeing service for our veterans but a good rehabilitative programme generally to ensure that military life, to which veterans have become accustomed, does not prevent them from re-entering their communities in Scotland. As a first step, we need early and proactive assessment of veterans' health. The 13-year delay to which Combat Stress referred is unacceptable and is a measure of the fact that we fail veterans. We also have to collect data on admissions to prison. It is not just about seeing the prison population and the percentage of the daily population that is in prison—that mistake is often made. The number of people in prison is around 7,500, but the number of admissions is 45,000. I have to say that that is not necessarily the number of individuals—again, that is not clear, because the statistics are muddied. We need much clearer data. I welcome Angela Constance's efforts in that area and hope that the Government, with the MOD and the SPS, will respond by endeavouring to provide a more accurate picture of what is happening. The criminal justice authorities need to keep much more accurate data, too. I welcome the UK Government's new horizons mental health strategy, which has promised to review the needs of serving personnel and veterans. At Holyrood, we had a joint meeting between the cross-party group on mental health and the cross-party group on supporting veterans in Scotland, which was excellent. We heard about the development of networked services, supported by units such as that at Hollybush. The meeting was attended by Kevin Woods, who, as chief executive of the NHS in Scotland, is leading the  development of services for veterans, which is welcome. We heard about the pilot project in Lothian between the NHS, the MOD and veterans organisations, which is welcome, and the work of specialists such as Dr Chris Freeman, who is taking a lead in this area. It would be wrong for us to sit back and let veterans charities such as Veterans Scotland be the mainstay of help—there must be a partnership. The partnership must include veterans, who will have views on how they would like to be supported. I pay tribute to Angela Constance for her persistence on this issue and hope that it will be taken forward appropriately.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it remains its position that the commitment in the Scottish National Party manifesto to provide free school lunches to all primary 1 to 3 pupils by August 2010 has been fully funded and whether it expects this pledge to be met. (S3O-10207)

I think that I thank the minister for his response. It is clear that only one of the 32 local authorities will deliver on the pledge. Ten councils say that they do not have the funding even to attempt to deliver it. Given that there is an additional £900 million in the Scottish budget this year—

An additional £900 million is in the Scottish budget this year, but it is clear that the minister and the cabinet secretary are shifting the goalposts on the commitment by telling councils that they need only demonstrate progress or provide free school meals in deprived areas. Will  the minister accept that, like the SNP's discredited class sizes pledge, the free school meals policy was never going to be delivered in this parliamentary session?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance on the MSPs code of conduct—specifically rule 7.2.5, which states: "Members must treat other MSPs ... with courtesy and respect." Can you confirm whether that courtesy and respect should be extended to the members of the United Kingdom Parliament? I ask the question in view of the behaviour last week, in Dollar, of the Minister for Skills and Lifelong Learning, Keith Brown. I believe that Mr Brown's behaviour was in breach of the code of conduct—

Thank you.

To ask the First Minister how many retailers have had liquor licences suspended for selling alcohol to children since 2007 and what the average fine has been. (S3F-2324)

Presiding Officer, "It's time to get tough on the irresponsible sale of alcohol ... The sale of alcohol to underage Scots will result in the loss of a premises' license". That was an SNP manifesto promise in 2007, yet from answers to me just now and answers from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, we know that of the 561 recorded offences in which a licensed person sold alcohol to a person under 18 in 2008-09, only 202 were proceeded against. As the First Minister just indicated, there has been no collection of any data from the courts on the suspended licences, which I cannot understand. Is that yet another broken promise by the SNP? Does the First Minister have any comment on the situation in Perthshire, in my constituency, where no such offences were recorded and where there were no prosecutions in 2008-09? Are there really no underage drinkers in Perthshire?

Labour has welcomed the decision to have a new, upgraded Beauly to Denny line. However, over the section from Crieff to Plean in my constituency, I have sought mitigation, including undergrounding of some sections, as has been agreed for some of the feeder lines in the Highlands. Bruce Crawford and Keith Brown have both suggested to the groups opposing the pylons that they should continue to campaign for undergrounding. Is that not a cruel deception? Will the minister make clear today whether he is still talking to the power companies about the undergrounding of some mainline sections around Stirling? Or is undergrounding around Stirling no longer on the table? My constituents are entitled to clarity on the issue at this point.

I welcome the minister's acceptance of amendment 47. The Health and Sport Committee was certainly of the view that the Scottish health council should continue. It has been an important development during the Parliament's existence. It ensures that the public are adequately represented, monitors consultation processes in health boards and gives boards advice on major changes. It is a crucial body that needs to be maintained, and giving HIS the power to decide whether it should continue did not seem to the committee to be appropriate. I very much welcome the change of approach, but it seems something of a paradox that amendment 51 would give powers back to the ministers to abolish the council. However, that is in line with all the other powers that ministers seek to enable them to abolish a range of bodies, and we will oppose it.  Amendment 47 agreed to.  Amendment 48 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.  Amendment 51 moved—[Shona Robison].

I rise briefly to support amendment 49, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm. For such a vulnerable group of people, charging does not seem to me to be appropriate. On the stage 2 amendments on the Mental Welfare Commission generally, I believe that the discussions that the various committees, including the Health and Sport Committee, have had with the Mental Welfare Commission and stakeholders have led to a much more satisfactory position. Therefore, I hope that Mr Brownlee will withdraw amendment 76. I hope that amendment 49 will be supported.

I rise to speak because Waterwatch is in my constituency and that of Keith Brown. We will be interested to see how he votes on amendment 81. Waterwatch was part of the dispersal policy of  the previous Administration, and dispersed jobs to an area with relatively poor employment. Thirty jobs in the constituency will go back to the centre if the bill is enacted as it is. I am not going to repeat other members' points, but the other important point is that the SPSO cannot deal with systemic complaints; it can deal only with individual complaints. Waterwatch has shown that, by dealing with systemic complaints, it has improved the performance of Scottish Water. Frankly, what the Government proposes is vandalism for the sake of numbers, and it should be opposed. I support Patrick Harvie's amendments.

The minister mentioned the choose life programme. As she will be aware, research by Professor Rory O'Connor of the University of Stirling suggests that 14 per cent of Scottish pupils have already self-harmed and a further 14 per cent have had serious thoughts about doing so. Will she comment on the fact that, since ring fencing ended, funding for choose life programmes has been reduced by some authorities, including Western Isles Council and Highland Council, which have the highest suicide levels not just in Scotland but in the whole of the United Kingdom?

The youth commission on alcohol's excellent report was discussed at yesterday's meeting of the cross-party group on drugs and alcohol, where it emerged that the central theme is that young people want a culture change in relation to drinking in Scotland. Will the First Minister pledge his Government to ensure that at least two young persons are represented on every local licensing forum? Will he also ensure, as requested by the youth commission, that his Cabinet Secretary for Justice has discussions with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland about ensuring full and rigorous enforcement of the current legislation?

To ask the Scottish Executive how much public money has been provided to support The Gathering 2009 Ltd since its inception. (S3O-9811)

Given the Government's vocal public support for the gathering, what steps did it take to ensure that the company was viable before public investment and loans were made of such large sums? What steps will the Government now take to assist the many small companies that believed The Gathering 2009 Ltd was viable but have now been left high and dry by the company's liquidation and the failure of rescue talks?

I apologise for not being here for the opening speeches, but I was on a school visit. I will not make a habit of missing the opening speeches of debates. Before I speak, I should declare an interest, in that I still hold an honorary professorship at University of Stirling, which has a significant aquaculture department. I will not talk about containment and planning, as other members have already covered those issues. I want to talk about disease, protected geographical indication status and some academic aspects. As others have said, Scotland's aquaculture industry is vital to us. Although we provide only 10 per cent of the world's supply at present and, as Peter Peacock said, that figure has been static for  the past decade, salmon nevertheless accounts for 40 per cent of our food exports, and the quality mark means that we have a niche in the market, which should be sustained on the basis of quality. Quality will be determined by how we tackle a number of issues that I will address. The sea-lice problem has been mentioned; it remains a major problem in salmon farming the world over. I wonder whether, in the light of Professor Randolph Richards's update to the ministerial group, we now have regular data on sea-lice induced mortality rates and whether those data are collected, collated and regularly published. I also wonder whether we are totally comfortable with the protocols on use of chemicals—in particular, repeated use and occasional use at levels beyond the prescribed levels, because clearly that is still the main way in which sea lice are tackled. I want to address an issue that has not been referred to by other members—bacterial kidney infection. I understand that this is a corynebacterium. It is acid-fast on staining, rather like the tuberculosis bacillus, and is—rather like TB in cows—endemic in wild fish and is vertically transmitted. All those facts are important, because if we do not maintain high standards of disease control and inspection in respect of the condition, we are liable to have problems. Norway has recently upgraded its disease control and attack on bacterial kidney infection. We are still at the same level as Northern Ireland, which is a significant source of eggs and smolts for us.

The question is whether we maintain the current controls, upgrade them or downgrade them. I suggest that we apply the same rigorous conditions to our eggs that are applied in Norway. As I understand it, that is not occurring at present. The information that I have is that the effect of not increasing our requirements with regard to eggs is that our export of eggs and smolts will end, because we will not be able to export to countries that have a higher grade of requirement in respect of disease control. I am not an expert in this area, but I am obviously interested from the medical angle. I ask the minister whether, in her summing up, she can give us some information on the matter. In respect of disease control, I commend the company that is based in Alloa—although I understand that it may not be there for much longer—that I was involved in trying to protect and promote in the first session of Parliament, and which uses DNA analysis and tagging to improve  both the resistance of the brood stock and rapidity of growth. By having faster growth and faster harvesting, fewer chemicals are required, so the whole system is improved. That company has obviously done an excellent job using new technology. On protected geographical indicator status, I understand that the current consultation and debate is on the potential for downgrading the status, which was upgraded a year ago. That would not be appropriate. If we are going to maintain the brand quality and our niche status, we must maintain the PGI status. If we get to a situation in which juveniles can be imported, spend less than half their life in Scotland and still be given the Scottish brand, someone will twig that that is not the Scottish brand. I understand—John Scott and others will tell me if I am not right—that there was an issue about whether beef and lamb that was brought here for fattening could have the Scottish brand on it. The animals now have to be born and bred in Scotland. It is important that we allow the importation of eggs, but not of smolts or juveniles. Finally, I turn briefly to the academic side. We have a number of academic departments in Scotland, including at the University of Stirling, with which I have been associated; at Heriot-Watt University, which works with disease control; at the University of Aberdeen, which has done considerable work on immunology; and, of course, there is the Marine Scotland laboratory. I ask the minister to say in her summing up a few words about the research network forum. I understand that it is helping quite a lot to develop a network of research in Scotland, which is important in maintaining the quality of our brand, tackling disease control and maintaining the niche market, which is vital to our exports.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will provide an update on the status of Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi. (S3F-2257)

On 12 January, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice told the Scottish Affairs Committee in Westminster that Mr Megrahi was "alive and well". In his other responses to the committee, there was no hint of regret from Mr MacAskill about any aspect of the handling of the entire affair. Since January, the Scottish Parliament's Justice Committee has produced a report that was highly critical of many aspects of the process. Would the First Minister now like to offer any words of apology or comfort to those relatives of the Lockerbie victims who were, and continue to be, distressed by his Government's decision and the process by which it was reached?

Follow that, as they say. As usual, Christopher Harvie has given us an excellent review of the history and culture of Perth. I have a lengthy association with the Perth area. I was born in Edinburgh but adopted by a family in Perth. My father was a general practitioner there for 40 years, I trained as a medical student at Perth royal infirmary and the grandfather of my adoptive family was previously head of one of the law firms there—J & J Mailler. Perth's association with the Black Watch has not been mentioned. My grandfather served with some distinction in the first world war—he was gassed while serving with the Black Watch—and my uncle Fergus was killed at Casino when serving in the second world war. I am really pleased that Murdo Fraser has secured the debate, because the time has come for Perth's city status to be restored—that is really what we are talking about. It is a royal burgh, as Murdo Fraser said. The campaign that has been launched—which is supported by all the local MPs, MSPs, the council and individuals in the area—is, I hope, gathering momentum on the back of the 800 th anniversary celebrations. Jim Murphy, to whom I have written, supports it. My colleague Gordon Banks has also spoken to Jim Murphy and organised a meeting in Westminster. Perth FM and the local papers— The Courier and   Advertiser and the Perthshire Advertiser —have also been supportive, which is welcome. I will not cover all Perth's history, but I will make one or two observations. The royal burgh status was awarded in the midst of severe flood damage, which is quite an interesting historical note. Perth is not just about its history, although that history is clearly royal, entrenched and of huge significance to Scotland. It is also a modern place and will, I hope, achieve city status on the back of its modernity and the fact that it is an area of growth. It has industry. Aviva has taken over from General Accident, which has a long and proud history in insurance—a growing industry. Indeed, one of the small local investments that my grandfather's company made was in General Accident. The other was in Pullars of Perth, which Perth people will know is significant. The city has a rich history of culture and art, which continues today with the new concert hall that was opened in 2005. That important development has led to the renewal of the city centre. Although some shops have closed in the recession, the changes that have created a vibrant, alive city centre since I was a child there are important. The only time that I have been angling—I am not an angler—my grandfather took me to catch salmon on the Tay. Indeed, I caught an 18lb salmon, though I was allowed to play it for only 10 minutes before he snatched the rod from my hand. Salmon were slightly more prevalent in those days than they are now, but salmon fishing and fishing more generally remain important to the area, as do many other sporting activities. The area is 530km 2 , vibrant and alive with possibilities for tourism in the modern setting. Time does not allow me to extol all of Perth's virtues, but the time has come for it to celebrate its 800 th anniversary. It has a Premier League football club once again—thank goodness—and a rugby club that is not doing too badly; that club is certainly on its way up. It would be a fitting accolade if Perth's city status was restored this year. Perth would be a worthy addition to the cities of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it has taken in response to the conclusions in the recent Her Majesty's inspectorate of prisons report on HMP Cornton Vale. (S3O-9614)

The cabinet secretary will remember some of the questions that I asked after the previous inspection of Cornton Vale. The current inspection report indicates that some prisoners still have to wait up to two hours to get to a toilet. The recommendation was that Bruce and Younger houses should have new systems installed as a matter of immediate action. Have we yet had a challenge under the European convention on human rights to that most degrading situation, in which prisoners are forced to use sinks as toilets? Does the cabinet secretary agree that it requires more urgent action and a strategic plan?

I acknowledge the member's role as chairman of the cross-party group on obesity. As he knows, I am proposing a bill to limit trans fats. He would agree that that is an example of an issue to which the industry has responded—80 per cent of the industry has met the limits that I propose in my bill. Does he anticipate the Food Standards Agency making the same inroads on saturated fats, which are one of the big problems?

Obesity is clearly one of the three great challenges that we face in public health not only in Scotland but around the world—the three challenges being tobacco, alcohol and obesity. Obesity is usually measured through body mass index, which is a complex formula. However, waist circumference is a powerful predictor of future health and is probably the measurement that we should use, although the waist hip ratio is sometimes used in that way as well. The question that is facing us is this: Why is obesity increasing as a major public health challenge? After all, obesity used to be a sign of wealth. Now, however, it is more a sign of deprivation. Obesity rates are rising because food-energy intake has increased and is excessive, while physical activity has decreased. Portion sizes in food retail have increased and the composition of foods, particularly in pre-prepared meals, includes increased amounts of saturated fats and salt, which is also not healthy. The latter aspects are to an extent being tackled by the Food Standards Agency, but I cannot find much about  that in the Government's new route map. That issue is important, so I would like to hear a bit more from the minister on it. The prediction is that about 40 per cent of Scots could be obese by 2030, but almost 60 per cent are overweight at the present time. The prediction in Australia, for example, is that 75 per cent will be overweight by 2025. Our increasing problem with obesity parallels that in the United States. However, when we consider some figures in more depth, we find that studies of overweight children in primary 1 show that the numbers of such children did not change between 2001 and 2008-09: 19.7 per cent of children were overweight in 2001, while 19.8 per cent are overweight now; 8 per cent were obese in 2001 and 8 per cent are obese now. The figure for severely obese children is 3.9 per cent. Overall, 32 per cent of the population are overweight, which is clearly a major problem for us. However, there is quite a bit of variation across the country. Interestingly, 36 per cent are overweight in the Highlands, whereas in Glasgow only 26 per cent of people are overweight. There is, in those figures, a lot of information that we need to tease out. I am sure that Mary Scanlon, with her connection to the Highlands, will look at that issue very closely. We have had a number of documents, policies and plans on the subject: indeed, "Eating for Health: a Diet Action Plan for Scotland" in 1996 was a hallmark because it introduced Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline 8, which was unique in combining prevention and treatment, which had not been done before. There was also the physical activity target in 2003 of two hours of PE a week, to which the minister referred. Again, that was part of a programme of looking at physical activity. My colleague Frank McAveety will deal with that in considerably greater detail in his summing-up speech. We then had the "Healthy Eating, Active Living: An action plan to improve diet, increase physical activity and tackle obesity (2008-11)", and the debate that followed that. Now, we have "Preventing Overweight and Obesity in Scotland: A Route Map Towards Healthy Weight". We need to start to recognise that tackling obesity is going to be a long-term effort and that the situation will not be turned around overnight. I will therefore not indulge in the sort of statements that were made by SNP members when they were in opposition. For example, Shona Robison said on "Newsnight Scotland" in 2005: "Obviously the Executive has failed to end the junk food, couch potato culture that is all too prevalent in Scotland." As Minister for Public Health and Sport, Shona Robison has today pointed out that, three years  on, the Government has begun to move a little further towards achieving the target of providing two hours of physical education in all schools, but the progress has been very slow. I will not indulge in attacks on the current Executive for its failures, but I point out that it must be responsible for achieving the targets that it set. However, we are dealing with a long-standing problem. There is, of course, one difficulty with the route map that we are discussing today, which is presented jointly by COSLA and the Government. As part of the agreement or concordat—and general harmony and light—between COSLA and the Government, I would have expected the document to contain a much firmer commitment from COSLA to the target of providing two hours of physical education. Instead, the document simply reiterates that councils are making progress towards the target. Frankly, that is not good enough. Time has moved on, so the achievement rate should be even greater by now. On prevention, a whole lot of things are required. We need to tackle labelling and the number of calories in portions. I hope that we might start in the Parliament by requiring our canteen to say how many calories each meal contains. I have already suggested that to the Parliament's officials, so we shall see what happens. In New York, for example, all restaurant chains are required to display menus that list the number of calories. That has been a highly successful experiment that we should review to consider whether it would be worth while. We need to look at regulations about advertising, particularly of junk food. There is, if I may say so, a huge appetite for fad diets. Unfortunately, such diets either do not work or, if they work, produce effects that are quickly reversed afterwards. I can confirm that that is the case, as I have tried such diets on occasions. We need diets that work, such as the Counterweight programme—I will come back to that a little later—which has been quite successful. I think that we need to begin by targeting groups, the first of which should be pregnant women. Perhaps the voucher scheme that provides help with the costs of infant formula feed and fresh fruit and vegetables could be extended, given that, if a woman who is pregnant is very overweight, the child will tend to be much heavier. We then need to look at when babies switch to solids, on which there should be good programmes that are backed by health visitors who will encourage women to maintain breastfeeding for much longer. The targets on breastfeeding are very slight, given that the aim is to increase the proportion of new-borns who are exclusively breastfed at six to eight weeks from 26 per cent to 32 per cent. We know that the children  of women who breastfeed are less likely to be overweight. However, recent research by Perez and Pastor, which was quoted in Mike Lean's editorial, suggests that we need to target not the children but the parents, because large parents have large children. Although that might be partly genetic, overeating is also a learned experience. As Mike Lean said to me the other day, "More porridge, and less of everything." On the question of early years, which the minister made much of, in addition to encouraging exclusive breastfeeding, we need to be sure that the inspections that are undertaken of child care and of nursery schools look closely at both the nutrition and the activity that are provided. The Health and Sport Committee's report highlighted the lack of reporting on such matters in nurseries and primary schools. That issue needs to be tackled more effectively. Evaluation of the Counterweight programme that I mentioned shows that its costs are covered by the future savings that it provides to the NHS. If that is the case, can the programme be built into Health Improvement Scotland's efficiency savings programme? Will the programme be rolled out beyond the seven health boards that were mentioned in the previous report? The minister referred to the healthy working lives strategy. It is obviously important that we encourage small and medium-sized businesses to undertake activity. For example, Auckland has more than 200 touch-rugby teams that help people to be very physically active, which is definitely to be encouraged. I am concerned about some of the programmes, although the minister said that they will be revised. In the Sunday Post , Gordon Blackstock said that the child health weight-intervention programme does not look like it has been very successful. I have not time to quote all the figures, but the fact that only 73 people in Tayside enrolled in a programme that cost £447,000 suggests that the programme needs to be reviewed. As Mary Scanlon may be aware, in Highland, which has one of the worst obesity problems, only 57 children have enrolled on the programme. In the most recent debate on the issue, the minister mentioned the healthy towns project in France and suggested that we could pilot that in Scotland. I would like to know what is happening with that. She has suggested that there should be an increase in walking. Through programmes such as the retired and senior volunteer programme, volunteers can encourage others to walk with them, but half the staff of that programme have been made redundant because of a change from  central Government funding to local authority funding, so that is no longer supported. We must accept that obesity is a long-term problem and that a long-term programme will be required to solve it. We have some targets on which we should be making more rapid progress, and the proven Counterweight programme would allow us to do that. I suggest that it should be part of the primary care quality and outcomes framework system or part of NHS Education for Scotland. We are not dealing today with issues such as bariatric surgery, although provision of it is still grossly inadequate in Scotland. I move amendment S3M-5798.1, to insert at end: "but regrets that the Scottish Government is failing to meet the SNP manifesto pledges to ensure that every pupil has two hours of quality PE each week delivered by specialist PE teachers and for children to be given free, year-round access to council swimming pools".

I am grateful for the opportunity to praise the fantastic work that general practitioners and their staff do all over Scotland. I thank the members who signed the motion in my name and who have remained to speak in the debate. Throughout Scotland, from single-handed rural one-person GP surgeries to busy multipartner practices, which are mainly in our cities, the whole range of practices provides an excellent service to us. I make no apology for approaching the debate from a rather biased perspective as, in a former life, I was a GP for 30 years. I declare that I am a member of the British Medical Association, which promotes general practice week, and of the Royal College of General Practitioners. Many MSPs have had the opportunity to visit GP practices in their constituencies in conjunction with the BMA and have found that useful. General practice week aims to build on the positive feedback that was received about those visits. Last year was busy for general practice, not only because of the recent prolonged cold weather, but most notably because of the increased pressures from the swine flu vaccination and pandemic. That is just the most recent demonstration that GP primary care has proved over the years to be the part of the national health service that is most capable of a rapid and flexible response. The BMA's document "General Practice in Scotland: The Way Ahead—Final Report", of which members should have a copy, spells out a clear vision for the future of general practice. From about 120 responses to the association's consultation, the BMA felt that six key areas needed to be addressed to ensure that general practice meets the aspirations of patients in the  community. Those are access, out-of-hours care, health inequalities, workforce planning—the right workforce as it is called—the balance of care, and infrastructure in terms of premises and information technology. I will try to touch on some of those issues. Don Berwick, the noted American academic, has called general practice "the jewel in the crown of the NHS", and, in a recent paper in the British Medical Journal , has said that, if we were to lose the core values of general practice, we would all live to regret that loss. It is hard to disagree with the sentiment. An effective GP service not only provides rapid diagnosis in an emergency but, by providing continuity in a trusting relationship between the patient and primary care team, is the bedrock for prevention, supported lifestyle changes, self-management of long-term chronic conditions and family support. Access is a matter for discussion. When I became a consultant psychiatrist, I found that too many practices had used the Scottish flexible approach of the 48-hour target for the time within which a patient has to be seen by a health professional to introduce unacceptable appointment systems. Patients had to phone at 08:00 to get an appointment and sometimes then spent an hour on the phone only to be told that, unless it was an emergency, they had to call again the next day. It is very important that the Government works with the BMA and the Royal College of General Practitioners to reward continuity and good access systems that suit individual localities. We must tackle the injustices that will arise from responses to poorly validated access questions in the current quality and outcomes framework survey. The QOF survey has done us a disservice in that regard; it has created—reasonably and appropriately—a lot of resentment among general practitioners. In the main, health mostly does not happen in hospital; it happens at home and in the workplace, school and community. Health is not just about the absence of disease. It is not even just about fitness. It is about the mental and physical wellbeing that gives us the energy, hope and self-esteem to achieve what we want to achieve. Looking after the health of the whole community is the job of general practice, primary and community health services and social services, working together to provide genuinely holistic health services close to home. Health professionals need to be well connected to the other services that are provided in their area, particularly local council services.  There is too much division between health and social services sectors. Indeed, divisions between GPs, hospital consultants, social care workers, public health officials and allied health workers have all deepened. Those divisions have shifted the focus of the professional from the patient as an individual to the part of the patient that the professional is servicing. That does not make it easy for the professional to consider the whole health and wellbeing of the person. I wish the Government success in its integrated resource approach, which is the latest Government effort to achieve integration. I hope that it is more successful than the joint future programme with which the previous Government wrestled over a number of years. I read this recently: "Hospitals, as most GPs will tell you, are foreign countries; they do things differently there ... Hospital specialists still routinely refer patients to one another without any reference to the patients' GPs, whilst the tendency of hospitals to call patients back for further outpatient consultations repeatedly, even though there is no obvious medical benefit for doing so, is still too prevalent. Encouraging hospitals to do less will require more than just a review of their funding arrangements therefore; it will require a re-examination of the fundamental ethos that governs the working practices of hospitals." Sadly, we still have a situation in Scotland where the poorer someone is, the less healthy they are. Scotland has pockets of real poverty. Poorer people tend to fall sick more often and have long-term illnesses and long-term poor health. As Professor Graham Watt has urged, if we want everyone to be healthy and if we want to improve the quality of care in our hospitals, we need to ensure that GPs in poor areas are given extra resources with which to do their job well. Primary care needs modern premises. With capital budgets being restrained, there are serious concerns about the future premises replacement programme. Primary care needs modern IT systems. The demise of the general practice administration system for Scotland—it was almost a national system for Scotland—reflects very badly on our ability to make public sector IT software work. I am concerned that the replacement system may prove as inadequate to the task as GPASS proved to be. In England, Labour has chosen a combination of approaches, based on patient choice, underpinned by commissioning or purchasing—initially by primary care trusts and then by GPs—and linked to foundation hospitals, which have achieved a level of service and governance, both clinical and financial, that allows them freedom that is not afforded to ordinary NHS hospitals. In Scotland, we have chosen a quite different approach. The challenge will be, with that approach, to match the progress that the NHS in England is undoubtedly  making. The intention must be that, eventually, people will expect rarely to see the inside of a hospital. Hospitals will be seen no longer as the centre of the health service but as an essential high-quality—and, no doubt, high-cost—but increasingly smaller backstop for things that cannot be accommodated in the service that is provided in local communities, which is the front line for the new NHS. Everyone will understand that the local services that the primary care team provides bind together—or should bind together—the whole NHS around the individual's personal needs. It is disappointing that Audit Scotland has been unable to identify much in the way of a shift in the balance of resources to match the intended shift in care. In England, primary care trusts are required to define and finance such a shift in their annual plans. I ask the minister whether there is anything comparable in Scotland. I commend to members the BMA's final report on general practice in Scotland and look forward to the report by the Royal College of General Practitioners in the autumn. I hope that all of us can work together to resolve issues relating to access, out-of-hours services and the workforce and to create systems that support what all of us seek—a continuing rise in the quality of primary care, so that it remains the jewel in the crown and a world leader.

In my time, we introduced the 218 centre, which was designed to do that. The number of fine defaulters in the women's prison has gone down by more than half, but the big problem is remand. What will the cabinet secretary do about that? That is not about sentencing or what happens beyond the court; it is about what happens before sentencing. The biggest rise in the prison population is among people on remand. That is what needs to be dealt with.

I would not have spoken if I had not been named.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with regard to changes in testing for health care associated infections. (S3O-9492)

On 25 November, following the outbreak in Dundee, I asked about the rapid polymerase chain reaction test that was being used in Dundee for pathogenic C difficile. I am pleased that the new algorithm on C difficile testing now includes PCR. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the standard ELISA test that has previously been used as a screening test is no longer fit for purpose? Can she tell me whether the ELISA test is still the initial screening test for the new algorithm, which is a two-stage test? If that is the case, will she publish the detail of how and why the experts are still of the view that two-stage testing is required, rather than PCR testing alone,  as is increasingly the case in the United States? Can she assure me that one of the three available PCR tests will very quickly be in use across Scotland?

Did the consultation include consideration of the disruption and disturbance due to noise and vibration, particularly in the night running of freight, which has started in the past few years and affected my constituents along the Stirling to Alloa and Kincardine line?

I welcome the minister's response to the issue generally, and particularly his response to the cross-party group on drug and alcohol misuse, which I chair.  On pursuing the provision of naloxone, does the minister agree that deaths following discharges from prisons remain a significant concern, despite the Scottish Prison Service's efforts to educate people? Will he invite the SPS to ensure that every prisoner who has a history of addiction receives information about overdoses before their discharge, and that the SPS will apply any naloxone programme to prisoners on discharge?

It is almost 60 years since Sir Richard Doll produced his groundbreaking paper on the ill effects of smoking. During that time, the number of smokers has been reduced from 70 per cent to around 22 per cent of the population. However, as members are well aware, smoking-related deaths still account for some 13,000 of the 54,000 annual deaths in Scotland. That is almost one in four deaths—it is four times the number of deaths from alcohol, and 26 times the number of deaths from drugs. The figures for women smoking are particularly alarming: lung cancer rates are rising among women while they are falling among men. Although the Scottish schools adolescent lifestyle and substance use survey has shown a welcome reduction in smoking in boys—from 30 per cent to 12 to 14 per cent—it has shown a reduction to only 18 per cent in girls. Smoking has become a major factor in health inequalities. More than 40 per cent of those in the lowest socioeconomic group still smoke, compared with about 12 per cent of the richest. All of that means that we must continue to make efforts of the sort that are included in the bill to try to achieve a smoke-free Scotland. The Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act 2002 was an important step. It is regrettable that we did not go as far as I would have liked today proactively to ensure that the tobacco industry does not circumvent the spirit of the law. I know  that ministers intend that to be the case, but it is important that we monitor the situation closely and ensure that any attempts to get around the spirit of the law are quickly stamped on. As I said, it would have been better to agree to the amendments that we lodged. Ireland has certainly had considerable problems. We came to a reasonable conclusion on vending machines. I hope that ministers will indeed continue to pursue discussions with Scottish producers and assist them in diversifying and protecting the jobs that exist in Scotland. It is regrettable that there was initial confusion about the number of jobs, but I have said publicly and I say again now that the Government cannot be entirely blamed for that, because the national response of the industry was, to say the least, tardy and unhelpful. The process of interaction between the Government and those who submitted evidence to the committee and assisted us strengthened part 1 of the bill considerably. The requirement on local authorities to make their test purchasing programmes clear is important, because citizens will be able to see precisely what their local authority is doing. The proxy purchasing provisions, the ability to confiscate tobacco from underage smokers and the new flexibility in the fine levels and the length of any ban all toughen the bill and the Government's support for those measures was welcome. I hope that the regulations will anticipate the industry's attempts to get round the important measures on display. We need further clarification. My one regret is that we have not had a demonstration. I offered that, as one of my constituents was keen to provide a site for a demonstration. I still urge the minister to consider pursuing that in completing the discussions with the industry on the precise nature of the covers that are to go on the gantries. Part 1 is one more step towards a tobacco-free world. Unlike alcohol, tobacco has no health benefits, so it is perhaps not surprising that there has been a largely consensual approach. If the measures mean that more smokers give up and, just as important, that fewer young people take up smoking, we will have taken one more step towards better public health. Despite the industry's protestations that it is not trying to encourage new smokers, it manages to recruit almost as many smokers every year as the number who die from smoking-related conditions. Part 2 is welcome in so far as it takes future-proofed powers to extend general medical services contracts to other health professionals. That allowed Labour to support part 2. However, I am concerned about the way in which general practice is moving and I do not believe that the bill  addresses the central problems that the Parliament will face. We are moving—quite rightly, I believe—towards having far more salaried practitioners. I have no objection to that. Indeed, I welcome it. However, what is happening with sessional doctors? We have moved from having a small percentage of sessional doctors—about 5 per cent—to 20 per cent in England and 11 per cent in Scotland.

We need to monitor that increase carefully. We welcome the completion of the bill, but we will monitor its effect closely to ensure that we retain our central focus, which must be that every patient in Scotland has an equitable service provided in the primary care sector.

Labour will support all the amendments in the group. We particularly welcome the added flexibility that sheriffs will have to take the banning order up to 24 months, rather than 12—a period that we felt was just too short. We very much welcome that change. We support Christine Grahame's amendments and pay tribute to her for her original work on tobacco.  Amendment 19 agreed to.

I thank the Government for responding to the debate at stage 2 so well. It is important that we have higher fines, as the current levels are rather low in relation to tobacco and so on. The fact that we are moving on is welcome. I thank the minister.

I draw members' attention to my membership of the Royal College of General  Practitioners and the British Medical Association, in case that is relevant. Amendment 29 seeks to anticipate the reaction of the tobacco industry, which will almost certainly press and push retailers to display items that promote their products, albeit—if we pass the bill today—no longer directly. Frankly, the tobacco industry has never respected the spirit of any tobacco control laws and has often taken every possible step to delay or stop their implementation. When that has proved unsuccessful, they have sought ways round the spirit of the law. I lodged amendment 29 in the light of the experience in Ireland, where new regulations are having to be developed to rein in the tobacco industry's inventive approach, which involves back lighting, adverts for lighters that clearly relate to a cigarette brand and even the use of the displays that limit sales by age in such a way as to infer that tobacco is available. Make no mistake—the tobacco industry is hugely powerful and has for more than 40 years found its way round successive pieces of legislation. Light tobacco fooled a whole generation into thinking that it was safe to smoke, and in the early part of this decade the industry sold ventilation to the Scottish health minister as an alternative to the ban on smoking in Kenny Gibson's proposed member's bill, which I supported. The need for amendment 29 hinges on whether the tobacco advertising legislation adequately covers the likely response of the industry.

As far as what we are trying to do in the bill is concerned, the important thing is to denormalise tobacco as a product—to make it something that is not seen as soon as people go into a shop. At the moment, when people go into a shop, the first thing that they see is a massive gantry. The increase in the size of gantries was a response to the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act 2002. Since that legislation was introduced, gantries have increased in size by 50 per cent. That is a classic illustration of the tobacco industry's response. It has spent a fortune on clever packaging that might display the phrase that Mary Scanlon mentioned, but which also incorporates holograms and uses ultra slim packs. The industry also produces note pads that people  can use. A variety of ancillary things have been developed that promote smoking. Amendment 29 would give trading standards officers the power to prevent new, subtle forms of advertising that, under TAPA, might not lead to a procurator fiscal taking action for a criminal offence. Amendment 29 would make such advertising an offence, which is important not just in tightening the legislation but in making it easier to implement as part of the continuing relationship between trading standards officers and retailers. By agreeing to amendment 29, we can tighten the bill, simplify its implementation and, for the first time in a generation, ensure that we are one step ahead of the industry rather than always reacting to it. I hope that members will see fit to support amendment 29. I lodged a supplementary amendment—amendment 29A—after discussions with the Government, which I know has concerns about the bill being challenged. We should not hold our breath—it may well be challenged, whatever happens. The inclusion of the phrase "cigarette lighters" would leave the bill open to the possibility of challenge. That is why I sought permission to lodge amendment 29A.

I, too, congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate. Through you, Presiding Officer, I apologise to other members as I might have to leave early to catch a train to attend a meeting in Stirling. [ Interruption. ]

Apologies, again, Presiding Officer. I find it difficult to get these things off.

I will put it away from me. Nanette Milne, Aileen Campbell and Mary Scanlon all laid out much of the material around the debate. It is true that, every day, 10 families are told that their child has cancer, which remains the most common cause of non-accidental death of children and young people in the UK. We should not forget that advances in the treatment of childhood leukaemia in particular have been enormous. When I did my first house job in paediatrics at the Western general in Edinburgh, the survival rate was about two and a half years, whereas now many of the individuals affected live healthy lives at least until late middle age. I welcome the fact that the cross-party group  will look at that, because a recent paper in the British Medical Journal showed a heightened risk of numerous problems in middle age. We need to consider focused screening of that group at a later stage. The treatment of such children is often successful now, but it can take them away from their homes, parents, siblings and friends for long periods. Those who are of school age often find it difficult to keep up to date with studies because, although a teacher might be provided on the hospital ward, the side effects of the illness and treatment can make the children very tired. There are also practical issues to consider, such as the emotional impact of cancer with which families have to deal, getting the child to and from hospital and caring for other siblings as well as other financial implications. The report "More Than My Illness", by CLIC Sargent, is interesting and I will be interested to read the follow-up report when it is published. The report was compiled after speaking to children, parents and siblings about their experiences and it provides us with a valuable insight into the needs of young people with cancer and their families. I understand that 97 per cent of the children who were surveyed said that they wished to return home during their treatment. Unsurprisingly, children and young people who are diagnosed with cancer are anxious about being away from home so we should do our best to ensure that they can return home when it is safe and appropriate for them to do so. It is appropriate that parents have the support that they need, not only to deal with the child's illness but to meet the child's educational and support needs. Part of that has to be the provision of chemotherapy in the spoke units under the hub-and-spoke arrangements with which Labour was involved in setting up and which the current Government has continued. Those managed care networks with the hub-and-spoke arrangements have proved successful in allowing people to have chemotherapy much closer to their homes. The report advocates a co-ordinated approach to community care and support services comprising a key worker care plan based on individual need and good information to support decision making. As Aileen Campbell illustrated eloquently, it is often the case that other children in the family are not recognised as needing support, but they are of considerable importance. I ended up treating such children as adults who had not come to terms with what had happened to their siblings when they were ill. The organisation of such support is complex, but it is beginning to develop—I give the good example of the support network at Yorkhill hospital in Glasgow. The challenge for the Government will  be to make the services patient and family focused and to fully integrate them so that they work in support of these children and their families. I know that the minister wants as much as I do to make that work, but it is not an easy task, as we discussed in another context today. However, it is of great importance that we achieve that co-ordination. Once again, I thank Nanette Milne for bringing the motion to the chamber.

First, I welcome the First Minister's cautious comments about the York study. The human cost was originally included in his Government's press release as a taxpayer cost, but he has now rolled that back. Secondly, no one disputes the fact that price and availability are major drivers of alcohol consumption. The dispute is purely over the evidence on minimum pricing—a policy that will result in at least £86.7 million being handed to retailers of alcohol.

The question is this: will the First Minister, in the meantime, take two steps that he can take? First, he can roll back the abolition of the national licensing forum, which was supporting the new policies. Secondly, he can prevent the closure of Beechwood home in Inverness, which deals with drunk and incapable  people. He can take those measures now without waiting for further debate.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to address the issue of stolen and lost equipment from NHS sites. (S3O-9194)

Under freedom of information legislation, I asked every health board to detail the items that have been lost and stolen. What particularly concerns me is that 10 laptops and one desktop personal computer have been lost or stolen in the past year. Can the cabinet secretary give me a concrete assurance that those pieces of information technology equipment did not contain patient information? In light of previous promises made in the chamber and the action that the Scottish Information Commissioner has taken against five Scottish NHS boards in respect of data loss, can she say whether the computers were fully encrypted, which would at least mean that patient data were not lost?

Christine Grahame illustrated clearly the history of prescription charges. They were not in place when the health service was established in 1948 but were introduced in 1952, with the resignation of Bevan and Wilson. Harold Wilson, as Prime Minister, abolished them in 1965 but had to restore them in 1968 because of economic circumstances. All agree that the current system of exemptions is outdated and unfair. It is clearly nonsensical that, for some illnesses—Christine Grahame mentioned underactive thyroid—people can get free prescriptions for everything. All members can agree that the previous system of prescription charges was not fair. From its manifesto, it is clear that the SNP saw the system as unfair and intended to tackle the issue of prescriptions for those with long-term conditions. It now accepts that it would be extremely difficult to do that, because of the boundaries involved, but it agreed with the Labour Party that we should try to extend exemptions and to make the system fairer, and that we should abolish charges for cancer patients immediately. Marlyn Glen and Rhoda Grant have made clear why charges for that group should be abolished now, as our amendment proposes.  When someone develops cancer, the financial consequences are often significant—Macmillan Cancer Support has made that clear in its campaign.

It was the SNP's manifesto promise.

It was. The SNP promised to abolish prescription charges for cancer patients. All that we are asking today is for it to do so, as it moves towards its stated objective. It could at least make an exception for those who receive attendance allowance on special terms because they are terminally ill; it could accept our amendment without interfering with its policy in any way. The amendment does not detract from the SNP's policy—it adds to it and helps the SNP to meet a manifesto commitment. The issue of the sustainability of the policy has been raised and identified as a problem. Why do we question whether the policy is sustainable? Already health boards are delaying the implementation of Scottish Medicine Consortium approvals and the application of SMC-approved medicines. I have asked the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing repeatedly for a guarantee that no cancer drugs and no new drugs that the SMC approves will be delayed or not introduced because the funds associated with prescriptions are not available. My colleague Jackie Baillie raised the issue of the minor ailments service. We have asked about that issue and are glad to have received a clear answer today. The Government has decided that, from 2011, the service will apply to all patients and that there will be no exemptions from it, because everyone will be entitled to a free prescription. I will be glad if the cabinet secretary can clarify whether that is the case.

The cabinet secretary's comments are most helpful, because we had misunderstood completely—we thought that the service would be extended. When I discussed the matter with Rhodri Morgan, when he was in the process of abolishing prescription charges in Wales, I asked him about the minor ailments scheme. He told me that it had not been introduced in Wales because of the consequences when prescription charges were abolished. Today the cabinet secretary is saying that prescription charges will be abolished only for some. Those who are currently on free prescriptions will retain the right to receive free prescriptions from their pharmacist, but those who are not currently entitled to free prescriptions will not receive them. All that the cabinet secretary is doing is shifting the boundaries. This is not a principled decision but a pragmatic one. The cabinet secretary may wish to argue against that when summing up, but the decision has been made clear today. It is totally new—none of us was aware of it previously. Jeremy Purvis and others raised the issue of co-payments. The Government likes to portray itself as taking a principled decision that all health care should be free at the point of need. That is clearly not the case, and it is clearly not the Government's intention that it should be the case. Dentistry will continue to be charged for—not one SNP member has been able to defend that. If we are to discuss co-payments we should perhaps have a serious debate, like those that are taking place in every other European country, about an appropriate and fair system for them. I will quote Ross Finnie commenting on prescription charges, and I would be grateful if he would say whether the quotation is accurate. An article in Healthcare Republic headed "Prescription charges in Scotland to fall to £3" said: "Liberal Democrat health spokesman for Scotland Ross Finnie said, in the current economic climate, extending reduced or free prescriptions to all should be a priority." That is from 7 January 2010. That must be the most rapid switch in policy, even for the Liberals—unless the article was misleading. Consultant awards and health visitors have also been discussed in the debate. Consultant awards are outdated and have been abused by the profession, which has given them to people who are within three years of retirement, not because they have provided an excellent or additional service but simply to enhance their pensions. The awards do not take into account the new consultant contract. I am astonished that Ian McKee, with his trenchant advocacy of their abolition, is not prepared to support an  amendment that calls for their abolition. That is something that he will have to justify to his own conscience.

However, we need to remain competitive for the best minds and talents to remain in Scotland, so we need to be careful about changing the situation. The Tories are prepared to restrain pay for those on £18,000, but they do not support the abolition of distinction awards. Their position seems unusual. I do not have time to deal with issues concerning health visitors. We need to balance universal care with focused care. Our attempts to do that so far have not been sufficient.

The main savings that were made were on improved procurement at the national and UK level. When that is taken out of the equation, the member's point is not yet proved.

The whole Parliament recognises Gil Paterson's commitment to palliative care. Does that mean that he supports our view that, no matter what the Government is doing generally, cancer patients should be exempt from paying charges now, because they are made poor and have little time to change their economic status to obtain free prescriptions? The whole arrangement  is far too difficult, so they should have free prescriptions now.

Whatever it smacks of, I wonder whether, in view of Dr McKee's trenchant support for the abolition of distinction awards, he will vote for the Liberal amendment today.

The problem is that general practices are extremely spread out in some areas—some of them go across whole cities. If nurses are attached to general practices in an absolute way rather than being given a geographical attachment as well, they will have to travel huge distances. Because they are independent contractors, GPs have not organised themselves properly.

Does the member acknowledge that the chancellor has reduced the allowances for those who earn more than £100,000 a year; that he has introduced an additional 10 per cent tax on those who earn more than £150,000 a year; and that he has reduced those people's pension allowances substantially so that there is already a universal tightening of belts for everybody who earns more than £100,000 a year?

It is not a bonus.

I hope that the cabinet secretary's voice improves, even if the things that she says do not. As Gordon Brewer said on "Newsnight Scotland" the other night, she continues to make assertions. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is not helpful to make statements on the basis of assertions rather than evidence and that, therefore, the Scottish Government's recent press releases on the topic of alcohol and minimum pricing are unhelpful because they overegg the pudding to make the case? Number 10 has indicated that Labour's United Kingdom policy on the minimum pricing of alcohol has not changed, but that a debate is entirely appropriate. I hope that the debate will continue, without suggestions that it is about party politics, which it is not.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Frank McAveety for taking my intervention. Has the Public Petitions Committee seen any evidence on the additional costs of transportation to the community-facing prison that is now proposed, which is very distant? Those additional costs include transportation not only for the families—although they are very important—but for the social workers and for drug workers, because there are a great deal of drug problems in prisons. The member rightly referred to connectivity with the local community. Has the committee seen any evidence on the long-term income and revenue implications for social work, the SPS and the Government of the additional costs, given the long distance that will be involved for all prisoners instead of just a proportion of them?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

This has been a useful debate on a report that I hope will have some effect. In opening the debate, Christine Grahame almost summed it up by saying that the framework is there. Once again, we have the strategy and the policy; now we must drive forward the action. That is not a criticism of this Government but of us all,  because we have failed as a Parliament to address the issue effectively over the first 10 years of our life. Rhoda Grant referred to something that is very important, which is how we develop resilience in children. The first stage of that has got to be about attachment and bonding. Unless we get right that fundamental first step in the development of the individual, we simply build up problems that we have to patch and mend as we go along. This must not be a further instance whereby we have to deal with people being in prison at the age of 16, as Mary Scanlon said, or with unemployment, illiteracy and drug and alcohol addiction in young people, which all emerge in young adults with problems that we have failed to tackle in childhood. There is obviously a balance to be struck between universal and focused services. Much of the debate has centred on that particular issue. The problem is how, with limited resources, we get that balance right. It is clear that we cannot identify, by the age of eight weeks, every child who might need help—that is simply not possible. We cannot identify every family that has problems, because they may develop problems at a later stage. There must therefore be a mechanism for allowing the sort of intensive support that exists in the programme being piloted in Edinburgh, to which Malcolm Chisholm referred, which is called the family nurse partnership. It is an intensive, two-year programme and we need that for our most vulnerable children. At the two-year-old stage, we need the kind of nursery school for vulnerable children that was piloted in the NHS Ayrshire and Arran area. Unfortunately, that pilot was subsequently abandoned. Indeed, a theme that came through in our inquiry was that pilots were introduced and some effort was made by people to develop programmes that were subsequently, despite being apparently successfully, abandoned. One theme that has perhaps not been sufficiently stressed in speeches so far is that of training. The training of teachers and pre-school teachers has been alluded to, but we also need a lot more training of primary care staff. Given that 30 per cent of general practitioners have no postgraduate experience in psychiatry, how do those people tackle mental health problems? Health visitors are also not always as well trained as they might be. An interesting point is that England's National Academy for Parenting Practitioners—which I think is a wonderful initiative—is promoting evidence-based programmes in parenting. The parenting academy is now training commissioners of caring services for parents in every local authority and is training 3,500 practitioners in  evidence-based training. However, the parenting academy's first report indicated that only about one in 100 of counselling or general support programmes in England are actually evidence based. Unless such programmes are evidence based, they will not produce change. Simple counselling is not enough; programmes need to be properly evidence based. That is why the programme in Edinburgh is really important. Voluntary organisations have been mentioned, although perhaps only in passing. The committee felt that the voluntary sector was under huge pressure. With many contracts that previously lasted for three years now lasting for just one year and many services requiring to be retendered for, the sector is being put under huge pressure. The voluntary sector can make an important contribution. For example, a programme in Edinburgh that is run by the charity The Place2Be has excellent results in the counselling that it provides to children and in the support that it provides to teachers and parents through a variety of programmes. The charity provides most of the funding, yet its offer is not being taken up. The charity is looking for other local authority partners in Scotland but cannot find them, whereas there are 150 such partnerships in England. For a small amount of money, we could develop that sort of support for voluntary organisations. Many of us have talked about the need for more resources and capacity, including physical capacity, given the lack of beds for dealing with those with learning disabilities and for forensic services. We are still admitting children to adult wards. We should say that that must finish by 2011. I hope that the Minister for Public Health and Sport will confirm that target, difficult though it might be to reach. We need to identify the groups that will need help. As many speakers have mentioned, those include children under three, because identifying such children by that stage and applying the programmes to them provides the best rate of success. Our programme for corporate parenting does not stand up to much scrutiny. We are not very good at corporate parenting and our outcomes are very poor. In Denmark, the number of those from foster homes and care support who go on to university is 42 per cent, which is almost the figure that we achieve for the general population. In Scotland, the equivalent figure is 4 per cent. We are failing those people. We need a comprehensive programme in which there is ownership, implementation and driving forward of the framework, which we all agree is necessary. We are able to identify some of the families that are at risk of mental illness, such as those with drug or alcohol-related problems, those in which the parents have learning disabilities,  those in which the parents are homeless or refugees or in prison, those in which the children are involved in custody and access disputes, those in which there is neglect or abuse or domestic abuse and, as one speaker mentioned, those in which there are transition problems relating to local authority or corporate parenting. We can identify all those families and we should apply resources to them. We need to stop doing what we are not doing well and we need to do much more of what we know from the evidence base can be done. I commend the report.

Professor James Law of the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists said that it was bad not only that the number of referrals from health visitors was down from 50 per cent to 15 per cent of all referrals but that referrals are now taking a year longer than they took five years ago. The point is important.

I declare an interest as a fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists and a member of SAMH. The whole area of children's services has been characterised over a long period—since the initial report in the 1980s—by a lack of any sense of urgency. Christine Grahame is right to draw attention to the committee's concerns about the fact that it is a Cinderella service that is still not being developed despite the provision of significant new funding by the Government, which I acknowledge. Concerns were expressed, particularly in the late 1990s, about the increasing prevalence of mental health problems among children and adolescents. The number of individuals who were suffering from a variety of conditions such as behavioural problems, hyperactivity, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and autistic spectrum disorder increased significantly between 1974 and 1999. There has been a subsequent stabilisation since then, but the number is still around one in 10. To see how stressed young people are and what little sense of mental health and wellbeing they have, we need look no further than a paper by Professor O'Connor of the University of Stirling that documents his study of 15 and 16-year-olds in Stirling and Glasgow. He found that 14 per cent of those children had self-harmed and that a further 14 per cent had had serious thoughts of self-harm. That is getting on for a third of all our children of that age, which is an absolutely frightening indictment of how we have dealt with the problem in the past. There are factors that have changed significantly over that period. For example, we know that more than 100,000 children or thereabouts are growing up in households where there is a drug or alcohol problem. Given that 58,000 children are born in this country each year, that means that two years' worth of our children are being affected by that problem. In his annual report last year, the chief medical officer, Harry Burns, drew attention to the issue of neglect. We have always identified the problems of domestic abuse, parental mental illness and so on, but neglect is poorly defined, even though we know that it has a serious physical and mental health consequence. The report that we are debating marks the latest stage in the journey that children's mental health services have been on. The SNAP working group, to which Christine Grahame referred, began in 2000 and reported in 2003. It said that services were patchy; that links between CAMHS and wider services were limited; that there were significant and damaging delays in the diagnosis and  treatment of early psychosis; that all four tiers of the services were working beyond reasonable capacity; that there was inadequacy in patient resources, including a severe lack of in-patient intensive care unit, forensic and learning disability services; that there was a lack of training, especially in tier 1; and, as Christine Grahame said, that young people were reluctant to be referred to the services. The SNAP report led to the framework report, and the committee has quite rightly said that no one is suggesting that that framework is inadequate. Indeed, some progress has been made. For example, successive Governments have endeavoured to eliminate the inappropriate admission of children to adult units. However, 140 children are still being admitted annually to those units—that represents 140 lives that cannot be properly turned round, because those units are totally inappropriate for children. In its 2008 report, the Mental Welfare Commission welcomed the progress that has been made but said that the target of eliminating such admissions by 2011 was challenging. Indeed, that target will almost certainly not be met. The previous agreement between Government and the workforce was that we would have 56 beds for children who were in need of them, but I do not think that that will happen; perhaps the minister can tell me whether it will. The number of beds that is needed if we are to meet European standards is 20 per 1,000 children in the relevant group, which means that we should have 100 beds in Scotland. However, we will have only 48, or perhaps 56. There is a great need for more beds. We should certainly have a number of beds that is in the high 60s, or we will continue to have problems. There is still no forensic unit and no learning disability service of any note, and the out-patient service is totally rudimentary. There are serious areas of long-term neglect that need to be addressed as an urgent priority. I will not go into the area of staffing, except to say that the report indicates clearly that, in areas such as Lanarkshire, there are 4.5 CAMHS staff per 100,000 members of the population, whereas in most parts of England there are 20. However, I should say that Lanarkshire has done more than any other council area in terms of tier 1 training for its health visitors. There are eight CAMHS staff per 100,000 members of the population in Lothian and 13 in Dumfries. There are too many areas in Scotland in which even a 20 per cent increase will not make the necessary difference. In the few seconds that I have left, I turn to prevention, which is the most difficult but probably the most important area. Unless we get the preventive side right, it will not be possible to turn things round. That means that we need health  visitors to effect proper screening. We must deal with that in an appropriate manner. We must reduce and eliminate the fragmentation of services in primary care. We must increase the number of public health nurses. I welcomed the commitment in the Government's manifesto to do so, but there has since been a reduction in the number of school nurses.

Perhaps the minister can address the point that she was going to make when she sums up at the end of the debate. To conclude—

The framework is excellent; the timing is wrong. We need greater urgency on this matter, which must become a higher priority.

I want to ask specifically about an issue that Christine Grahame rightly raised: that universal screening appears to end at eight weeks. That is not even the point at which post-natal depression maximises, which is 12 weeks. That seemed to the committee to be not a proper interpretation of Hall 4.

I ask the minister, for the third time of asking, where the undergrounding will occur. In particular, will it occur around Stirling and Crieff in my constituency? He has given no indication of that, although he has been asked three times.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with DB Schenker and Network Rail regarding freight traffic carried by rail to Longannet power station. (S3O-8901)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that there have been nearly 70 complaints now. There have been 50 formal claims, 38 of which involve legal representation. Will he assure me that there will be adequate provision in his budget for compensation claims to be met by the Government, rather than by Clackmannanshire Council, should the claims be successful? Given the continued level of disturbance to my constituents, especially the serious disturbance to some children, which has now entered its second  year, has the cabinet secretary any message for them this Christmas?

It might be worth while for the chamber to consider the possibility of wheelchair users being part of local licensing forums. In my area, I work with a wheelchair group that is effective in advising Clackmannanshire Council on changes to roads and so forth. The group also advises on planning applications, on which it is consulted.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the programme undertaken by Glasgow addiction services to provide supervised use of disulfiram in the treatment of individuals with alcohol problems. (S3O-8718)

Will the minister and the cabinet secretary examine the potential for introducing this successful programme of supervised treatment across Scotland as part of the Government's approach to tackling Scotland's alcohol problems?

I hope that this has been a useful debate and will lead to some changes, although I am not convinced that it will. Ross Finnie, Ian McKee and others talked about the history of the disease, which I do not want to reiterate. I take Brian Adam's point that, if in 1999 someone had told us that we would be debating C difficile as one of the main public health challenges that we face, we would have asked why. The reason is that the figures have changed. MRSA and C difficile were not a massive problem in 1999. They grew into a problem, which the previous Government began to tackle. I acknowledge that the present Government is trying to tackle it—I do not say that it is not. However, we in opposition are trying to point out where we think improvements can be made.  I recommend that members read the report published by the Public Accounts Committee at Westminster on 10 November this year, which shows that MRSA and C difficile account for only 20 per cent of health care acquired infections. A major problem is still ahead of us. If anyone thinks that C difficile is the last type of infection with which we will have to deal, they will be sorely discommoded. The trends are there and are welcome. There is no doubt about the drop in infection rates that has occurred, in part because of the measures that the previous Government and its successor put in place. The cabinet secretary acknowledged the importance of surveillance. Initially surveillance was voluntary but, as C diff developed, it became clear that it needed to be mandatory. Although the drop in C diff rates is welcome, Cathy Jamieson made the point that it is not as great as that which has taken place in England. We may not like that, but it is a fact. In some trusts in England, rates have dropped by 80 per cent, which is significant. We must think about why the drop in Scotland has been smaller.

I do not think that that is the reason. The PAC report to which I referred, and its previous report, indicate that the improvements were achieved by implementing a tough, robust, legislated-for inspection regime. That is what our motion is about. We are not calling for a new regime—I do not know how the Liberals got that idea. We are looking for a rapid, robust response by someone in Government when there is an outbreak. There have been four outbreaks since that at the Vale of Leven—in Orkney, Highland, Grampian and, now, Tayside. This year alone, we have had three outbreak reports and new guidance from Health Protection Scotland. As Nanette Milne and others indicated, we do not need a lot more guidance. We have had 130 pages of report this year, and there are 31 linked documents—to guidelines, protocols, toolkits and further guidance. There is a plethora of information that is stressing front-line staff, as the RCN says, because matters are not clear. As if that were not enough—I repeat the comments that I made in the previous debate on the issue—there is a clutter of organisations, from the Government issuing chief executive letters, through the health care associated infection task force, HPS, health facilities Scotland, NHS QIS  and the health care environment inspectorate, to the care commission, which, I acknowledge, is beginning to do work on the matter. That is clutter. Nanette Milne called for clarity and I absolutely agree with her. Things must be much clearer so that the front-line staff understand the situation. If the cabinet secretary does not accept that point, let me refer to the HPS website. We read that there is no general access to the outbreak control information on the Scottish health protection information resource website, which says: "we are developing a Managing Incidents and Outbreaks Section ... At present, SHPIR is not a publicly available resource ... although this may change in the future." That is what our motion is about: full, adequate information that should be given timeously. I turn now to the Ninewells outbreak—as others have mentioned, I went to the briefing about it. I suggest that the cabinet secretary reads the report from the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman on the Mr A case, which demonstrates that there were significant problems. The complaint about things being unhygienic was upheld; there were lots of problems. With the individual's permission we have quoted from the letters that were sent on the matter. They describe the appalling, unacceptable circumstances that applied to one particular patient. I agree with the cabinet secretary that the outbreak itself was handled extremely well by the hospital—that was not faulted. When HPS came in, 10 days later, it said that it had been handled well. I asked the hospital's management why it had not asked HPS to come in earlier. They said, "We didn't ask them until we saw some slight peculiarities that we needed advice on." HPS were the experts, however. They had seen the previous outbreaks, and they should have been in there on day 1, albeit not to order people around—not necessarily to order the ward to be closed, even, as that had been done already. The management should be there to offer their experience and advice. The cabinet secretary has just said that that is not going to happen. That should happen—or the inspectorate should have gone in. A further point is that confusion was caused by the press release that said that the index case was from 10 weeks previously. It looked as though there had been a cover-up and staff were dismayed by the resulting attack on their competence. When the three index cases occurred, the outbreak was declared and the ward was closed. The board took a deliberate decision, on the basis of protecting the patients and their families from press harassment, not to tell the public. The question is whether or not that was acceptable. When I asked the management why they did not make an announcement until 6 November, they  said that they waited until the outbreak had concluded. I asked, "What if it hadn't concluded by 6 November? At what point would you have informed the public?" The managers' response was, "We would value clear guidance from the cabinet secretary as to how to manage the press." If that was the first such request, I would understand and I would not criticise, but it is in the NHS QIS report, too. There is a specific statement regarding Orkney and Grampian—the cabinet secretary may shake her head, but it is there—saying that there is a need for much clearer management of the media regarding the provision of public information. I say to the Conservatives and the Liberals that we will support the Government on the measures that it is taking, but we will also criticise. I return to the index case. NHS Tayside has a system under which it can identify the 027 strain within two hours of a sample being tested. I asked why staff were not testing all samples, and the reply was that it was too expensive. I pass that on to the cabinet secretary—and I am sure that the Minister for Public Health and Sport, who is also in the chamber, will also pass it on. If the index case had been seen and diagnosed in August from testing carried out at that point—which was not done for reasons of cost—I say that lives might have been saved. I know that that is a very serious statement to make.

Indeed—it is very serious. If the 027 strain is recognised, people become hypervigilant. The cleaning measures that have been described in correspondence as having occurred in September would have come in with a much greater intervention. I ask for that to be looked into. Antimicrobial policy is being considered, and it is hugely important, but reports to the Government from NHS QIS have repeatedly said that there is a policy in place, yet it is not being followed. When I raised the problems of recruitment and retention among hospital pharmacists, I was blown off: "It's not a problem. That isn't the case," I was told. However, the management in Dundee admitted to me that the recruitment and retention of pharmacists is a problem, because community pharmacists are now paid much more. I ask the Government to look into that, too. We need clear guidance, clear information, reduced clutter, robust and timeous inspection, clarity and resources in order to tackle the issue. That is all that we want. We acknowledge what the Government is doing, and we acknowledge that staff are making huge efforts, but we need clarity of purpose.  We need the cabinet secretary to acknowledge that the current web portal is sadly inadequate, and that the mechanisms for dealing with the media during an outbreak, which is her responsibility, are not adequate either. I support the motion in Jackie Baillie's name. The Labour Party supports the Liberal amendment, but not the Government's.

I accept that one must be careful with statistics, but the problem—which has not been acknowledged in the debate—is that the 027 strain is involved. That strain is regarded as hypervirulent and hypertransmissible—it transmits well and it kills. We have not had that problem before.

I fully understand Ian McKee's analogy. The concept of an antibiotic policy was introduced in around 2003 or 2004. We did not mention it in the motion because it is not new. The problem is the implementation of the policy, not the policy itself. The motion simply refers to the robustness of the regime that we have.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

No one is suggesting, no one has suggested and no one will suggest that the actions of the staff after the outbreak occurred were anything less than excellent in controlling the outbreak, but the fact remains that neither the HPS nor the HEI—the two bodies charged by the Government to oversee—offered on-the-spot guidance from their experience of the four previous outbreaks. That is the point that we are  trying to make; we are not criticising the staff at Dundee.

The cabinet secretary repeated clearly that health care acquired infection is the top priority of her and her Government, yet we have another incident that involves the most lethal ribotype—027. Is she comfortable that HPS, the national agency, took 10 days to turn up at the hospital to give support and advice? Will she confirm now or later that, from 17 October, when the first 027 case was typed, a sample from every symptomatic patient in the hospital was sent for typing?

One suggestion around democratisation and participation that the Health and Sport Committee heard at the time of its consideration of the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill was for increased representation of both councillors and patient groups at the level of the community health partnerships. Following that discussion at committee, has the cabinet secretary looked into the suggestion and will she issue guidance on the matter?

Mike Pringle's comment, that we should keep the situation open, is exactly our position. I welcome that late conversion in the debate. We all agree that there is a problem. I do not have time to rehearse all the issues, but we know that alcohol-related deaths have increased—we are now at twice the European average—that the age of onset of problems is younger, that people are dying of alcohol-related problems younger and that alcohol is one of the most significant factors that contribute to premature death, alongside suicide, accidental death and, indeed, death from cirrhosis of the liver. We must address three problem groups: the young adult binge drinkers; the increasing number of adults who are drinking above safe levels, which leads to ill health, including cancer and diabetes; and those who have an alcohol-dependency problem. Not only do we all agree that there is a problem, we all agree that price would appear to be relevant and important. As Michael Matheson said, availability and price are the two major factors that affect alcohol consumption. The peculiar situation in Scotland is that the level of problem drinking has increased very sharply and significantly in the past 20 years. Around 80 years ago, we had a culture in which we elected teetotal MPs—one of whom defeated Winston Churchill—on the basis that they were teetotal. During a period of 70 or 80 years, there has been a slow but significant change in culture, and the culture is the central problem that we must address.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. Other countries have experienced significant problems with alcohol. France had a massive  problem, and yet the number of deaths from cirrhosis in that country has now reduced significantly without the introduction of minimum pricing. France has begun to change its culture by tackling two things: advertising and drink driving. Those have been the main drivers of change in France—they began at a level which Scotland is now reaching, and they are now approaching the EU average, so France is moving in the opposite direction to Scotland without introducing minimum pricing. The other important factor in the debate, as many members have stressed, is that a new licensing act—the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005—has only just been introduced and we do not yet know what its effects are likely to be. We hope that the licensing boards will have the guts, the teeth and the determination to tackle one of the central problems, which is supermarkets stacking 'em high and selling 'em cheap and displaying alcohol all around the store, which makes a major contribution to the cultural fact that drink is a massive part of our diet and makes the situation more difficult. I do not have the time to rehearse the various arguments for and against minimum pricing, but it is clear that the health lobby, the police and the on-trade are in favour of it. There is evidence from Canada that it may have some effect, but there is also evidence from Finland that a price reduction has an adverse effect, particularly on deprived communities and those in the 40 to 50 age group. There is the University of Sheffield study, although it has been criticised. One major criticism I have is that the study's definition of moderate drinkers falls well below the level of safe drinking, so the study does not model the right groups effectively. Scottish Health Action on Alcohol Problems says that changing the price would affect the very heavy drinkers, but I remain to be convinced of that. We definitely need to address the arguments about price and achieve a consensus on the matter. There is also the central question, which really must be addressed and cannot be brushed off, about whether the legal opinion on the new tobacco legislation has no bearing on this issue. I see that the cabinet secretary is looking at me again—she has shaken her head every time the issue has come up. We need to develop a clear understanding on the matter, which must be shared by all parties if possible. Without such a consensus, the policy will not be passed. Hugh Henry made the argument about the cross-border trade between Northern Ireland and southern Ireland, which is important and must be considered. The important issue of internet sales—which are increasing—has not been addressed, and the issue of illegal trafficking must  be considered. The issue of Buckfast has not been tackled at all.

We need to consider all the issues in the round, as a complete package. I admit that I come from a health community that is more in favour of minimum pricing than against it, but nevertheless I believe, along with Jackie Baillie, that the arguments are not yet conclusive. We need to sit down together and work out how to tackle the problem in an effective way.

In the short time that I have, I will focus on the scale of the problem, particularly regarding drug and alcohol misuse. The background is fairly clear, but I will remind colleagues of our record in Scotland. We have, annually, more than 50,000 referrals to the children's reporter. A United Nations Children's Fund report has stated that children in the UK fare less well and feel worse about the quality of their lives than children in almost any other industrialised country, which is surely a serious and shocking situation. This year, research by Professor O'Connor that was based on schoolchildren in Stirling and Glasgow showed that 14 per cent of children aged 15 are self-harming and that a further 14 per cent have thoughts of self-harm. Surely that reflects a damaged situation. We have much work to do to repair it. In the 30-odd years between 1973, when the report on Maria Colwell hit the ground, and the recent reports on Victoria Climbié and, in Scotland, Kennedy McFarlane, we have had more than 70 reports on problems associated with child care. Some are related to the deaths of children, and others to problems in child care and residential accommodation. The scale of the problem that we face is massive, as is indicated by the reports that have appeared. Despite all those reports, we have been unable to amend the situation to make it satisfactory. The recent report on Brandon Muir shows that we still have problems. Most of the reports are based on the deaths of children. Over the past few weeks, Iain Gray has been trying to make the valid point that, for every child that dies and every report that we produce, there are many other children who stagger through their childhood being increasingly damaged, and who reach a point of damage from which there is no return. We, as a society, are paying for the consequences of that in the increasing number of people who are admitted to our prisons, which has  grown by more than 40 per cent in the past 25 years. Projects such as the Dunedin project, which followed children from their birth in 1973 into their adult lives, show that children who will have significant problems in adulthood can be identified at age three. Obviously, there is overidentification—many children who are identified at that age as people who may have problems will turn out to be excellent citizens, who are fully developed and who achieve their aspirations. Such overidentification should not, however, prevent us from focusing on those children. Jackson Carlaw was right to say that what we have done to the health visitor system over the past few years in trying to introduce the review of nursing in the community has put a planning blight on the development of health visiting. Without early identification, we have a major problem. Drugs and alcohol are part of that problem. It is thought that more than 100,000 children are living in families with drug or alcohol-misusing parents. We need more antenatal projects, to provide families with support at that early stage. The Edinburgh PrePare project is one, but its funding is short term. We need multidisciplinary teams involving midwives, nursery officers, community mental health nurses and health visitors in order to achieve early identification, to assess the extended family's capacity for parenting and to put in place the necessary supports. If we fail to do that, as Harry Burns said in his excellent report last year, by the age of three many children will be damaged and beyond repair. For that reason, we need to have a new strategy and inquiry into child care in Scotland. It should look not at systems and structures—which were tackled in Jack McConnell's report—but at what we are doing on the ground. If we do that, we may be able to support some very vulnerable children and families.

Is the member aware that there are more than 300 proposed airport rail connections throughout the world and that only the Scots have cancelled two such projects instead of building them?

Will the member take an intervention?

It is clear that the logistical problem is, as was to be expected, a major issue. Will the cabinet secretary agree that the broad-brush at-risk group that includes front-line health and social care staff, which was announced in report 56 on those at risk, from the Scottish Government resilience room, is now too broad for this first week or 10 days in which vaccine supplies are limited? Will she therefore consider issuing a refined list of priorities that includes, for example, young pregnant women in late pregnancy rather than all pregnant women, and children who are seriously at risk rather than all children? That would allow the vaccine supply to match the actual risk needs and prevent every person who is in the at-risk group from phoning up.

There is concern that services that users and the care commission regard as being excellent are losing their contracts because of a retendering process that seems completely unnecessary because it is not about a new service.

This has been quite a good debate; as all members have agreed, it is certainly a very important one, given the demographic issues that are coming down the line. I will not go into those issues in any detail, because members have already put the facts on the record. However, a very important point that has not been emphasised enough is that although life expectancy has increased massively, with a subsequent significant increase in the numbers of older people, the healthy life expectancy that they will experience has grown at a far lesser rate. There have been two elements to this debate: first, how we have arrived at the current situation over the past few years since the Parliament's establishment; and secondly, the challenge of the future. We all agree that the Parliament has done a considerable amount to improve the lot of our  older colleagues through, for example, free personal care, which righted a discriminatory wrong against people with dementia; the central heating programme; concessionary travel; and the many other measures that members have mentioned. However, as the "Panorama" programme and the Herald investigations that Johann Lamont, Duncan McNeil and others referred to have indicated, we face a very serious problem. Indeed, I would go so far as to say that we are beginning to see in a community care setting the same kind of massive institutionalisation and inappropriate care in an institutional setting that my generation of psychiatrists saw in the asylum depicted, for example, in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest . As members have pointed out, we are in grave danger of warehousing people in their own homes. The fact is that we should begin to look at these problems when people turn 50—not because they necessarily become older people at that age but because that is when we can begin to prevent some of the problems that might materialise later. Recent Swedish research has shown that, even for couch potatoes, beginning to exercise at 50 can have huge benefits for older people's physical and mental wellbeing. Many older people want to remain active. Indeed, in many families, it is almost a joke that the 75, 80 or 85-year-old family member goes off—as they put it—"to look after some older person". As Des McNulty has said, we have to recognise that needs change as we get older. Such changes might be rapid or slow, but we must never consider older people as some unitary whole. Their problems must be dealt with on a completely individual basis. As a result, we need to consider the activity in which older people are engaged and look at allowing and encouraging them to continue in work. We should consider the role of part-time work, for example, in helping older people to manage the sudden move from full-time work to retiral. We also need to consider individual elderly people's aspirations, the skills that they can bring to our communities, their desire to acquire new skills and any opportunities in that respect. The most important element in creating the necessary resilience in our communities will be volunteering. Unless we see older people as a resource, not a problem, we really will have problems. As a result, it is a matter of considerable regret that, despite a members' business debate and a Labour-initiated parliamentary debate on this issue, the retired and senior volunteer programme has lost half of its development workers, who are the very people who can train and support older people and help to fulfil their desire to contribute. The programme's £350,000  funding is no longer provided centrally but has been given to the local authorities, and the move has resulted in four redundancies out of a staff of nine. That is disastrous for what I am sure the Government wants to achieve, yet the Government has failed to recognise that. Many members, particularly Robert Brown and Ross Finnie, emphasised the other major change for volunteering, which is that charitable organisations' income has gone down and they are no longer able to contribute in the same way. Organisations such as Lloyds TSB might not be able to make any contribution. We are faced with a funding crisis that has been generated by the banking crisis, and a second funding crisis that has been created by local authorities withdrawing services that voluntary organisations provide. The other day, I spoke to Crossroads Care, which is facing the worst situation that it has faced in the 12 years under the current chief executive. Crossroads is fundamental to the provision of respite care, which supports the carers who then support older people who are in need. We are destroying the system that has been established in the past 10 years. The Government must recognise that and start from that point. If we want people to remain in their homes, it is absolutely vital that we ensure that our adaptation programmes are adequate. Christine Grahame and Mary Scanlon alluded to that. Adapting people's homes gives them a much better opportunity to stay there. We need to maintain people's independence and provide them with support. As Jeremy Purvis, Robert Brown and others said, we must ensure that people are not isolated. The concessionary travel scheme helps with that, but we must also allow support to be provided in the home. Members have referred to the fact that the majority of funding goes to the NHS budget and is spent on institutional care and, within that, on unplanned admissions. We can certainly do a lot to improve that situation. Many programmes are being operated. For example, Peter Gabbitas in Edinburgh has a programme of support and rehabilitation for people coming out of hospital. In Lanarkshire, the Monklands integrated discharge and assessment service—MIDAS—does the same and Christine Grahame referred to a similar project in the Borders. There are many projects that aim to enable people to maximise their independence when they come out of hospital and therefore to prevent their return. As Johann Lamont said, community care is facing a major challenge. There is a retrenchment to dealing with the most serious issues, rather than preventing people from developing those issues. We need continuity and consistency of care. As Malcolm Chisholm eloquently put it, we  must ensure that users and their carers are consulted fully. Please, can we get away from the present system of retrenched funding and cutting costs? If we do that, we will improve care for the elderly.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. I did not hear how many minutes I had.

Has the minister included the voluntary sector in the eight very important work streams?

I congratulate Irene Oldfather not only on securing the debate but on the power of work that she has put in with Alzheimer Scotland and others to develop the charter of rights. We have already had a debate on dementia and considered some of the issues, but we should never forget that it is one of the most significant challenges that we face. When I was involved in the Timbury commission on dementia in 1980, it was thought that the number would be increasing quite significantly by the date we have now reached. We got it wrong—we underestimated the growth—and I suspect that we may be underestimating it again. Dementia is part of the mirage of health; once we deal with heart disease and perhaps cancer, dementia is the next big challenge, and it is a growing problem. The charter is timely, but we should not forget that Scotland has a fairly proud record in the area, notwithstanding reports such as "Older and Wiser", which examined NHS premises and the treatment of those with dementia in such premises, and the joint care commission and Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland report "Remember, I'm still me", which examined care homes. Those two reports reveal significant elements on which we need to make further progress. The charter will help in that regard. It is 20 years—it will be its 21 st anniversary next year—since the dementia centre at the University of Stirling, with which I have had some association over the years, was founded. The centre is a beacon of excellence in research and considering extremely practical measures and adaptations to support carers. It has just produced a booklet, which I recommend to those who are interested in the subject, called "10 Helpful Hints for Carers". That short leaflet does not simply contain anecdotes from carers; it is based on research that shows how carers can deal with difficult issues such as aggression, wandering and hallucinations. I suggest to the minister that when the charter is sent out to various places, a copy of the leaflet should go out to all general practitioners. One of the things with which GPs have a problem is what the next step is; what they should do once they have made a diagnosis, which is not always easy. It is not clear how to tell carers how  to manage or how to help the individual who will, in the early stages of dementia, be very aware of what is going on—they will not have reached the stage of not remembering anything. Another report, from the Nuffield Council on Bioethics under Dr Tony Hope, has just been published. It does not say anything different from what the Alzheimer Scotland survey says, in terms of the things people want. We know that things such as ensuring that people are active, that they get out and about and that they keep their social connectiveness are all part of maintaining the quality of life for dementia sufferers. I am particularly concerned about the management of nutrition and its importance in hospitals and other institutional settings. It is also important in community care support. Sometimes, if people do not eat it is assumed that they are not hungry and the food is taken away, but they have forgotten and they need to be supported in that respect. The management of pain is another important issue. Scotland has a proud record on such matters. Free personal care has been enormously important with this group and the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 has made a huge contribution. The charter is the next step that leads to a strategy—we have done a lot already, but we need to consider the next step. I commend the charter to members.

To ask the Scottish Executive for what reason it has not publicised the fact that it has an extra £880 million in purchasing power available in its 2010-11 budget due to lower rates of inflation. (S3O-8159)

I would like to confirm some of the basic facts to find out whether we have any agreement between us. First, is the cabinet secretary aware that £880 million is not my or my party's figure, but is from the Scottish Parliament information centre? It gave an independent view and suggested that there is additional headroom in the budget. Secondly, does the cabinet secretary agree that the inflation rate will probably be between 1 and 1.5 per cent, whereas the original budget estimates last year were based on an assumption that inflation would be 2.75 per cent? If we can agree on those facts, we can begin to discuss why projects such as the Glasgow airport rail link have been cut although there is further headroom within the budget.

I thank the minister for her replies so far and, although I welcome the fact that the Government has now published the Scottish end of the University of Sheffield evidence, the figures are based on 2003 data on alcohol problems, whereas the latest figures are from 2008. That is a major criticism from the industry, which is attacking the Sheffield report as not providing a firm basis for minimum pricing. Will she say how minimum pricing will help, given that the additional profits that would result from the policy would go back to retailers rather than into alcohol treatment?

Does Sandra White agree that those volunteers need support, training and often counselling to fulfil their function in the most  effective way, for their benefit and for the benefit of those for whom they volunteer? Does she agree that the Government must therefore ensure that such support is available?

Does the minister regard it as cohesion when he has outsourced to local authorities £350,000 of support for the CVS senior volunteers programme and failed to agree to the transitional funding that was demanded in the debate last year, with the result that only four as opposed to nine development officers now support an increasing number of people who want to volunteer? The programme is under massive threat from his lack of cohesion.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to address problems associated with those parts of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 that came into effect on 1 September 2009. (S3O-8059)

Is the minister aware of the case of a constituent of mine from Braco, whose shelves were cleared of alcohol at great cost to him following errors that were made by the local Scottish National Party council and licensing board? Is he aware that, in some areas, 50 per cent of premises have not received their licence and that some individuals have had to wait 15 months for them after due process and payment? Is he aware that licences are not being posted by recorded delivery and that retailers are asked to pay their fees again when they are lost? What compensation is available to retailers such as those in my constituency to cover losses that have been caused by such errors? What additional resources were given to local licensing authorities and licensing boards to implement the act quickly and efficiently?

I join other members in thanking Rhona Brankin for securing this important debate, in the 21 st year of the NHS breast screening service. I remember Professor Forrest presenting the findings of research when screening was introduced. It is good that early doubts about it have been put to rest and that screening is now used by so many. As other members have said, there are groups who do not take up the opportunity of screening. There needs to be retargeting, refocusing and outreach by the health service, so that screening reaches more deprived groups—to which Mary Scanlon and Margaret Smith referred—and black and minority ethnic groups, among which uptake is low at present. There is also some indication that uptake is dropping, which is slightly worrying. There needs to be a degree of renewal. Members have mentioned research, which is important. Recently the British Medical Journal suggested that some early interventions after screening may not be appropriate. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, I was part of a research group, led by Dr Ian McIntosh, that carried out research into the psychological impact of screening. One concern was the time it took to get test results back. Margo MacDonald and Rhona Brankin have raised that issue—almost 20 years on, the concern is still the same. Anything that we can do to speed up the process would be welcome. That should surely be possible with the technology that we now have. Misdiagnosis is a problem. One difficulty is that not all general practitioners emphasise the fact that an appointment is urgent, which would allow patients to benefit from rapid referral to the assessment that should take place. That can lead to delays. Recently a constituent wrote to my colleague Anne McGuire and me about her experience of misdiagnosis. During self-examination at the age of 40, she found a lump. The GP told her that it was a milk gland and nothing to worry about. Five months later, the lump was still there. She asked for a second opinion and was referred to Stirling royal infirmary, where she insisted on being given a mammogram. The single-view mammogram that she received was reported as negative, but she was offered a six-month review, at which the consultant undertook fine needle aspiration. She was informed that she had more than one malignant tumour and had a mastectomy, chemotherapy and radiotherapy.  The time from the original presentation to completion was one year. My constituent followed up the matter and took legal action. It was found that there had been negligence in her case—something that we would not wish. Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline 29 is clear: a woman with a lump should be assessed and, in almost every case, offered the triple assessment of clinical examination, imaging from mammography—preferably more than one view—and ultrasound or ultrasound and histology, where the lumps are taken by fine needle aspiration or core biopsy. If that does not happen, the result can be legal action. Between 2002 and 2008, legal action was taken in 30 cases. It is important to follow through in this regard; survival rates have improved, but we are still behind. Further to my parliamentary questions of 11 December last year, I ask the minister for a response on the national advisory group's plans for digital mammography and the sentinel node biopsy programme. Like other members, I look for answers to the issues of retargeting outreach to BME groups, lymphoedema, reconstructive surgery and secondary cancer. All indicate that we still have some way to go, albeit that the situation is undoubtedly improving.

I join others in congratulating Rhoda Grant on securing this members' business debate. Blood transfusion in humans was another first for Scottish bioscience, with the early work of Leacock on animals at the veterinary school in Edinburgh followed by Blundell's work in humans about 190 years ago. The national transfusion service, as Nanette Milne indicated, has supported patients for more than 65 years and is approaching its 70 th anniversary. It has met the changing needs of patients and the NHS, faced challenges and remained at the forefront of blood transfusion, punching well above its weight in research and innovation. Despite recent concerns about HIV, new variant CJD and the screening that might be needed, and the concerns about hepatitis C, the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service has always been at the forefront of delivering the safest service. I was involved—as I think Shona Robison was—in the Health and Community Care Committee's investigation into hepatitis C in the first session of the Parliament. I understand that there will be a further inquiry into the matter, but it was the committee's view that the transfusion service was well ahead of the other services in the United Kingdom in introducing the necessary exclusions to deal with the virus once it had been identified as hepatitis C, not simply non-A, non-B hepatitis. The service faces and will continue to face many challenges. I have referred to some of the reasons for exclusions, but others need to be reviewed and examined. Rhoda Grant referred to medical exclusions. I have been donor, albeit intermittently, over the years. Because I was a general practitioner partner, I could give myself paid time off work without any difficulty, but I did not always take the opportunity because of work pressures, which I regret. I believe that, now that I am taking some medication, I am excluded but, after Rhoda Grant's timely reminder, I will go back and ask whether the medication excludes me, as I hope to become a donor again. Jim Hume referred to the exclusion on grounds of homosexuality. It is appropriate that the advisory committee should keep that under review. Given the major concerns that relate to hepatitis C and new variant CJD, the advisory committee is not particularly keen to take risks. It feels that, if something were to happen, the result would be more petitions and more demands for public inquiries, which would make life difficult. If the exclusion is lifted, it will have to be done carefully to ensure that the quality of blood is safeguarded.  We may face further exclusions in the future—we simply do not know—so campaigns to encourage young people to become involved in donating blood early on are important. The transfusion service may also need to consider going beyond its current pain relief measures. We heard Rhoda Grant's cringing tale of being awake all night the first time that she donated, and others have suggested that donating is not entirely painless. Perhaps more measures could be adopted to ensure that donors can be guaranteed a pain-free donation if that is what they want. Michael McMahon referred to the Anthony Nolan Trust. My practice was one of the first to invite patients to come for a blood test to determine whether they might be suitable bone marrow donors, which is how the Anthony Nolan Trust started back in the 1970s. Within two years, one of my patients ended up being recalled from holiday in the Western Isles to give bone marrow. The whole community, as well as the donor, felt good about that. Community feeling about the donating experience is crucial and must not be lost. Platelets have been mentioned. We also need to examine closely the recapture of salvaged blood. Scotland is not performing as well as England in that respect, and I hope that the minister will examine the situation. Although something is being done, health boards are not incentivised enough to manage supplies of blood cautiously. The use of blood has been improved, with substantial reductions being made, but more could be done not only to recapture salvaged blood but to encourage patients having elective operations to give blood beforehand. Their blood might not be given back to them—although that the best way because it is the safest—but at least it would be available to others. I recommend that we encourage progress in those two areas.

I should declare an interest as a member of the BMA, although whether I will still be a member at the end of this process is another matter. I am also a member of the Royal College of General Practitioners. I hope that Ross Finnie will forgive me, but I will concentrate on part 2 in my summing up. As other members have said, David McLetchie's speech needs to be read carefully before we can come to a conclusion. There is no doubt that, if the bill was successful and did what it purports to do, it would entrench in primary legislation one model of general medical services. That is the basic flaw in the bill, as we have no idea exactly what we will need in four or five years' time. At that point, if we need something different we will have to go back and amend the primary legislation. I am unhappy about that. I am also unhappy because, in practice, there has been only one attempt by a commercial company to intervene in primary care, and that ended up not progressing. That might be because the remuneration offered to that company was inadequate. There is some evidence from England that Atos and other companies are being unduly promoted by primary care trusts by being given extra rewards beyond those given to general practices. That approach would not therefore fulfil the criteria, which David McLetchie quite correctly set out, for the sort of competition that pushes prices down. In England, it might be that, in order to have competition, primary care trusts are actually paying considerably more. A lot more remains to be done on the bill. The Labour Party will be considering its position, depending on amendments that are lodged at stage 2. First, there needs to be an amendment to clarify the position with regard to future competition from other groups, such as nurses, that might provide general medical services. There also needs to be clarity on whether other groups might come into being, such as co-operatives, social enterprises and new models of community-owned practices, which might indeed be profit-distributing organisations. A number of speakers have made the point that general practice is a profit-making business. As a GP, I can tell them that that is absolutely the case. Profit, in this case, is not a dirty word—indeed, I do not think that it is ever a dirty word—but there  is no doubt that the income that is obtained by general practice partners, on which they are taxed, is the surplus income that exists at the end of the year, once all the costs are met. To be frank, there are bad GPs who will skimp on staff and premises and do the absolute minimum in order to maximise their profits. That is rare in Scotland, but I tell ministers that they are about to be confronted with a serious problem the likes of which we have not seen since the 1960s. Since the Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Act 2004 came into force, the number of partners is dropping—that is very evident in England—and the number of salaried doctors who are employed by those partners is increasing. The result is that there are now doctors who earn £150,000 or £250,000. I received an e-mail from a doctor who moved from England to Scotland in which she complained bitterly that her income, as a salaried doctor employed by a partnership, is less than half what she was earning in England, and is less than a registrar's income. We talked about exploitation this morning in relation to teachers, but exploitation of doctors is now beginning to occur. Substantial numbers of qualified general practitioners are having to queue up as locums in order to try to get work. The bill is not flexible, so we need to think seriously about part 2. Already, communities such as Rannoch are facing particular problems. The other day, Lindsay Roy told me about a community in Fife that was having problems attracting GPs. GPs are closing down branch surgeries because they are no longer profitable or sustainable, which means that some people are now faced with having to travel considerable distances to get GP services. Part 2 is seriously flawed. Although the Labour Party will agree to the general principles of the bill when we vote tonight, we have serious concerns about the bill. I addressed the provisions on tobacco in detail earlier, but I will deal with them again briefly. The Conservatives opposed the ban on smoking in public places because they felt that the evidence was not clear and that that ban would be an unnecessary restriction on individuals. Now that we can see that the outcome was a 30 per cent reduction in heart attacks and an undoubted improvement in people's health, as well as the fact that Scotland has a higher standing because it led on the issue in the UK, will the Conservatives reflect on whether their opposition to that ban was appropriate? We did not hear today whether they now feel that the smoking ban was a good thing and that they were mistaken in their opposition to it. I raise that issue because it reminds me of the Conservatives' position on a ban on tobacco  displays. There has been an increase in the number of brands that are displayed and the volume that there is in a particular area. The first thing that a shopper sees when they go into a supermarket is a vast array of tobacco. There is no doubt in my mind that the tobacco industry is using that as a loophole to get around the ban on advertising. As the only party that has adopted a stance of total opposition to a ban on tobacco displays, the Conservatives ask, "Will it work? Is there evidence that it will work?" There is partial evidence that it will, and the committee made clear that it felt, on balance, that the evidence was there. If so, the ban is worth pursuing. The fact that we do not have all the evidence is not a reason not to have such a ban. I promise members that if we always wait for the evidence, the tobacco industry—this is particularly the case with that industry—will use every means in its power to get around every piece of legislation that every country passes. When Judith Mackay, an Edinburgh graduate who was given the British Medical Journal award for her work on tobacco control in Asia, worked in Thailand, there was massive opposition to the controls on tobacco, and she was vilified and personally threatened by tobacco companies for her actions in that country. If 10,000 shops have closed in Thailand, that may simply reflect a change in economic circumstances. The number of businesses such as convenience stores in Canada that have closed since the ban there is no greater than the number that closed due to changes in purchasing patterns before the ban was introduced. There is no evidence whatsoever that a single retailer in Canada has closed because of the ban alone. Having said that, we need to ensure that what is being proposed is proportionate. Ross Finnie stated clearly that we do not know exactly what the Government is proposing in parts of the bill, and we need to be totally clear about that before we can support without amendment any of the bill at stage 2. Small retailers are entitled to measures that are proportionate, and interim measures—such as cupboards or covers at first, pending a longer-term ban—should be examined carefully. The same applies to vending machines—

The results of the radio-controlled vending machine pilot—which we now have but did not when the committee produced its report—indicate a massive increase in control of sales, but it still stands at only slightly more than 80 per cent. The test purchasing in Oban that I mentioned—

The illustration that I gave indicates that we must ban vending machines. [ Applause. ]

Will the member give way?

This Parliament has demonstrated its acute awareness of the unsatisfactory state of Scottish public health in respect to smoking. It introduced the smoking ban, which came on top of the United Kingdom's ban on advertising, and it introduced test purchasing. I understand that recent research shows that since the ban, the number of heart attacks in Scotland has gone down by almost 30 per cent. Our joint commitment to improving health is not in question, but it remains a fact that 12 per cent of boys—or perhaps slightly more—and certainly more girls still take up smoking by the age of 15. Indeed, approximately 80 per cent of smokers start smoking when they are under the age of 19 and, as the minister has indicated, they face correspondingly higher risks. The bill proposes to end the display of tobacco in shops, to ban vending machines, to register tobacco outlets and to tackle enforcement. Three questions need to be asked about the display  element, which I think the committee has asked. Is display a form of advertising? Is there evidence that banning display would have an effect? Are the actions proportionate? The advertising ban that came in in 2002 resulted in the tobacco industry's classic response to any attempt to control it: companies multiplied the number of brand variations, with all sorts of justifications, and the effect was to double or triple the display area within shops. A question that I regularly ask pupils in primary 6 and 7 when they visit the Parliament is, "What do you see when you go into your local convenience store?" They refer to three things: sweets, alcohol and tobacco. I promise members that tobacco is always mentioned. There can be no doubt that display is a form of advertising. New types of colourful packaging, slide packs, ultra-slims, new products for young women and terms such as "cool", "smooth" and "chill" are all being used by the industry to try to deliver the new generation of smokers who are necessary for their profits. The advertising issue is clear: the industry would not spend the money that it does on it if it was not successful in achieving advertising and delivering the new generation of smokers. Would a display ban work? Professor Gerard Hastings from the University of Stirling suggested in his evidence that it would in the long term contribute to a reduction in children taking up smoking. Surveys indicate that 83 per cent of children are very aware of smoking and feel that it is more likely to lead to them taking up smoking. The campaign by Cancer Research UK entitled out of sight, out of mind aims not just to denormalise tobacco displays but to ensure that those who try to give up smoking are not confronted with rows and rows of display when they go into shops. Is the banning of display proportionate? Is the cost of the ban to the small retailer, whom we all want to support, particularly in the economic climate, proportionate? Given that the evidence is still equivocal from Canada—I believe that the evidence will come only in the long term—that is difficult to determine, but the Irish and Canadian experiences give us some insight. First, in Ireland, shops are using cupboards for tobacco, so it is not kept underneath the counter. Shopkeepers raised the issue that having tobacco underneath the counter would cause difficulties, because they would have to bend and would not have sight of the shop. Those cupboards appear to be inexpensive. Secondly, the evidence from Japan Tobacco International was the most equivocal that I have heard in a committee. It said, "We don't think we'll support tobacco retailers." The evidence in Canada and from the Gallaher Group, which is  part of JTI in Ireland, is that if the sales are sufficiently large, it will install £10,000 dispensing machines. The historical evidence is strong that the tobacco industry will do everything that it can to support such retailers.

Jackson Carlaw was not listening to me. I said that we need proportionate measures. The cupboards that are used in Ireland are very cheap. We need to see what discussions take place with the Government to determine the precise terms of the display ban. Once we know those, we will decide whether the ban is proportionate and we can support it. Not all small retailers will get the £10,000 machines. We need to know whether the transition arrangements are satisfactory. We must await the outcome of the discussions on that. Our party is much clearer on the fact that vending machines must be banned. Thirteen per cent of 13-year-olds start smoking by buying from tobacco vending machines. I recently heard from a significant pub owner in Scotland—it owns 600 pubs—that one of its pubs, in Oban, was the subject of test purchasing. Of the 25 pubs that were tested, 23 failed on vending machine purchase. That is a level of test purchasing that I had not heard of before, and it indicates strongly that the vending machine ban is a small but necessary measure. The transition arrangements will be important to protect jobs. We will see what happens on that. We will support registration and the committee's views on the changes to enforcement. I am sorry that I do not have time to deal with part 2, about which we have considerable doubts. We would rather have seen it as a separate bill. We do not believe that the bill does what it says on the tin, and we believe that it will have unintended consequences. We will therefore be looking for a lot of clarity at stage 2.

Is the member comfortable with the fact that if the reasonableness defence is not removed from the bill, those who take part in test purchasing will have to appear in court?

In light of the low rate of response by general practitioners in Fife when it comes to joining the new extended hours contract, which improves access for patients, what further steps is the cabinet secretary taking to ensure equal access by all patients across Scotland?

Will the member give way?

The report was unusual for the Health and Sport Committee in that it was extremely consensual. It was also unusual that much of the written and oral evidence, and the impressions that we gained from our visits, was very consensual. Although, as the convener said, we gave some witnesses a slightly rough time, our evidence sessions were nevertheless a very useful exercise. As the convener said, anyone who needs to know why sport and physical activity are important need only look at the figures on obesity. Many of the substantial health gains that have been made in the past 40 years will be jeopardised unless the obesity problem is tackled. Of course, one aspect of tackling that will be sport. The committee started with the understanding given by documents such as "Let's Make Scotland More Active: A strategy for physical activity" and by committees such as the review group that was chaired by John Beattie, which indicated that participation levels had been dropping and sports  facilities disappearing. Sport in schools never really recovered from the massive damage that was inflicted by the attack on teachers' role in sport during the 1980s. We start from a rather depressing picture. The Labour-led Government began to reverse that trend. In my constituency—now that of the Minister for Schools and Skills—the active schools co-ordinators, for which Clackmannanshire had been a pilot area, resulted in a substantial increase in participation, particularly among girls. That was very welcome and demonstrated that active schools co-ordinators had great potential. As the Minister for Public Health and Sport said, that was followed through by expanding the scheme to include 2,500 schools, with 600 or 700 active schools co-ordinators. The establishment of sportscotland and the Scottish Institute of Sport encouraged both elite and general participation. The results of that are evident. For example, the level of participation in rugby has risen in the past few years—in fact, it has doubled—so some good things are happening. Our report makes clear—as the convener so eloquently outlined, with the velvet glove over the fist that she normally displays—that the resulting recommendations are not some radical and costly set of proposals. Rather, they are a clear call for leadership at every level to make physical activity, physical literacy and sport a much greater priority. That is simply not occurring. Although the Government accepted some of our recommendations, its response was on the whole disappointing and, at times, even dismissive. It seemed as if the Government was not treating the issue as a real priority, although the report on the legacy of the 2014 Commonwealth games indicates to the contrary, as does much of the rhetoric that we have heard. Part of the problem might be that multiple ministers are in charge, although that is not necessarily a problem. The response of the Government and HMIE on monitoring and inspection suggests a lack of determination. We are told that HMIE is considering a different approach, but there should be a clear approach. PE should be treated in the same way as other subjects in the curriculum.

I thank the member for that intervention. I regret that, as far as I know—Mr Brown can tell me if I am wrong about this—the Government has  refused to guarantee pupils and parents a report on the child's level of physical literacy and a personal development plan. I hope that that will be progressed in the curriculum for excellence, but I am not clear about the present position. There is no great evidence of a commitment to the provision of two hours of quality PE a week. Indeed, the Government does not have the levers to allow it to say that that will occur, and that is regrettable. Despite the leadership that the Government is trying to show, there is no indication that the local authorities will definitely comply. We should remember that it is not just a year or two but six years since the target was first set out, yet the local authorities still cannot demonstrate that all their schools are meeting it. We know that the target can be achieved—East Renfrewshire Council has demonstrated that. East Renfrewshire showed leadership at every level and it reorganised the entire curriculum to ensure the delivery of two hours of PE a week. Other councils, such as West Lothian, simply say that they cannot do it, or that they plan to do a bit of the work that is required by 2011. They are building failure into their proposals. We should recognise that the Scottish Consumer Council has said that parents want their children to have five hours a week of physical education or physical activity and sport. They are not getting that. Margo MacDonald said that it was a question not just of how much PE children get but of the quality of the provision, and that is extremely important. However, the Scottish Government has declined our request that uptake of the teacher training that has been introduced—which is extremely worth while and important—should be matched to local authorities that are not providing two hours of PE a week. That training should not just be available for some teachers to apply for; it should be matched and monitored on the basis of the meeting of the two-hour target. I hope that the minister will respond on that. The commitment in the Scottish National Party's manifesto to provide five hours of outdoor activity a week has not even been mentioned, and I would be interested to hear the Government's position on that. As the convener mentioned, Stirling is one area where progress is being made. The council and the university have combined to create effective pathways into sport. I praise the Government for naming the University of Stirling as a centre of excellence. Even though the funding is rather inadequate, one result of that is that, with the creation of a sports village at Forthbank and the development of access by the university, elite and ordinary athletes are achieving a lot. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council's recent funding of 100 talented young sportspeople  through its national winning students scholarships will help enormously, too. The convener also mentioned Perth and Kinross, where a huge number of additional PE teachers have been taken on, but teachers in primary school still do not have the confidence to provide PE in the way that we want them to. I welcome the Government's decision to have a health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment target, but I am not clear that it will be able to deliver it, even through the community planning partnerships. I regret that the current legislation does not provide minimum standards. Local authorities' duty on entitlement to participate in sports is extremely unclear and woolly, and I urge the Government to ensure that clear guidance is provided. The SOAs do not allow local authorities to deliver and the concordat contains only fairly woolly, high-level targets. Specific guidance must be provided on the duty that local authorities have in this area.

I commend the report and urge the Government to look again at some parts of its response, so that it is better able to deliver the objectives to which we all subscribe.

One problem that the committee came across is the fact that many active schools co-ordinators are on temporary contracts. Does the minister propose to address that?

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I want to start with a little bit of the history of this issue, which I do not think has really been mentioned so far. Maureen Watt alluded to the fact that back in the 1960s depression and dementia were not understood as separate entities. It was not until Martin Roth—later Sir Martin Roth—produced in that decade his seminal paper showing depression to be different from dementia that we began to understand the process. Indeed, as Maureen Watt said, we now realise that there are multiple types of dementia and if we are to achieve what every member has said that they wish to achieve we must never forget that these are different entities that require different approaches. As a result, we need to look carefully at not only the individual but the conditions. In that respect, Robert Brown pointed out that we should not forget about early dementia. Down's syndrome is still associated with a very early stage of dementia, and there are many people who have early dementia through a variety of causes. For example, CJD and its new variant can occur at any age. In 1976, I was proud to be a member of the mental health programme planning group that led to the Timbury report, which was the first major report on dementia in Scotland. Professor Timbury  warned that dementia would be the next great challenge to face after the scourges of heart disease and cancer began to be tackled significantly. However, given that he substantially underestimated the number of people who would be suffering from dementia today, I am not sure that the current projections of 110,000 or 114,000 people suffering from dementia in 2031 fully take into account the fact that life expectancy is increasing at the rate of about two and a half months a year and that the rates of dementia in older people are very significant. The thrust of Professor Timbury's report was that people should be managed in the most domestic-style setting that was possible and that they and their families should be supported in that respect. The report was published at a time when the Conservatives were addressing the issue of long-term beds more or less by privatising them and putting them into the care home sector. As we know to our cost from reports such as "Remember, I'm still me", those care homes have never really been able to address the dementia problem to the extent that any of us would wish. When Labour came to power in 1997, one of its priorities was to try to address the problems of mental health. I am not saying that we were totally successful across the board, but at least with the mental health framework we got stakeholders together and set targets for implementation. In the time that we were in power with the Liberals, we achieved quite a lot. For example, the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline 22 in 1998 and the more comprehensive guideline 86 in 2006 are important in clinical terms. We also put in place the current legal framework. The provisions in the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 and the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Act 2007 were based on the Millan principles and are all important considerations, although I hope that in her review the minister will consider some aspects of the overall framework. Members have mentioned the role of carers in the management of this condition; indeed, as Tom McCabe made clear, they are fundamental to the approach that we need. The commitment to respite care is important for carers and dementia patients. I pay tribute to the Government for the commitment of an additional 10,000 hours of respite care—I think that it is 10,000 hours.

Sorry. I was not sure about that, which is why I had a question in my voice. It sounds much better as weeks. That is important. As members have said, the Labour Government established the dementia services development  centre at the University of Stirling, which is now under the leadership of Professor June Andrews. The centre has done an enormous amount to draw together a body of work and research on which to base practical implementation. I draw members' attention to the report "The Forth Valley Dementia Project", which describes one of the last projects that was funded by the Labour-Liberal Government. The project was based on bringing together staff, carers and others and the report is a vital document that should inform the strategy. More important, it has practical suggestions for implementation. There are 37 ideas for simple measures that could be adopted now and which have been adopted in Forth Valley NHS Board. There are another 34 ideas that were regarded as being more difficult to adopt, yet for each one the report indicates how it has been dealt with. There are also seven ideas that staff regarded as difficult to introduce, but some of them have been introduced already. I pay tribute to the Government for that. It was suggested that we should have a HEAT target, although it was thought that that would be difficult and would take time. However, we now have a HEAT target. Another idea that was though to be difficult was the introduction of effective respite care and holidays for users, but that has also been funded. Two of the seven ideas that were thought to be difficult to implement have already been implemented. Members from across the chamber have paid tribute to Irene Oldfather for her work in the field, which is only right. Her contribution and discussions in the Labour Party led us to lodge our amendment. We do not seek to disrupt the consensual approach that has been evident in the debate, but certain important points could be drawn from Alzheimer Scotland's work and in respect of advocacy. I was slightly disappointed by the minister's response that, although elements of that work are useful and important and will feed into the strategy, it does not provide much added value and that the proposed charter can be subsumed by the forthcoming patients' rights bill. I am not sure that that is the appropriate answer. As Tom McCabe and others have said, simply having a strategy will not be enough. The issue is about implementation, and the devil in the detail of that implementation will be difficult. I will list some other concerns that members have raised. Christine Grahame referred to the need for early diagnosis and the lack of early support. An Audit Scotland report has made clear that the trend in social care is a steady move away from supporting people who have conditions in the early stages and towards supporting those who have complex and serious conditions. That is all very well, and I understand it in a situation of cost restraint, but it has the effect of leaving carers unsupported. Good  support is provided through groups such as Crossroads Caring Scotland with its 49 local branches, which has not been mentioned in the debate. As a general practitioner, I found such support absolutely crucial for my patients. Tom McCabe, Robert Brown and Maureen Watt all referred to the need to support carers with respite. That is crucial to their sense of wellbeing.

We are not capable of preventing the condition, but we can prevent its progress. Early care and support can lead to that. A couple of additional issues are important. Several members, including Ross Finnie and Irene Oldfather, mentioned training. Good training is fundamental for staff in all settings, but it is also important for carers. If carers are trained properly, their capacity to support is even greater. We must also deal with the lack of stimulation and physical activities in care homes and wards. It is important that people can get out of their care home or ward when they are still physically fit to do so. Time is constrained, and I appreciate that members' speeches have been cut short.

I thank Ian McKee for supporting our amendment and ask for members' support for both amendments as well as the motion.

I, too, congratulate David Stewart on securing the debate, which is the third debate on diabetes in the Parliament. As Nanette Milne said, we received a helpful briefing on the subject at a breakfast meeting. From that, I thought that it was now beyond dispute that patients' lives can be turned round and transformed by pumps, and that no one should need to be convinced of that. As Kenny Gibson and Ross Finnie said, it is inappropriate to see pumps as being only for people whose treatment fails. They are for people who have particular problems that need to be treated. There is a catch-22 situation that needs to be considered. I want to ask a series of questions rather than make a speech. I assure the minister that I do not expect all those questions to be answered today, but perhaps they could be answered in due course. Sixteen months on, why is the usage figure at only 1.63 per cent? Why has only one health board met the lower level of the NICE target, which is 4 per cent? Does the minister accept the guideline figure of up to 14 per cent, or is there another Scottish benchmark? In her accountability reviews, has she raised with any boards their poor performance on this? It is 14 months since we first debated the matter. Cathy Jamieson was then promised that there would be contact with all health boards that were performing poorly. Has that been done? What was their response? Perhaps the minister could place a detailed response to that question in the Scottish Parliament information centre. The situation in Ayrshire and Arran is appalling. For the health board there to say to David Stewart that it plans to reach 1 per cent usage in three years indicates that we are not really getting a grip of the matter. If a board thinks that it can get away with a level of 1 per cent three years on, it must be asked serious questions. The other two areas in which there is pump usage of 1 per cent or less are Highland and Greater Glasgow and Clyde, which has not been mentioned in particular. The usage there is 1 per cent. That is one of the biggest areas. There is mass deprivation in it and serious diabetes complications. What on earth is NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde doing? How many and which boards have committed specific spending to pumps? How many have now produced business plans? Perhaps information on that could be placed in SPICe. How much of the change and innovation funds, which are now called health improvement funds, has the Government allocated to redressing the balance  and dealing with what is becoming a national scandal? What steps will the minister take to ensure rapid progress to the minimum target? We have found it difficult to interrogate boards on waiting times—that is also clear from answers that David Stewart has obtained. The outliers appear to be Grampian and Orkney at six months. Is there a common data set and common collection? If not, why not? Will that be part of the 18-week referral-to-treatment guarantee? I appreciate that there are many pressures on the ministers, not least as a result of swine flu over the summer and upcoming legislation on tobacco and alcohol, and that it is not their job to micromanage the service. However, the second most important fact in considering the issue is that rapid implementation will bear fruit in efficiency savings, as members have said. Will the minister indicate a model for efficiency savings that can be placed in the boards' efficiency savings targets? That alone will encourage them to spend money in order to save. The most important fact is that patients have a better quality of life on insulin pumps when they are suitable for pumps. The issue needs to be dealt with before it becomes the subject of a main debate for one of the parties, which will require a decision to be made.

Is the cabinet secretary aware that, notwithstanding paragraph 27 of the pandemic flu guidance, two out of 14 health boards—Lothian and Grampian—do not even have lists of retirees, 11 out of 14 have not yet made any effort to contact retirees to assess their willingness or capacity to help, and almost all are waiting for national discussions on suitable training to be finalised? Is she satisfied with that level of complacency in our pandemic planning? Most boards seem to be waiting until things get bad enough to require them to take up the issue of trainees and to take any necessary action.

All members who have spoken have made one common point, which is that the decision whether to release Mr al-Megrahi was a difficult one. Indeed, most public comments have made the same point. I object to the fact that some Scottish National Party members have consistently indicated that anyone who criticises any part of the decision or the process that led to it is lacking in compassion. I find that offensive. Those members have no particular cloak of compassion. I want to concentrate on two areas in which I feel that, in the process of reaching his decision, the cabinet secretary was misguided and failed in his duty to the Parliament, to the people of Scotland and, most important, to the victims of the Lockerbie atrocity. From time to time, it falls to ministers to make very difficult decisions. The visit to Greenock for a face-to-face interview, and the way in which that was brought about, was completely misguided. Civil servants give advice and spell out options as far as they can, but, at the end of the day, the consequences are for the justice minister to determine. We now know from the correspondence that has been published that it was not Mr al-Megrahi who sought that face-to-face meeting but the justice secretary and his department, who wrote to Mr al-Megrahi offering him a face-to-face interview. When I was a justice minister, I received a request to meet Paddy Hill, one of the Birmingham six, who had just set up the Miscarriages of Justice Organisation. My civil servants advised me that such a meeting was not a clever move and that I should not meet Mr Hill—a man whose appeal had been upheld and who had been found not guilty. I chose to disregard the civil servants' advice. However, they gave me some helpful additional advice, which was that I should ensure that the agenda for the discussion was clear and did not include cases that were pending, and that I should check who Mr Hill was bringing with him. I followed that advice, and found out that Mr Hill was going to bring with him a Mr TC Campbell, whose appeal was pending. I did not need the further advice of the civil servants to tell me that meeting someone whose appeal was pending was inappropriate for a justice minister. I have seen nothing in the correspondence to dissuade me that Mr MacAskill failed in that regard. No face-to-face interview was held with the victims' families, so claims of natural justice are unacceptable.  I turn to the medical evidence. Ian McKee talked about old warhorses—which probably describes me and him—sniffing the air. The issue is not about what will happen to Mr al-Megrahi. I wish him no ill. I hope that the consequence of his release to Libya, misguided as it was, will be the extension of his life. According to the published reports, it is likely that that will happen. The psychological aspect of his condition was referred to again and again in the summary provided to the justice minister by Dr Andrew Fraser. I hope that Mr al-Megrahi, who I understand is embarking on further chemotherapy, will live for some considerable time. However, whether Mr al-Megrahi lives or dies within the three months is not relevant here. What is important is whether the justice secretary, acting on behalf of the Scottish people and the Scottish justice system, sought the medical evidence that allowed Mr al-Megrahi to meet the conditions of release, which were that it was likely that he would not survive more than three months. In September 2008, the experts' general view when pressed—they had to be pressed—was of a mid-estimate survival time of around 18 to 24 months, although they could not be certain. In June and July, when Mr al-Megrahi's condition was discovered to be hormone resistant, the experts were asked again for their opinion. That opinion was that Mr al-Megrahi's expected survival time was at the lower end of their estimate. If we do the mathematics, that means eight months. In other words, the experts gave advice in June and July, on the basis of all the evidence presented to them—which may or may not have included face-to-face examination—that Mr al-Megrahi was likely to survive for eight months. However, within a week of his application for release on compassionate grounds, a single medical officer indicated to the prison medical adviser that Mr al-Megrahi's condition had deteriorated. I am not surprised that it had deteriorated. Considering the meetings with the cabinet secretary and the issue of having to give up the appeal that he desperately wanted to continue with in order to deal with his guilt, Mr al-Megrahi must have been under enormous pressure. His deterioration was to be expected. If I had been the justice secretary, that is the point at which I would have said, "I want independent corroborative evidence that the conditions have been met." I would have wanted the experts to have a face-to-face review of all the evidence. On the basis of three independent reviews, from a cancer specialist, a palliative care specialist and Dr Fraser—whose evidence and report I do not question, having been given to the cabinet secretary in good faith—the expertise would have been available and the cabinet secretary could have said in front of members, "I  have taken advice from a sufficient weight of medical expertise to allow me to say that this man has met the conditions for compassionate release." I do not believe that the cabinet secretary did that. Therefore, on the basis of those two grounds in particular, his decision was wrong.

As a former associate member of the Society of British Neurological Surgeons, I am interested in the health grounds. I understand that the guidance from the SPS is that death should be anticipated to take place within three months. The medical reports, which I have read, indicate that in July, the lower end of the previous estimates was to be considered, which means that in July, Mr al-Megrahi was expected to survive for eight months—until April 2010. All medical advisers have said that prognosis is difficult to determine, so the three-month rule is highly questionable in this case. Who did the minister take advice from, other than a consultant urologist and the prison medical officer? Did he take any advice from a palliative care expert, who would have had a greater understanding of the possibilities in this case? If Mr al-Megrahi lives for much longer than three months, it will add to the insult to American families and others.

I thank the minister for the detailed replies—pandemics were what I wanted to address. The reduction from 2,000 delayed discharges to zero last March is excellent, but will  the minister ask the joint improvement team to examine the length of time for which individuals are in hospital below the six-week level? The average number of days is creeping up, and in pandemic planning that is clearly very important.

I thank the minister for coming to hear the views of my constituents at a recent meeting of COBRA—the campaign to open Blackford railway again. In light of the evidence that was presented to him on poor disabled access at Gleneagles, the dangerous access route to that station, the Ryder cup in 2014, the growth of Highland Spring and the problems at Dunblane down the line, has he had any opportunity to reconsider the possibility of reopening Blackford station?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is confident that it will, in this parliamentary session, fulfil the pledge in the SNP manifesto to ensure that every pupil has two hours of quality physical education each week delivered by specialist PE teachers. (S3O-7456)

I think that that is a rather longwinded "No." We are promised progress, not that the manifesto commitment will be fulfilled. Paragraph 71 of the Health and Sport Committee's report on pathways into sport showed that only one council—East Renfrewshire Council—had so far achieved the target of two hours or three 40-minute periods for all pupils, and the Government restated to the committee its aim of achieving the target by August 2010. Will the minister comment on the 1 June report from West Lothian Council's review group on physical education? It states: "The West Lothian recommendation is that a baseline target of 100 minutes or two 50-minute classes for every pupil every week should be made." Taking into account changing time and travel time, that means that West Lothian Council will not achieve the target and clearly has no intention of achieving it, so how will the minister be able to fulfil his manifesto promise or even make reasonable progress towards it?

I agree with the First Minister that continued  testing will tell us more about the epidemiology of this novel virus, but as we will experience a course of events similar to those of previous pandemics—a modest first wave and a much more widespread second wave in the autumn—what steps are being taken now to assist small and medium-sized businesses, especially non-statutory organisations that provide care in the community, to prepare for that second wave so that continuity of care will be ensured for our most vulnerable citizens if we experience a severe second wave?

I will try not to repeat what has been said, but I congratulate John Lamont on obtaining the debate, which is important not just for Chirnside but for all dispensing GP practices and, more important, as Christine Grahame said, the communities in which they are sited. The communities, and the services that are provided to them, must be paramount in our minds. The situation arose partly because of the 2003 Office of Fair Trading report that recommended the deregulation of dispensing. At the time, the Scottish Executive decided, partly in response to a petition that was lodged, that deregulation would not be appropriate for Scotland, so we have continued to have regulations. As Christine Grahame said, I have asked six parliamentary questions on this topic, and my colleague James Kelly asked the minister an oral question. The helpful responses to all those questions are welcome, so I take the opportunity to thank the minister for the responses, which indicate that a review of the regulations is to be considered, stakeholders are now being consulted and, in the meantime, matters of public consultation are to be proceeded with, which is welcome. I hope that that will apply to the Drymen practice, because there has been an application for a pharmacy in that area. The answers to the questions that I asked revealed that no board had consulted the Scottish health council about the changes that would occur as a result of the introduction of a pharmacy. In small communities, the introduction of a pharmacy that might destabilise a practice is important—I would regard  it as a significant change—so we need to examine the consultation process carefully. It is clear that the current regulations lack transparency. Those regulations are pre-devolution; they reflect an older health service and an older system. Given the Government's view of a mutual NHS, I know that the minister will want to make the new regulations transparent and fair to all. Practices are independent contractors, although not in quite the same way as pharmacists are. Practices plan their business—they plan the buildings and the services that are provided from them, which cannot be changed overnight. John Lamont said that the BMA wants a transition period, but it is more than that. If dispensing facilities in purpose-built premises are closed while rent continues to have to be paid on them, that is an unfair imposition on practices that were, after all, required by the regulations to provide dispensing services. We need a set of regulations that reflects the fact that GPs run businesses. That is important. I suggest that the effects on a practice of the introduction of a local pharmacist should be independently evaluated. The benefits and risks should be assessed by a health board committee, if that continues, but we need an independent evaluation of whether a practice will be destabilised. I say with due respect to my GP colleagues that, if they say that their practice will be destabilised, it is easy to put together a petition with as many signatures as the number of people who are registered with the practice, because no patient wants to lose their practice. We need independent evaluation that will allow effective consultation. I have said repeatedly in many debates that pharmacists are highly skilled health professionals. Until recently, their skills were massively underused in the health service. The new contract and the developing role of pharmacists are welcome. In assessing the benefits and risks of a new pharmacy, it is important that we acknowledge that, in their new role, pharmacists provide an extended service that some general practitioners cannot provide. I welcome the minister's replies to my questions and the review that will be conducted. I ask her to look carefully at all the issues. When she sums up, perhaps she could list all the issues that will be considered and discussed with stakeholders before the review is completed and give us a timetable for completing the review.

To ask the Scottish Executive what  role it considers credit unions will play during the economic downturn. (S3O-7336)

Would the minister care to comment on the report from the Westminster Scottish Affairs Committee, in which the committee said that it was "disappointed to see that ring-fenced funding for credit unions from the Scottish Executive now totals ... £250,000, a sharp decrease from over £2.7 million before 2008"? Will he comment on the fact that the number of official provident associations, which in themselves already charge high rates of interest, but are at least not loan sharks, has reduced considerably, thus putting further pressure on credit unions?

Will the minister give way?

I do not want to get into who knew what when, but the freedom of information inquiries make it clear that the officials knew about the situation in September 2008, so there is a gap there. The minister is quite right to say that we need to find a solution. Will he call a meeting of the agencies involved to try to get them together in order to agree how to alleviate the situation? Everybody is denying responsibility and saying that they will not take action.

The member states that the previous Executive was aware of the potential problems. That does not fit with the minister's response to my parliamentary question on the issue, which indicates that he did not know about the night running of trains until February 2009.

I congratulate Michael Matheson on securing the debate, which is important to his constituents and mine. It relates to DB Schenker's transportation from Hunterston to Longannet of coal that was previously transported either across the Forth rail bridge or by road. All who live along the line are affected. Most people welcomed the development of the SAK railway, which has allowed the transportation  of coal from Hunterston to Longannet via my constituency. Of course, the resulting passenger transportation between Alloa and Stirling and on to Glasgow and Edinburgh has been hugely successful and has exceeded the promoter's expectations by a large margin. However, the coal trains have caused complaints from people in Larbert through Braehead, Broomridge and Riverside in Stirling to multiple locations along the line. That is a real problem. Complaints are about noise and vibration, but there is anger that the freight trains are running at night. Why is that? The original proposals for the SAK line indicated clearly that there were would be no night-time running of trains. The disturbance of Michael Matheson's constituents and mine at night is causing the greatest grief. The original impact report of 2001, which was commissioned by Clackmannanshire Council as the probable bill promoter, excluded night-time running of traffic along the line. Indeed, that report states on more than 13 occasions that the consultants, Scott Wilson, were not asked to consider the night-time running of trains. Transport Scotland must bear the responsibility for acceding to the stated objective of English Welsh and Scottish Railway—now DB Schenker—that freight would not run between 11 pm and 7 am.

That is not my point. My point is that the bill was promoted in the Parliament on a fallacious basis. The Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine Railway and Linked Improvements Bill Committee, Clackmannanshire Council, which is in no way a rail expert, and Transport Scotland, which must surely be the expert, allowed the project to proceed on the publicly accepted assumption that there would be no night-time running of trains. Network Rail—the successor to Railtrack, which existed when the original report was produced—has made it clear that it must allow 24/7 access if it is safe to do so and that it must allow general speed provided that it is safe. It has no requirement to consider the environmental circumstances. We must ask the minister why there are fewer journeys per week than were envisaged in the original report. It indicated that there would only be daytime running, so why do we have night-time running? Was a purely selfish commercial decision taken by DB Schenker that chose to ignore constituents? Some of my constituents tell me, as they tell Michael Matheson, that they and their children are  frequently disturbed at night and that their lives are being ruined. The motion refers only to Larbert, but it applies to all the sections before the new SAK line in Stirling. As Michael Matheson said, families have lived alongside the railway for more than half a century and have had no problems. However, they now have problems. They were offered no pre-operational surveys on the new heavy freight, so they do not know what damage can occur, and they cannot prove it. Why did the minister, in answering a parliamentary question that I lodged, not know that night-time running was proposed in 2008? He said that he did not know about it until 2009, although his officials knew about it at least five months beforehand. Why has he failed to protect the public by not having any consultation on the significant change of including night-time running? He has allowed families in Michael Matheson's constituents and my constituency to be seriously disturbed by what has been in effect a betrayal of public trust by the Government and all the agencies involved.

Does the minister agree that we should perhaps go further? Every carer is entitled to a care plan of their own. When someone who has a problem is given a care plan, and a carer for that person is identified, the carer should automatically be offered a care plan too, so that their health and wellbeing can be protected.

Really?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it has taken to complete both the initial agenda for change process and subsequent appeals. (S3O-7264)

In light of the important role that of pharmacists play in antibiotic prescribing in hospital as part of the control of health care associated infections and in general patient safety, will the cabinet secretary examine closely the staffing of, and recruitment to, hospital pharmacy posts, which are currently uncompetitive with community pharmacy as a result of agenda for change?

I congratulate Helen Eadie on obtaining this further debate on infertility. It is clearly an important issue. Indeed, the level of fertility appears to be declining, although the birth rate has gone up in the past five years. A number of factors are associated with that—as Mary Scanlon said, there is a general feeling that male fertility is declining—so it is important that we debate the issue. I had the good fortune to serve under Dr John Ford on a commission in the 1990s that led to the  publication of a report entitled "Infertility Services in Scotland". The report was written in 1992 and published in 1993, and I am sorry to say that the issues that are being debated today are broadly similar to those that were debated then. The only change is that the cause of infertility—when it can be established by a diagnosis—is something that couples are now entitled to know. There is a more rapid approach to that. However, in 1992, there was a huge postcode lottery even for access to a diagnosis. As Angela Constance said, as a first step, every patient and every couple should be entitled to a diagnosis when that is possible. Not knowing the situation that they are in is very difficult for them. Much of the commission's work centred on some highly technical aspects of infertility. As the general practitioner and psychiatrist on the commission, I was particularly concerned about the psychological aspects of services. Among other things, the variation in waiting times throughout the country meant that many couples were being unduly stressed by the uncertainty of the situation. Indeed, the whole management of infertility was, at that time, characterised by massive uncertainty. The commission, which was supported by the Scottish Health Advisory Service, made 27 recommendations, all but six of which were accepted by the then Conservative Government. Of those six, three were commended to health boards for their consideration and the remainder were passed on to a new clinical resource and audit group advisory committee. The one recommendation that was not accepted was that reproductive services should receive centrally determined funding, and that remains the case. It is for health boards to decide what funding they allocate to infertility treatment. Inevitably, that leads to the postcode lottery that Helen Eadie and Mary Scanlon have ably described. When the commission produced its report, we had four Scottish centres for infertility services, and that is still the case. Consideration should be given to the direct funding of those centres on a regional basis. Looking back at the notes that I made at the time—my wife does not like the fact that I tend to hoard all my papers—it is interesting to discover that many of the centres were charitably supported because they did not have sufficient NHS funding even to provide a basic service. As I have said, it is clear that without careful planning and the provision of effective support for couples, they can be left in a cycle of apparently never-ending investigations. When there is no closure, couples cannot deal with the sense of loss that they are bound to experience. The uncertainty means that depression is quite commonplace during that process. Our  recommendation that an infertility network and a network of specialist nurses be established has been helpful. I have concentrated on the history of the issue, but we are concerned about the future. It is true that NHS funding will always be limited, so it is difficult to provide adequate funding to cover all the new medical technologies that are available. Whatever we do, we must try to eliminate the postcode lottery. It is totally unfair that some couples have enormous waiting times simply because of where they live. In January, I asked the Scottish Executive whether infertility treatment would be included in the 18-week waiting time initiative. The cabinet secretary's reply was that she was aware that some boards had invested in reproductive services in an effort to reduce waiting times and that the issue of waiting times was being considered. Four or five months on, I hope that the minister—the failings of any previous Administration notwithstanding—will be able to give us a clearer indication of whether the present unacceptable postcode lottery will be ended.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister and his team consider the possibility that some of the victims of crime are children? That includes looked-after children, who are singularly disadvantaged in many respects and often have difficulty getting into such schemes. Will the minister consider whether such children could be given specific help from the scheme in future?

We first considered in October 2001 what became the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, which introduced the present system. As Margaret Curran said, we were following Ireland's example—Ireland blazed the trail. As we know, it was recognised that using in the act the concept of being beyond reasonable doubt as a basis for confiscating assets would be insufficient and inappropriate, because criminals are adept at hiding their assets and avoiding prosecution. The act allowed a change to civil proceedings, which was an important step that has benefited communities. I was involved in the original debate because I was the Deputy Minister for Justice at the time. As Michael Matheson said, we debated how the money would be applied best and whether it should be left with individual constabularies or centralised. We also debated how we could promote a virtuous circle in which intelligence-led policing was supported by communities, with the result that more criminals were caught or recognised and prosecuted. We must never lose sight of that virtuous circle. In a powerful speech, Margaret Curran said that it is difficult to get the balance right between Scotland-wide distribution and distribution to communities that provide the intelligence that leads to confiscation. That balance should err on the side of the communities that provide information so that we retain the virtuous circle. I was concerned that, at the outset, the Lord Advocate and the Crown Office wanted to address the big criminals and to attack the people who had big amounts of money. My concern then, which remains, is that those people are difficult to catch. They are adept at hiding their assets and dispersing them among relatives and abroad. I ask the minister to comment in his summing-up on assets that are dispersed in the rest of the United Kingdom or abroad.

I hope that that means that our larger criminals' Spanish assets, as well as their UK assets, are being confiscated. The principle is local reparation, which must be visible, so that communities see that their efforts are being rewarded. That is the incentivisation that we need and that is the most appropriate approach. Youth diversion is a fundamental concept. The fund that uses criminal assets was preceded by money that was raised in part by a Daily Record campaign, which the then Scottish Executive matched. Systems were tested as we disbursed the modest sum of £500,000 to communities. What we learned from that was useful. Communities that had some capacity were able to apply and to develop schemes. Michael Matheson, Bill Aitken, Tricia Marwick and others referred to the fact that some communities are so damaged that their organisational capacity has been hugely impaired. We must have a way to work with local authorities and neighbouring communities to develop the necessary structures in such damaged communities. I hope that the minister will take on board the fact that cross-party support has been given to the concept of supporting the recruitment, development and training of volunteers to develop capacity further. I had grave doubts when I saw that the scheme was being used to fund the under-21 Scotland football team. I thought that football at that level was sufficiently well off to provide for itself. However, my criticism was muted when I learned that the purpose of the funding was to replace an alcohol logo with one from cashback for communities, which may be appropriate in the circumstances. I have reservations about using the scheme to support wealthier clubs, but small clubs such as Stenhousemuir, the Stirling clubs and Alloa Athletic, which are not wealthy, need to be considered. I echo Michael Matheson's comments in that respect. Given that we are all congratulating our communities, I ask members to join me in congratulating Alloa rugby football club on winning division 2 midlands of the Caledonian regional league. Linking into existing systems, the programme has been used to fund the appointment of Kris Burney as a rugby coach; it is not totally novel but provides one more link in the chain to promote rugby among secondary 1 and 2 children, which will be important. Eighteen or 19 groups in my region of Mid Scotland and Fife have received awards, all of which are welcome. I join Tricia Marwick in paying particular attention to communities such as Levenmouth, which has been devastated by drugs. Although some good drug treatment work is being done there—as Fergus Ewing, the Minister for Community Safety,  will know—the promotion of the YMCA and other groups in the area is particularly welcome. I welcome the updating of regulations on the issue. I do not know whether we have re-examined the question of what constitutes a criminal lifestyle, but that needs to be done. I am not sure whether we have looked again at the threshold at which the programme applies. I did not win this battle at the time, but it is important that we focus on intermediate groups, such as drug dealers. The drug dealer campaign was particularly successful in persuading communities to give information, as they could see money coming back to them. Drug dealers do not have large sums of money, but it would be helpful if it could be demonstrated that such money was going back to communities. I hope that the minister will consider adjusting the scheme as we proceed. Now that the scheme is working so well, we need to consider sustainability in the longer term. It is not just about one-off projects but about sustaining projects.

In light of the Parkinson's Disease Society's statements and campaign on the need to ensure that hospital patients with Parkinson's receive their medication in a timely manner—especially as that medication can be very time sensitive—what steps has the minister taken, even prior to the appearance of the guidelines, to ensure that that happens?

I join the cabinet secretary in congratulating all the NHS staff who have been involved to date; in particular, I congratulate staff in NHS Forth Valley on their initial prompt actions, in Inverclyde, and in all the Government agencies that are involved. The general thrust of my speech is that the Labour Party will support the Government motion. We do not want to be critical in any way of the Government at this stage. Alan Johnson has led the call for the World Health Organization to consider whether lethality should be a factor in determining alert level 6. Does the Government support an early review of alert levels? The name that is now being given to the virus is swine-origin influenza virus, or S-OIV, which is unpronounceable. Thus far, one thing that is for certain is that it is a novel virus. In a recent article, Hugh Pennington referred to swine flu being acquired in 2005 by the Mayan population in Yucatan, which—like other populations in south-east Asia—keeps pigs and birds in its backyards. A mild form of swine flu may have gone unnoticed in significant numbers of people before it was formally identified. That reference is important in forming our exact knowledge of what the virus is about. For example, we have established that the current mutation does not produce PB1-F2 protein, which was the virulent factor in the 1918 flu outbreak. Much of our planning worldwide was based on the supposition that the new virus would arise from an avian source in south-east Asia. It came as something of a surprise, therefore, that it was first found in Mexico and that the source was the pig. Much greater research is needed into pig viruses as the melting point for the triple reassortment of viruses from humans, birds and pigs. In that regard, what input will the Scottish Government make to that worldwide research effort? The three areas of concern are the rate of spread, the degree of contagion and lethality. The cabinet secretary referred to them in detail, so I  will not go into the same level of detail. On the rate of spread, the number of cases has risen from 1,000-odd cases at the beginning of May to 13,398 cases as of this morning. The spread from only a few countries to 46 indicates that we have problems in this regard. That said, the spread rate seems to be slowing. Is that accounted for entirely by an absence of testing in countries such as the United States of America, or is the rate naturally occurring? I do not expect an answer today; I simply pose the question for consideration. Clearly, if the rate of spread is slowing, that says something about the second area of concern, which is the level of contagion. As the cabinet secretary indicated, the level of contagion looks like being somewhere between two and 10 times the normal flu rate for severe winter flu—not the mild flu outbreaks that we have had. What is the Government's estimate of the future level of contagion? Again, that question probably cannot be answered today; I simply pose it for future consideration. Labour Party colleagues will address the impact on education and on prisons and other closed units. I turn to lethality. It is clear that, outside Mexico, the outbreak is very mild. I assume that we still do not know why that is. Certainly, there is nothing on the WHO website to indicate the reasons for the outbreak. As of this morning, there have been 95 deaths, 85 of which have been in Mexico. As the cabinet secretary said, the rate is considerably lower than that which applies at the top end of pandemic predictions. We do not know quite what is happening—there is a wide variation in the assumptions on lethality. Unlike in previous pandemics, assessment of the three factors of spread, contagion and lethality is considerably complicated by new variables. First, there has been a massive increase in air travel since the last pandemic in 1968. Secondly, there has been the application of successful containment policies using antivirals that disrupt the normal development of the virus. The one thing that we know about pandemics is that they tend to encircle the globe in at least two and sometimes three waves. From the three pandemics in the 20 th century, we know that the first wave is always mild. The second wave of the Spanish flu outbreak of 1918 was particularly lethal. The 1957 pandemic, which also started in a mild form, returned in a form that was somewhat more severe but not nearly as severe as the 1918 outbreak. The 1968 pandemic was not severe in most countries in its second wave, but it was in some countries. As the cabinet secretary indicated, we cannot predict what further genetic shift or drift might occur in the novel virus that confronts us today; nor can we predict what effect the intermix of  H1N1 with H5N1 avian flu in south Asia will have, because there are only a few cases—some, in Taipei, for example, have only been reported in the past week. Very few cases have been reported in south-east Asia. The pressure on the virus to mutate, with the mix in pigs, birds and humans in south-east Asia, might present us with a severe challenge in the second phase. The emergence of an inherently much more virulent virus in phase 2 can never be ruled out. The cabinet secretary and the UK Secretary of State for Health, Alan Johnson, are absolutely right to say that we must continue to plan on the supposition that the second wave could be more virulent, while continuing to hope that it will not be. Do we have sufficient capacity in Scotland to maintain rapid diagnostic testing to ensure that, in the event of severe reaction, individuals can be tested for any new, potentially lethal, mutation of the virus? I understand that, at some point, we will probably have to drop general testing, although we need to maintain adequate testing facilities to look for that possible mutation. As is clear from the cabinet secretary's speech, we have not yet moved from containment to disruption, or even to an open situation. However, I have some concerns. First, from the outset there has been an overreliance on Tamiflu—I make that criticism of all Administrations. The single purchase of Tamiflu, which has been augmented only recently by Relenza, might lead to our being overreliant on it. There has already been some resistance to Tamiflu in response to some cases of flu in Japan. I hope that stocks of Relenza, and indeed of amantadine, may be maintained. Amantadine was the original antiviral and although it was not particularly effective, perhaps for the very mild form of flu that we have at the moment, the use of amantadine—or of Relenza—could protect against resistance to Tamiflu. Is the Government considering that point, which has been raised in academic debate? I will address some further issues related to pre-planning for a possible second wave, no matter how virulent it is. All the elements of the report that I did for the Health and Community Care Committee in 1999—published in 2000—and of the subsequent planning will be tested to a level beyond that of the winter willow simulation exercise that was carried out previously. I ask the cabinet secretary to respond to a number of further questions, on the basis of continuing to hope for the best while preparing for the worst. First, I thank the cabinet secretary for her letter to me in response to my question regarding the register of retired doctors and nurses. Her letter indicated paragraph 27 of the guidance. Further to that, is the cabinet secretary satisfied that all health boards have such lists in  place? As a semi-retired doctor, I have not yet been contacted. Will health boards offer training over the summer, as has been suggested, so that we are prepared for the second wave, should it occur? Secondly, are there similar provisions for the temporary reregistration of nurses and allied health professionals, as there are for the General Medical Council, which has established a rapid reregistration system? Hopefully, such a system will be made available to nurses and allied health professionals. In addition, we have a number of unemployed allied health professionals, such as physiotherapists. Do we have a list of people who are currently not employed, but who are qualified and who might be able to help out in the second wave? From previous correspondence with the cabinet secretary, I know that the Government has had discussions with, and has involved, the British Red Cross, the WRVS and other voluntary organisations at a national level. Have health boards and local authorities engaged with those two organisations in their plans? When I corresponded with the cabinet secretary on the matter last year, the Red Cross and the WRVS were indicating their satisfaction with national discussions, but they believed that local discussions were very patchy. Preparation must be made more adequate over the summer. In my report, I suggested that we needed adequate supplies of pneumococcus vaccine for all relevant vulnerable groups. We should consider the potential for a summer programme of pneumococcal vaccination, rather than waiting until autumn, when the second wave might hit us and we might be otherwise occupied. I make the suggestion because a number of the deaths of young adults in Mexico have been associated with the pneumococcus virus and because, during the moderately severe pandemic in 1957, research in Holland showed that pneumococcal pneumonia was a significant factor in deaths. The preparation that I suggested might therefore help. The new vaccine must be properly tested. The most recent significant swine flu outbreak, at Fort Dix, in America, in 1976, resulted in rapid production of a vaccine that had to be withdrawn because of its association with deaths and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Will the cabinet secretary consider whether we have an adequate supply of ventilators? The health service in Mexico has had problems in that regard. We know from an Audit Scotland report that there is a significant maintenance backlog. If ventilators are to be replaced during the next two years, it might be worth bringing forward the purchase of replacements, to increase capacity.  As the cabinet secretary said, dealing with a pandemic is about managing uncertainty. Sam Goldwyn said: "Making predictions is very difficult, especially about the future". The remark has never been more applicable. We are only weeks into the outbreak—pandemic or not—and many of our assertions and plans have already been negated. We must be on guard and continue to plan and prepare, and we must be ready to be flexible. The Labour Party will support the Government motion.

I join other members in congratulating Cathy Jamieson on the motion and the Co-op, of which I am a member, on its choice of the RNID as its charity this year. The universal newborn hearing screening programme, to which other members have referred, is very important. I have memories—which I was sharing with Cathy Jamieson the other day—of my children being tested by someone rattling keys or some similar object behind their heads, which irritated the hell out of them and did not test both ears. We have moved on. The fact that we have proper testing is welcome but, as Ross Finnie said, we need to think about the fact that the pre-school testing has been dropped and whether that is the correct thing to do in terms of universal screening. We need to consider whether it should be recognised that there is a possibility of infection occurring and that even the newborn screening test—which is very effective—could miss something. I wonder whether we should take another look at that, perhaps by carrying out a project to study it and find out whether anything has been missed. I will concentrate on two areas that have not so far been mentioned. One is tinnitus, which affects about 10 per cent of adults and from which I suffer myself. I was trying to work out why I suffer from it. I know that one reason why I have it more intensely in one ear than the other is because I once did some work as a driller in the construction of Loch Awe power station, which is underneath a mountain. I was drilling rock and the noise was such that at the end of a week of shifts it took me the whole weekend to recover my hearing. In  those days, before health and safety regulations came in, there were no earplugs and no opportunity to ensure that one was not affected. Other drillers were drilling the Clyde tunnel at that time, and as they were drilling under pressure they developed even worse hearing problems. I am sure that I suffer from tinnitus partly because of drilling. The second reason I have the problem is because I was assaulted by a very friendly drug-using patient during my brief absence from the Parliament—I feel much safer here than I did in some of the clinics I was running. Assault was not something I enjoyed. I mention tinnitus because 10 per cent of adults are affected in some way, and half of them are affected to a large degree, so it really begins to trouble them. Around 1 per cent of those people are affected really quite severely. In half of those who are affected by tinnitus, sleep is affected, which can be disturbing for them because they then become more irritable. It is a difficult condition and information is important, but there is not a huge amount that one can do about it. Ensuring that employees take precautions is very important. My practice worked with United Glass (Closures & Plastics) Limited in Bridge of Allan, where the noise of the machines was enormous. As a result of health and safety legislation, the company introduced noise conduction to take the majority of the noise away, but the employees had to play their part by wearing either earplugs or mufflers. That is an important balance in the regulations for health and safety at work: employees are responsible, along with employers, to try to ensure that people do not subsequently suffer from deafness. The testing of older patients is also important. In the 1980s, my practice—partly as a result of the work that we were doing with UG—had a machine, which meant that we were able to offer testing to all our patients as part of the screening system that was then in place for older people. We tested people at age 65. The number of people in whom we picked up a hearing problem was extraordinary. I will finish, Presiding Officer—I know without even looking up that you are looking at me. I will say one final word. One of my colleagues had an old-fashioned hearing aid that people did not like wearing—it was the one with the big battery on the chest. When he did not like what he was hearing in meetings, he would switch it off—and I will now switch off.

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on the continuing measured approach that the Government is taking to this problem. We must not allow a situation in which people become alarmed to develop. We have not reached that point, as yet. First, could I have an answer to the question on registered retirees that I put in week 1? I have not had that as yet. As we prepare to move from containment and disruption to mitigation and a general situation, the issue is important. Secondly, when I did my report—

That was a previous question.

Thank you for your courtesy in allowing me in again, Presiding Officer. My question is on the sleeping contracts. One of the things that I put into my report of 1999 was that there might be a bottleneck in respect of egg supply. I was laughed at in one cartoon for even suggesting that. Clearly, if we are trying to produce 45 per cent cover, we will need a vast vaccine production. Can the cabinet secretary assure Parliament that the sleeping contracts include adequate production and egg supply for production? Will production be in the UK or are we reliant on European supply sources?

I thank the minister for his response to John Lamont's question. Given the success of the time-out centre in Bath Street in Glasgow in diverting annually from short-term custody 500 women whose main offence or problem involves drugs, will he and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice give serious consideration to establishing a second centre for women, and a pilot centre for men, to increase the diversion of those with drug  problems? Will he also seek a review by SPS of the management of remand prisoners who have a drug problem, as part of discussions about the national health service taking over medical and nursing care in the Prison Service?

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing such an interesting debate and on her tour de force of a speech, in which she covered so many areas so well. I remember well my first experience of the difficulties that can occur during childbirth, which I gained in the 60s in Sudan when I saw the consequences of female circumcision. Even though female circumcision is a particularly unpleasant procedure that leads to great difficulties with birth, it is still practised widely—although it has been fully outlawed in this country. Mary Scanlon dealt effectively with deaths during childbirth overseas, so I will not go into it again. Suffice it to say that meeting the millennium development goal by 2015 is a difficult challenge and if we do not all make considerable efforts it will not be achieved. It is vital that we tackle the problems that exist. The number of mothers with AIDS who give birth in Africa, for example, is a massive problem. Even when societies reach a higher socioeconomic level they are confronted by tobacco companies that mercilessly exploit people by encouraging them to take up smoking. As we know, smoking during pregnancy, which leads to premature and low-weight babies, is still a problem in this country. The problems that we face are to do with the fact that, until 2003, the birth rate in this country had been dropping steadily, but it has since gone up and it continues to increase—it has increased by roughly 10 per cent over the past five years. That is leading to greater pressures on midwives throughout Scotland. In some areas, midwives are carrying excessive case loads; I am sure that some of the midwives in the public gallery will tell MSPs of their experiences later. The size of midwives' case loads is being exacerbated by the emergence of new problems and the growth over the past 20 years of existing ones, the first of which is drugs. We now know that roughly 50,000 children have parents who have drug problems. They must go through an antenatal process, in which the support of their midwives is crucial. Obstetricians such as Dr Mary Hepburn in Glasgow have done a lot of work in that field, along with midwife colleagues, to support patients, and the specialist team in Edinburgh that is led by a midwife is doing sterling work in that regard. The other problem is alcohol. Foetal alcohol syndrome was first diagnosed by Dr Peter Whatmore, a colleague with whom I worked in Cornton Vale prison. We discovered that a number of the babies who were born to women in the prison had unusual features. Foetal alcohol syndrome is now well recognised. As I am sure  the minister will tell us, research is to be commissioned to determine the number of babies who are born with foetal alcohol syndrome, because we still do not know the numbers involved. I have asked a number of parliamentary questions about midwifery over the past few months, because I have concerns about the fact that seven health boards are not meeting the standards on the number of supervisors of midwives. I understand that the issue is being addressed, but it is quite inappropriate that boards are not meeting standards, which are usually a minimum. The issue needs to be addressed and I hope that it will be. At £500 per annum, the incentive for midwives to become supervisors is pretty meagre and does not reflect the excellent work that supervisors do to support their fellow midwives and ensure that practice is safe—so that we can address the 13 deaths per 100,000 live births that Mary Scanlon alluded to. I will finish on the matter of general practice. I too think that the abandonment of the contract is inappropriate: it should have been adjusted. There is no doubt that the role of GPs has changed, but general practice is the one specialism that has an holistic role to play in the patient's life. The GP is the one person with whom all patients are registered. The abandonment of the contract is not appropriate and there should have been far wider debate, as Mary Scanlon said.

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will join me in criticising Richard North for his comments that the issue has been hyped. We all agree that the preparations have been appropriate. The potential new swine flu vaccine will take six months to produce. What was the start date for that work and which companies are involved? At what point will the production of a new vaccine  affect the production of the normal winter flu vaccine?

I am grateful to the members who signed the motion and to the Parliamentary Bureau for the opportunity to debate it. The debate is a personal milestone, because although I have spoken in many members' business debates this is the first such debate that I have brought to the Parliament, despite my having spent six years as a member of the Parliament—[ Interruption. ] I assumed that that meant that I would not be interrupted. Telehealth is hugely important for the health of our nation and holds enormous promise for improved health and improved efficiency of the national health service. I welcome the people in the gallery who have a significant interest in telehealth, who will attend the reception that will follow the debate. The best place to start is with some definitions. Telehealth is made up of two components: telecare and telemedicine. Telecare is the use of a range of technologies to support people in a home or community environment who would otherwise be at increased risk of coming to harm from a range of causes. Telemedicine is the provision of health care at a distance by using a range of digital technologies, including videoconferencing and mobile telephones, to transmit information such as electrocardiogram results and digital X-rays to clinical professionals and specialists. The Scottish Executive invested £5 million over the three years from 2000 in the Scottish telemedicine action forum—STAF. The initiative funded a number of telemedicine projects, which confirmed the potential advantages to patients, clinicians and organisations in areas such as  telepaediatrics and tele-unscheduled-care. To build on those successes, the Scottish centre for telehealth was established in 2006 and became fully operational in 2007. As many members know, representatives of the centre will be in the garden lobby after the debate, and I hope that members will join us, to meet patients and care providers in telehealth and to find out how the centre will develop telehealth in Scotland. The centre has been charged with supporting and guiding the development of telehealth throughout Scotland for clinical, managerial and educational purposes. Its prime aims are to increase awareness within the service of telehealth's potential, to provide a centre of expertise to define and disseminate best practice, to provide practical and informed support to telehealth projects in their development phase and to develop interoperable standards, protocols and processes to support telehealth solutions and facilitate the evaluation of their impact on service redesign. We should note that the centre is not a funding body, although its joint improvement side supports telecare with funds. Building on the STAF projects, the centre's staff initially visit health boards and discuss clinical priorities, the availability of technology and the preparedness to adopt telehealth in support of patient care. That has led to the introduction of a variety of new applications in the past two or three years, such as tele-endoscopy, tele-stroke-care and telehealth in support of patients in remote and rural areas of Scotland. In addition, much interest has been shown in using technology to monitor patients—such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients—in their own homes. During the past two years, a wide range of telehealth projects have been introduced. Although each brings benefit in its own way, one of the prime objectives for the Scottish Centre for Telehealth is to introduce pan-Scotland services. To that end, it has recently commissioned work in areas of care that support the Government's priorities and in which there is worldwide evidence that telehealth can benefit patient care, clinicians and organisations. The centre is trying to take those up by focusing on mental health, stroke, COPD and unscheduled care. We believe that, by concentrating efforts on those four areas, Scotland can demonstrate leadership in bringing specialised services closer to patients regardless of their location. The parliamentary reception tonight offers an opportunity to explore the possibilities of telehealth and to hear at first hand how it may benefit people. "Better Health, Better Care: Action Plan" highlights the role of telehealth in improving the patient's experience of care by reducing the need for travel to major cities or hospitals to receive care and  treatment. Funding is targeted at support for sufferers of long-term conditions, with an initial emphasis on COPD, which is basically narrowing of the airways of the lungs. The most significant risk factor for COPD is cigarette smoking. The efforts of the current and previous Executives to reduce smoking have produced effect, but the COPD occurrence in Scotland today is probably the result of the high smoking rates of 30 to 40 years ago. Increased awareness of the disease and its inclusion in the primary care quality and outcomes framework—QOF—probably contribute to increased diagnosis, but there is still an unrecognised burden. The COPD programme is already demonstrating the considerable benefits of the linkages that can occur, particularly in reducing readmissions. That is highly significant and has been evaluated as making great savings for patients and great financial savings, so it will contribute to the significant efficiency targets that health boards have to achieve. Dementia is another area in which telehealth—such as the joint improvement team's work with the dementia services development centre at Stirling University—can reap huge dividends. Monitoring by videophone, pull cords, falls detectors, flood detectors, medication reminders and temperature assessors are only a few of the adaptations that can be introduced to keep people with dementia in their own homes. Telehealth also provides exciting opportunities for people who live in remote and rural areas, such as phototriage in the diagnosis of skin cancer, which is a fast-growing area of concern. That approach has been shown to be effective in the Highlands, but further work by Dr Morton—a dermatologist in Forth Valley—has demonstrated effective care through phototriage and that more than 100 specialist clinics could be freed up annually once the programme is rolled out. Currently, a number of health boards and ambulance services are developing or testing protocols for the management of chest pain. The one in Edinburgh is among the most advanced, but those in Grampian and other areas are not far behind. I understand that the first ambulance protocol led to a drop in thrombolysis treatment. That is regrettable but it is important in respect of what I propose. New patient testing with the necessary telelinks to the nearest cardiac catheterisation laboratory would help to ensure that, whatever their geographical situation, every individual patient was given the most appropriate, fastest, safest treatment—either thrombolysis or transfer to a cath lab for primary angioplasty. In that area of care, there is a need for national leadership. The protocols that are being developed are fragmented and, unless they are  joined up, we could end up not improving the situation as much as we might. Telelinks to local cath labs that are diverted to other regional or national centres when the individual labs are closed could give us a total national service that would not be fragmented and would ensure the best outcomes and efficiency. It is not possible to list all the projects, but I pay tribute to Professor Wootton and his predecessor, Gordon Peterkin, and James Ferguson, who developed the links between the accident and emergency unit in Aberdeen and 15 community hospitals, saving a lot of patient journeys. While longevity has risen in the past 10 years by about two-and-a-half months a year, we are not seeing a comparable improvement in the quality of health. It is in that context that the time has come to support telehealth pilots that have been developed in Scotland and elsewhere. By rolling the pilots out nationally, we will make Scotland a true world leader in modern health care, in which telecare and telehealth will at last play a full part.

As the cabinet secretary said, there are many issues to do with the virus that are not yet clear, such as its degree of contagion and the rates of mortality, so we are at the beginning of something rather than well through it. It is clear that we should work for the best, which is containment, but prepare for the worst. In 2000, the Health and Community Care Committee produced a report on influenza, for which I had the privilege of being the reporter to the committee. Preparation and testing of the system through exercise winter willow put us in one of the best positions in the world, which is excellent. In preparing for the possibility that things might get worse, does every NHS board have a register of retired NHS staff, including doctors, nurses, paramedics and porters, all of whom should surely now stand by to be ready to help backfill for staff who fall ill or who are exhausted? Does the  cabinet secretary agree that internet purchase of antivirals is not recommended, because the products are often not appropriate or suitable, and that people should not rush to the internet to purchase such products? Does she also agree that we should refer to the virus as an AH1N1 virus and stop using the term "swine flu"? That is in part because we are not sure that it is swine flu and also because the term suggests that pork and pork products might not be completely safe. We should reassure the public that those products are totally safe and that there is no evidence of any problem.

I join the First Minister in welcoming Monday's summit, which was indeed very useful. However, does he agree that there should, given the significant waiting times that are faced by too many addicts seeking treatment, and the stress of such situations on them, their families and—in some cases—their children, be a commitment to achieving in Scotland a similar waiting time for drug misusers to that in England, which is now less than four weeks?

Along with all other members, I welcome the public inquiry, which the families have long  campaigned for. I look forward to seeing the terms of reference, which I hope will be broad and will incorporate lessons from elsewhere. On the generality of tackling HAI, the cabinet secretary has announced a move to 100 per cent of beds being in single rooms in new-build hospitals, but there is a priority need now to be able to isolate affected patients. Has an audit been undertaken of the shortfall in isolation rooms? What progress does the cabinet secretary expect on delivering that? Two members have referred to anti-microbial prescribing. The figures for general practice prescribing are absolutely level, at just over 14 million scripts a year for the past three years. What specific action will the cabinet secretary take beyond encouraging general practitioners on that? What steps will she take to remove the public pressure on them to prescribe antibiotics?

I join other members in congratulating Hugh Henry on obtaining this debate on the 20 th anniversary of the Scottish Huntington's Association. I will not cover the ground that my colleagues have already covered—like Mary Scanlon, I have been crossing things off my list, so I will not talk about numbers, symptoms, the huge impact on families or the mistaken identification of intoxication. When I was serving on the chief scientist's committee in the 1990s, we funded a study to promote genetic counselling services in the Lothian area as a pilot scheme. Can the minister say whether that counselling service is now universal? It is vital that the families in which there is a 50:50 chance of inheritance should receive appropriate counselling. It is also important, now that we have the availability of predictive testing, that it is available to all who wish it. Not all will seek it, which is quite important to remember, but those who wish to have it should, after counselling, be able to obtain it. Can the minister confirm that predictive testing is available to all who seek it? We have moved on since I started in practice and first dealt with a family with Huntington's  chorea—testing is now available. In those days, the risk was unknown and people simply had to live with that. There is also now the possibility of family planning through in vitro fertilisation, and approval for two cycles of that has been given by the Scottish medicines consortium. Is universal counselling available in that regard, too? I gather that that process has only a 25 per cent success rate and that, at the moment, the service for the group of patients that we are discussing is available only at Guy's hospital. Is the minister prepared to consider having discussions with the regional health authorities in the north of England about the possibility of establishing a new centre for such treatment somewhere further north than London, so that people might have easier access to that way of creating a new family? We must consider how we can support these families in an integrated way. There needs to be integrated planning, integrated care pathways, effective standards of care, effective information in written form and on the internet and adequate advocacy services for families that are affected by the disease and individuals who are suffering from the disease beyond the stage at which their marriage has broken down, when they no longer have a spouse to support them. There need to be local audits of the mental health effects on individuals. I know that the SHA is keen for the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network to reconsider its decision on guidelines. I cannot say whether there is adequate research to allow it to establish further guidelines, but I ask the minister whether that has been considered recently and, if not, whether she is prepared to ask SIGN at least to reconsider its decision. Huntington's disease is the sixth most funded subject of research in the United States, and the European Union network of research is already making an effective contribution. I ask again what the Scottish Government is doing to contribute in the form of collaborative research approaches. I was disturbed to see that among the health boards that are named as not providing a service for the condition is the one in which I practised as a doctor—NHS Forth Valley. However, I was delighted to see that Fife, which is an area that I represent, was commended for its multidisciplinary teams. I say to the SHA that, after tonight's debate, I will write to NHS Forth Valley to ask what steps it will take to ensure that an effective service is provided. I am also aware that, once again, we are faced with short-term funding in some areas, such as my colleague Cathy Jamieson's area of Ayrshire and Arran, and I know that she will take up the issue to ensure that there is funding beyond 2011. Patients with Huntington's disease deserve our support and attention. I hope that the minister will  be able to answer some of the questions that I have put to her.

The cabinet secretary is addressing various issues. An issue that has not been raised is the high hedges problem that residents throughout Scotland have experienced. Will that issue be covered under the national framework for antisocial behaviour or under separate legislation?

Does the member agree that individuals who were being harassed were very often not even believed, which made it very difficult to establish the problem itself?

Does the member agree that a fundamental problem is that the behaviour, vandalism and aggression of a small minority towards other young people constrict the ability of those young people to participate in the diversions that are available? Unless we tackle the aggressive group seriously, the others will not be released to fulfil their aspirations.

I associate myself with some of the sombre remarks that members have made about yesterday's accident. The debate is serious and it must reflect where we have come from. Although she did not linger on it, Cathy Jamieson mentioned that we have moved a considerable way, not only in terms of what has been achieved in our health service, and what is continuing to be achieved under the present Administration, but in terms of the aspirations that we all have for the quality and timely delivery of the service. I join the cabinet secretary and the other members who have praised NHS staff for their achievements during the past 10 or 12 years in moving the health service forward. When I entered practice in 1970, I referred my first patient to an orthopaedic surgeon and received a note back that said that there was no doubt that the patient needed an operative procedure, but it was not urgent and would not be done before the surgeon retired. I inquired when the surgeon would be retiring, and was told that his retirement was about five years away. We have moved a long way from those rather dark days, when the health service's waiting lists were appalling. As I think the Liberals mentioned, NHS staff have not always found targets comfortable but, to be frank, I will not apologise to them for that. If clinical priorities are being distorted in a way that would put patients at risk, we need to take that seriously, but I do not believe that that is happening. I will return to that point later in my speech. When I carried out a word search on the draft of my speech, I found that the word "welcome" was used on about seven occasions. I thought, "My goodness—this will be a hard speech to deliver," so I will get the welcomes over quickly. I welcome the addition of the target on child and adolescent mental health, on which the Health and Sport Committee is currently carrying out an inquiry. There is a long way to go on that issue,  but the target is welcome. I welcome the cabinet secretary's assurance in her opening speech that the Government will consider the situation with adult mental health. Ian McKee, Mary Scanlon and Helen Eadie have referred to the enormous waiting lists for psychological treatment. There are workforce problems in relation to psychologists, which—although it will be difficult for the Parliament—need to be addressed. I am concerned that, in contrast with England, where 3,000 new therapists are being trained, we do not have the talking therapists who will be required to deliver on the joint targets on driving down the levels of antidepressant prescriptions. Those targets will not be met unless the therapists are in place. I hope that the NHS pilot on cognitive behavioural therapy by phone is successful, but I do not believe that it will be enough. I welcome the decision to have a HEAT target on drug waiting times, although—as I said yesterday—I have some concerns about exactly how the new drug and alcohol partnerships will deliver on that. It is an NHS target, and the local authorities will now be put in a more central spot through the community planning partnerships.

Mary Scanlon is right. The support has to be sustainable. I am sure that no member feels that waiting more than six months for assessment is good for the 872 patients who have had to do that, or for their families or children—we have debated that aspect; nor is it good for the public safety of the patients' communities, because some of the patients will commit crimes. It will be interesting to see the targets that the Government brings in for those areas, as it has announced that it will. Labour's 2007 manifesto promised that, if returned to power, we would tackle a number of issues—I am glad to say that most of them are being taken forward by the present Administration—including the use of availability status codes, which were always referred to as hidden waiting lists. I know that the press were persuaded to use that term; reporters had to ask me what the ASC actually meant. The availability status code was a simple system whereby people were put on a separate waiting list if they could not make themselves available or if their doctor decided that they were not available. The fact that the system was abused by management to deal with waiting lists was both unfortunate and regrettable, but we all agreed that the ASCs should be got rid of and they have been got rid of.  Therefore, we developed the new ways waiting times, which were then carried on by the current Administration. However, there are problems with the new ways waiting times. As Helen Eadie mentioned, I have pointed out some of those problems on previous occasions. The fact is that 100,000 people have been put off the lists for one of the 14 reasons. I welcome—that is another welcome—the fact that the reasons listed as items 50 and 51 in the index to the new ways waiting times document, which relate to interconsultant referrals, will now be cancelled. At least we will now have two fewer reasons why people should be put off the list. I remain concerned about the effect of the new system on some groups of people, including those with learning difficulties; those with communication difficulties, such as the deafblind; elderly people, especially those who are unsupported or have early dementia; the homeless; travelling people; prisoners; new immigrants; asylum seekers; some from black and minority ethnic communities who might have language problems; and some with mental health problems. We have a small amount of evidence so far that suggests that those groups might be squeezed by the new bureaucracy, but we do not have enough evidence to make a case or to have a debate on the matter. Nevertheless, I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that the Audit Scotland review looks closely at whether those vulnerable groups are being squeezed by the new bureaucracy that has been created. Another target on which we are all agreed is that no one attending accident and emergency should wait for more than four hours. More than any other, the four-hour A and E target has been the subject of protests from clinicians about false decisions being made in order to squeeze inside the target. We should send out the clear message from the Parliament that such targets are designed not to force clinicians into inappropriate decisions but to ensure that management supplies the resources that are necessary for the clinicians to undertake their work. I still hear from A and E consultants who are angry that, at three hours and 50 minutes, clinically unqualified managers almost bully them into sending patients home so that the target can be met. If a patient can be moved to a clinical decision unit to await the results of tests rather than be sent home just to meet a target, we need to find some more sophisticated way to allow that process because it is in the patient's interests. The interests of the patient should always be borne in mind. In that regard, I urge the cabinet secretary to look again at the emergency department information system—EDIS—which several reports suggest is not user friendly and might need to be reviewed.  As many members have mentioned, people are also waiting for appointments with allied health professionals. Last year, a census showed that 94,000 patients are on that waiting list. Is that the new hidden waiting list? We will see. As other members have mentioned, people are waiting to see podiatrists and physiotherapists as well as—I would add—orthoptists. Many groups of people are experiencing serious problems of waiting. Labour's manifesto committed us to delivering a nine-week waiting time guarantee for AHPs. I urge the cabinet secretary to consider that issue closely. In that regard, I understand that referrals from consultants to allied health professionals or from allied health professionals to consultants do not come within the current waiting time guarantee. That needs to be sorted.

As I understand it from my discussions with allied health professionals and from my reading of the census that was carried out last year, there are 2,600 separate waiting lists. This is not a criticism of the Government—we did not tackle the issue because we had other priorities, which the Government now shares—but I believe that the issue now needs further attention. I hope that Shona Robison will refer to that when she sums up the debate. The Labour amendment draws a comparison with waiting times in England. I do not suggest that we emulate England's approach, which was taken to tackle the particular problems that it faced. Over the past 10 years, the Scottish health service has adopted a collaborative and co-operative approach that does not seek—this is one reason why we will not vote for the Tory amendment this evening—to build capacity within the private sector. Nevertheless, the fact that 93 per cent of in-patients and 97 per cent of out-patients in England now have a whole-journey wait of less than 18 weeks for treatment is a significant achievement. We are now falling behind, so we need to redouble our efforts if we are to maintain things. The cabinet secretary said that median waiting times do not reflect the individual patient's experience. That is of course correct, but the median waiting time in England for the whole journey for in-patient treatment is now 62 days compared with our 79 days. We need to be realistic about the fact that we are falling behind and we need to ensure that pressure is maintained. Finally, we need to look ahead. We need to begin now a process of debating a more sophisticated system that goes beyond the target  that has been set for 2011. We need to begin the discussion with the public, with professionals and within the Parliament on how we can achieve individual waiting time guarantees for conditions to reflect the needs of patients more appropriately. That discussion could begin now. I ask members to support our amendment.

I am fascinated by the member's speech, but is he saying that we should allow ambulance arrival times to drift later and later? When someone has had a heart attack, for example, speed is of the essence, so the targets are entirely reasonable. They are also rational, as they are set at 75 per cent rather than 100 per cent. The Conservative party's ideological opposition to targets is ridiculous.

The rate of referral for such things as computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging scans by general practitioners is hugely lower in Scotland than it is in England. There seems to be a major barrier to such referrals. Does the member agree that, if we loosened that up, it would improve the effectiveness and throughput of the service?

We would all agree that availability status code waiting lists should be abolished. In fact,  Labour set that abolition in train. However, will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that the statistics on waiting times, median waiting times and so on used to take the ASC waiting lists into account but no longer do so? The statistics therefore need to be considered slightly differently, because 100,000 patients are now off the lists, and many of them would previously have been on the ASC lists.

I refer to the entry in the register of members' interests relating to my work as a consultant psychiatrist on addictions and to my membership of the Royal College of Psychiatrists and the Royal College of General Practitioners. I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement, but I am not convinced that it takes us an awful lot further. A considerable amount of material is still to come out. However, I welcome the report of the delivery reform group, and I look forward to the Government's response to it. I also welcome the report from Audit Scotland, although it is regrettable that the information on funding is still so complex and difficult to identify. However, that is not the fault of the drug action teams. I therefore ask the minister whether, with the abolition of the DATs, which has been suggested, it will be possible to protect the good work done by many DATs and ensure that all stakeholders will continue to be engaged? Will he assure us that such things will not be lost because of an administrative change? The minister referred to waiting times, which he rightly described as unacceptable. There are 872 people who have been waiting more than six months to be assessed, of whom 28 per cent are in Grampian and 20 per cent are in Lothian. Why has the Scottish National Party broken its manifesto promise to increase funding by 20 per cent? Funding for drugs is going up by only 14 per cent, and workers are being made redundant. When will the HEAT target be published for consultation? The target is clearly important, although it seems to apply to health but not to local authorities, so how it will relate to community planning partnerships, which deliver, is unclear. Perhaps the minister can clarify that. Finally, when will the minister place the details of the event on 20 April in the Scottish Parliament information centre?

We are in a devolved Parliament. In Scotland, the level of alcoholic cirrhosis is more than twice the EU level and we have a much more rapidly developing problem. Along with the SNP Government, we will seek a Scottish solution to our problems, and I hope that there will be a consensus in that regard.

One of the things that disappoint me most is the Government's failure to follow through on the work of the national licensing forum, which provided essential support to local boards, and to monitor the extent to which support for boards varies. The Government said that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities could do that job.

Unlike my Liberal Democrat colleagues, I welcome the Government's acceptance that the issue should be moved to the health portfolio and that there should be proper debate on it. The issue is too serious to do anything else. I am wearing four hats in the debate: as shadow public health spokesperson, as a member of the Health and Sport Committee—as Christine Grahame said, the committee will have an important role to play in all of this—as the chairman of the cross-party group on drug and alcohol misuse, and as a former psychiatrist who dealt with the alcohol problems with which we are confronted. As Frank McAveety said, the problem with debating alcohol as a justice issue is that it runs the risk of demonising drink. The difference between drink and smoking is that smoking is totally pernicious—there is no benefit—whereas drinking in moderation is a health benefit. We run a grave risk of demonising drink and of being perceived by the public to be doing that, and some of the debate on justice aspects has contributed to that. In the sort of thoughtful speech that we have come to expect from Nigel Don, he said that we have to separate out the issues. As other members rightly said, the central problem in the debate is excessive drinking by a very substantial minority and not the public safety issue that we have all seemed to concentrate on and which has taken up much of the debate in the press. There has been a massive rise in cirrhosis among the over-40s. Also, 11 per cent of emergency attendances are associated with alcohol, and they relate mainly to the over-40s. Indeed, the most significant growth is among over-60s. We need to tackle the group of people who have developed an inappropriate cultural approach to alcohol over a long period of time. We also need to look at the growth of alcohol consumption among women, which has been even greater than the growth of consumption among men. What we do in Scotland has to be the subject of debate in the Scottish Parliament. Why? Because the problem is hugely greater in Scotland than in England. Over the past few years, there has been a marked rise in alcohol consumption in England, but England has reached only the European Union average for cirrhosis whereas the figure for  Scotland is 2.3 times that average, and rising. We need to find Scottish solutions to what is essentially a Scottish problem. Labour will not act in haste. We did not do so on the proposal to raise the off-sales purchase age to 21—we took a few weeks to examine the evidence before saying that, as a public health measure, it was a non-starter. We will consider proposals carefully and take the opportunity that has been afforded by the Government's change of heart to enter into a debate. That is reflected in the fact that, for the first time in this session, we produced an amendment that was identical to one lodged by the Government.

I am afraid that I do not have time to take an intervention. Last night, we looked at the issue of minimum pricing and heard a presentation by a consultant psychiatrist who favours the measure. A representative of the Scotch Whisky Association told us that there might be problems with what he called commoditisation—at some point, I will look up the word to find out what in heaven's name he meant by that. We need to balance the industry's concerns with those of clinicians, who definitely favour minimum pricing. However, there must be no doubt that the consumption of alcohol is price sensitive; all the papers, including those from Sheffield and the Australian medical colleges, are clear on that fact. We need to have a debate but, as Cathy Jamieson said, we must ensure that we are not seen to punish impoverished moderate drinkers. We need to achieve a balance. When we see that alcopops and Buckfast are not affected by minimum pricing, we realise that we have a job of work to do. Undoubtedly, some of the problems are not price related but cultural. Thirty-nine of the 150 sections of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, which was Labour's attempt to move us forward on the issue, have not yet been implemented. Those include sections relating to drunkenness and to the consideration by licensing boards of overprovision of licensed premises. It is important not only that we implement all sections of the 2005 act but that we enforce them. So far, enforcement of the legislation has been tragically weak—it needs to be reinforced. Labour is up for this debate and is prepared to try to reach agreement on issues. However, it must be a careful and mature debate.

I pay tribute to Mary Scanlon and the Conservative party for lodging this morning's motion, which does, indeed, pay tribute to the previous Administration for commissioning the pilot scheme at Stracathro. That is a rare accolade, and it led me to look a great deal more closely at the evaluation of the Stracathro project. My colleague Helen Eadie will address some of the critical points arising from that evaluation, which were rather skipped over by Mary Scanlon.

It will become clear as my speech progresses that we are in no way ashamed of what we did in Government. We are very pragmatic in our approach. The Scottish regional treatment centre has made a positive contribution for patients. It has reduced waiting times for many patients with painful and debilitating conditions. That success has been achieved by increasing the number of spaces that are available for elective surgery, ensuring that the treatment is efficient and convenient, while maintaining high levels of care. The SRTC allows us to keep open a valued resource at Stracathro hospital—that was a very important factor in the decision that we reached, in response to the campaign in the area to keep the local facility open. It was Labour's aim over its term in office to utilise the skills and capacity of the private sector to overcome NHS capacity issues on a temporary basis, and I am pleased that the proposals have worked so well at Stracathro. Independent health care organisations can provide great flexibility, particularly by introducing new and innovative care—not that the NHS is bad at introducing that. However, on occasions, it is necessary for us to use the private sector to instigate changes and to ensure adaptation.

In a speech of four minutes, I do not have time to do that. There is no doubt, however, that there are areas where it can play a  role. For example, the private sector has done work on breast cancer and on infertility. Innovative work has been done in the private sector. That is in no way to detract from the NHS, which has produced the preponderance of innovation, but using the private sector can be very helpful to the NHS when it comes to mass change. We developed the SRTC to ensure a greater balance of facilities in the east. It was appropriate for people in the west to go to the Golden Jubilee national hospital, and the nationalisation of that establishment was an important factor in creating the necessary capacity.

I have taken enough interventions, and I have to get on—I am sorry. The Golden Jubilee hospital provides a great resource and provides capacity that boards themselves are unable to provide. Many patients are still waiting on long lists, with 18 weeks from treatment to the out-patient stage, and 18 weeks from out-patient to treatment. That will change, and there will be capacity needs in future. The Minister for Public Health and Sport has said that the Government will use the independent sector not strategically but tactically, and I understand that, but it will become necessary to ensure that there is adequate capacity to meet the new, very challenging, targets. The use of the private sector will need to continue. The standards of those independent sector services that we use must be the same as those for the public sector and that is certainly the case at Stracathro. Patients get a choice about the date and time of their initial appointment, which is now usually within six weeks of referral. It is important that it has been possible to achieve that. Satisfaction ratings exceed 90 per cent for the treatment centre, and the incidence of health care acquired infection is low. I was very impressed with the centre when I toured it, and Tayside NHS Board was pretty satisfied with the treatment available there. Nevertheless, patients still have to travel quite long distances. In the longer term, it will be important to build capacity within the NHS to ensure that that is where the overwhelming majority of procedures are carried out. Mary Scanlon mentioned Medacs Healthcare, and I am pleased that the prison medical service is to be brought back into the NHS. That is important. A pragmatic decision was made because it was not possible for the NHS to undertake the service as we wanted it to be undertaken. However, it has now been agreed in principle that both nursing and medical services in  the prison service will be brought back into the NHS. I hope that that will happen quickly. Labour will continue to maintain a totally pragmatic approach in which the interests of patients are put first. When we undertake work with the private sector, it will be done entirely on that basis. The Labour Party will certainly support the Liberal Democrat amendment. I move amendment S3M-3796.1, to leave out from "and pays" to end and insert: "with its high level of patient approval and welcomes the Scottish Regional Treatment Centre's contribution to maintaining Stracathro Hospital as both a local and regional resource; notes the success of the nationalisation of the HCI hospital in Clydebank, now the Golden Jubilee National Hospital, and recognises the contribution of both these units and their staff in achieving the continuing reduction in waiting times."

Like other members, I welcome the statement. Indeed, I will go a little further and congratulate the cabinet secretary on wrestling appropriately with a very difficult issue. Ultimately, medicine is not entirely a science; it is also an art, and individuals really matter. I have a couple of specific questions. First, the cabinet secretary mentioned three of the special factors that the SMC will take into account in its approval process. When will the full list be published? Will they be consulted on before their publication? After all, the readdressing of the quality-adjusted life year measurement—and, indeed, quality of life issues—is important. Secondly, the cabinet secretary said in her statement that no one should be refused treatment if it will have "demonstrable benefit". Of course, she has alluded to the fact that what might be seen as benefiting one person will not necessarily be seen as benefiting someone else. How will that issue be dealt with in the list of exceptional needs? Will a set of principles be established, even though it is understood that such principles will not be able to cover every individual circumstance?

Given the 25 per cent mortality rate for the first 16 cases of C difficile ribotype 078 that have been identified in Scotland and Health Protection Scotland's view that ribotype 078 is as toxic as ribotype 027, why will the protocol that requires samples to be submitted for typing to the national laboratory not be amended to include a requirement to submit samples from any hospital where ribotype 078 is identified?

I join other members in thanking the cabinet secretary and the bill team for working flexibly with the Health and Sport Committee. I thank colleagues on the committee and all those who have given evidence on the bill for their work. The Parliament can be proud of the fact that it has moved quite a long way since it was established in 1999. When we first gathered to look at the state of the NHS, the available guidance on how the public was to be consulted on health service issues was, to say the least, antiquated. As Ian McKee said, it reflected a situation in which the NHS was often autocratic and paternalistic. In the past 20 years or so, we have moved to a situation of far greater partnership in the delivery of health care. It is therefore entirely appropriate that the public should have a sense of ownership of how services are delivered at an operational and strategic level. The bill will help to deliver that. Ross Finnie, Mary Scanlon and others have made the point that, in the period between 1999 and the introduction of the bill, a number of changes have substantially altered the process and have resulted in different health boards progressing at different rates. When considering the proposal for elected health boards, we should not allow that progress to be lost. Those boards that have moved are now involved in a process of genuine consultation, using public forums, citizens juries and a range of other mechanisms that have been introduced. As many members have said, that does not remove the problem of making hard decisions when communities are divided. I remember the discussions on where the new hospital in the Forth Valley NHS Board area would be placed. Falkirk wanted it in Falkirk, Stirling wanted it in Stirling and, as I represented mainly the Clackmannan area, I did not care as long as we got a bridge that gave us rapid access to it. I ended up being the meat in the sandwich between the two groups, but a decision had to be made. There was wide consultation and a decision was reached that was accepted. There were people around in 1999 whose view of consultation was, "This is the option that we  have decided on, which is what you will accept, and we will now consult." That is not consultation. Unfortunately, some health boards still have a culture problem in that respect, which will not be totally solved by the pilots. Some may see the pilots as overly cautious; they may ask why we did not move to direct elections for all health boards. I sensed, from their final speeches, an unusual partnership developing between Dr McKee and Bill Butler. Had Dr McKee been in the Parliament in the previous session, there might have been a different configuration of support for Bill Butler's proposal for directly elected health boards as a totality. It is important that the evaluation of the pilots is robust, and the Parliament's decisions today have reflected that. With due respect to our Conservative colleagues, it is not only about the economic climate, although that is important. The evaluation must be robust and must demonstrate that the elections add value to the process of ensuring democratic accountability, as well as a sense of ownership. It must also demonstrate that elections do not undermine the existing structures of participation, but add to them, and it must commence well before the elections so that the baselines of existing participation and consultation processes can be fully established. The super-affirmative resolution, which will be accepted at decision time and was accepted in an amendment to the bill, has been an important element of the bill as it has emerged. In 1948 we gained a new institution, which no party would now try to remove, but in doing so we lost one thing: local community control. Until that point, health services were local rather than national. When the Parliament votes at decision time, it will re-establish a degree of local control, which is important. I support Ross Finnie's view—I hope that the cabinet secretary will work with us on the matter—that the involvement of a substantial number of councillors, not only at the level of community health partnerships but on the health board, should be one of the alternative pilots. That would test a more economic version of representation, albeit indirect, and it would allow us to come back at the time of the super-affirmative resolution, if that occurs, and find out what the best method is for ensuring the democratic accountability that the whole of the Parliament wants.

I will be brief. Amendment 5 recognises the crucial importance of having an independent evaluator in place sufficiently ahead of the pilot health board elections taking place. By agreeing to the amendment, we will ensure that the person who is tasked with the evaluation of the pilot schemes is appointed at least three months before the health board elections are held. That will allow them to set out fully the scope of their assessment and to establish a baseline around a board's public engagement and local accountability activity prior to the elections. I thank the cabinet secretary for working with me on the amendment. I move amendment 5.

I decided to comment because I suspected that Jackson Carlaw was going to make that speech. It seems to me that the Conservatives have a difficulty: their predominant objection is to the cost of the elections, yet the cabinet secretary made it clear that she has not ruled out the use of personal identifiers in full roll-out of the elections. If we are to test the proposal properly in the pilot  stage, we also need to test the costs. If we are to do that properly, we must include the use of personal identifiers. I will not reiterate the arguments that my colleague Jackie Baillie has made, but I stress that what happened in 2007 makes the point about the credibility and validity of the pilot elections much more important than it would otherwise have been.

I do not think that that alters my argument. The £800,000 cost for the pilots might make the difference between the elections being credible and not being credible. If the elections are questioned on the basis of credibility, Parliament will be in a very difficult position when we come to debate full roll-out. Therefore, I hope that Parliament will oppose the amendment.

Further to the answers that the First Minister has given, can he invite his cabinet secretary to take steps to move beyond the 48-hour access guarantee to ensure best practice for appointments and ensure that not only rapid access for emergency matters but routine appointments when patients request them in  advance are applied throughout the whole of general practice?

Given the challenging targets that, rightly, have been set for the Scottish Ambulance Service, does the cabinet secretary feel that the funding for the service will be adequate to provide for an effective inter-hospital transfer service—which is supposed to be developed—the service that is needed for percutaneous coronary intervention across the west and east of the central belt, and the implementation of the new Health Facilities Scotland guidance on cleaning that is being discussed?

This has been a good debate, so let me begin with some positives. We welcome the follow-up report to the independent review of the Vale of Leven outbreak, which makes it clear that substantial progress has been made. We welcome the changes to the HAI task force programme that the cabinet secretary has announced, particularly the hospital-by-hospital reporting and the new web portal. Let me be clear that we in no way doubt the Government's concern about making progress on HAI generally. Indeed, we welcome the undoubted progress on MRSA that NHS staff have achieved even before the pilots have reported. Despite what Dr McKee implied, we do not suggest that it might be possible in future to eliminate all health care associated infections. Such a suggestion would be foolish, as that will not be possible. MRSA, C difficile, norovirus and vancomycin-resistant enterococci—which is another new infection on the horizon—will be with us, so they will need to be tackled effectively.  Our concern is that the current situation is not advancing quickly enough. For example, the cabinet secretary reminded us—quite rightly—of the substantial increase in funding that the Government has put into tackling HAIs, but that is mainly for the MRSA pilots, which will swallow a huge amount of the funding. The recent Audit Scotland report highlighted a £512 million backlog in maintenance, which we need to deal with to tackle HAI infection. Hospitals with maintenance problems are more likely to have HAIs. Audit Scotland reported that PPP hospitals are well maintained, but all those other facilities need to be dealt with. For example, temperature-controlled and automatic washing basins are vital. Further to Alasdair Allan's comments, I point out that if people turn on the taps to wash their hands thoroughly and then need to turn the taps off, they will transfer the bacteria that they had put on the taps back on to their hands. We need modern facilities urgently. Labour recognised that MRSA and C difficile were growing problems, as Christine Grahame mentioned. C difficile hardly existed 10 years ago. Previously, it was a commensal, largely non-symptomatic, organism. We recognised that C difficile had increased and, as it were, had come up on the rails, so we tried to draw together all the work on the issue by setting up a HAI task force in 2006, but items that were on the agenda of the task force's first meeting—the minutes of which I have read thoroughly—are still on the agenda today. For example, the dress code that is now being implemented was on the very first agenda. The Cairns Smith report identifies "implementation of the NHS Dress Code" as one of the issues that are still outstanding.

Christine Grahame has not listened to the point I have been making. We set up the HAI task force, which has been continued and has produced 56 points. Revised information and guidance on death associated with C difficile has been issued to medical practitioners. That was not an issue eight years ago, but it is an issue now. Implementation of the outcome that we all want to achieve, which the HAI task force plan indicates, seems to be rather leisurely and slow in some places. The issue has not had the impetus  that it is now being given following the tragic incident at the Vale of Leven hospital. As my colleagues mentioned, the health service in England has met the target of a 30 per cent reduction in C difficile. In the south-east and in other regions, targets of 50 and 55 per cent are now being set. We need to revise our targets and to make progress. I ask the cabinet secretary to be cautious in interpreting the statistics that are reported. In England, the health service has met its target of a reduction in C difficile on the whole of the previous year of 2007. In Scotland, we have not achieved a reduction in the rate of C difficile associated disease in the rate per bed occupancy, which is Health Protection Scotland's preferred measure. The rate increased in the two winter quarters but decreased in the two summer quarters. HPS said that that was a "seasonal variation", but the cabinet secretary's press releases said that the reduction was a trend. That might be the case, but there is no way of telling. Given that public confidence was undermined by the Vale of Leven situation, I urge the cabinet secretary to be cautious in interpreting the statistics.

I accept that entirely, but the cabinet secretary's press release called it a reduction. I just urge caution. Do I have one minute left, cabinet secretary—I mean Presiding Officer—to conclude? [ Laughter. ] Sorry, all the promotions of the past week are getting to me. I will finish by making a couple of serious points. First, we have an alphabet soup of organisations and systems. Their functions might be clear to the organisations themselves, but I can say as a doctor that it has taken me many days of work and many meetings with the individual organisations even to begin to comprehend their function and role. How can the public have clarity? We have HPS and HFS—health facilities Scotland—as well as NHS QIS, the care commission, health and safety at work, statistical process control, the SPORS reporting system, hand hygiene surveillance and even Audit Scotland. The system is too complex, so it needs to be simplified and focused. That is why we have recommended a single leader to help us achieve that focus. The Cairns Smith report that was published this week states:  "Restructuring ... has produced a much clearer and simpler structure, with clear lines of responsibility and accountability." We need that nationally. Presiding Officer, I realise that I should probably close now. This has been a good debate; members have drawn together a lot of serious issues and given some very good examples of their personal experiences and those of their constituents. Unless we draw together all the issues—hand washing, the environment, antibiotic policy, testing of toxins and death certification—and ensure that guidance is clear and standardised, we will not secure the public confidence that we all seek. I hope that the 15-point plan that we have produced will be seen as building on and complementing the 57 points that the HAI task force suggested. I hope that we will achieve that. Let me make one last point. The public must be seen as our partners in this. Public involvement is taking place at a number of levels. In NHS Forth Valley, we now have members of the public on the team walking the wards—

That is partnership.

I hope that Christine Grahame will acknowledge that it was Sam Galbraith who said, when he was a minister, that there should be no further privatisation of cleaning. That approach has been in place for almost a decade.

Where will the new care environment inspectorate sit within the organisational structures that are currently involved in tackling HAI?

I add my congratulations to Irene Oldfather for today's result. It is a testament to the hard work that she has put in, and to the hard work of others such as Dr Gillian McLean, Professor June Andrews and Jan Killeen of Alzheimer Scotland. I declare an interest as a psychiatrist who has connections as an honorary chair at the University of Stirling, having previously carried out some research on dementia at that university.  Other members have referred to the fact that there are some 60,000 sufferers of dementia, of whom two thirds are in the community. In 1980, I was part of a mental health planning group that produced the Timbury report, which was largely ignored. We estimated at that time that there were only about 20,000 people with the condition, which demonstrates how much it has increased. As the "Mirage of Health", as it has been described, changes—as heart disease begins to decline, as it has done for 15 years, and as we begin to tackle cancer more effectively—the next element of ill health that will be prominent is dementia, so it is right that we are debating the issue. It is a challenging task, as Mary Scanlon said, to diagnose dementia in A and E, but if poorer levels of cognition and poor memory at least are not recognised in that setting, the people who work in that setting are doomed to achieve a great deal less than they otherwise might. Mary Scanlon said that 70 per cent of patients with dementia who present at A and E are not already diagnosed, which is true, but it is also estimated that about 25 per cent of A and E patients suffer from dementia. It is, therefore, important that the proper tools are put in place. To begin with, we need formal guidelines, but I note that no such guidelines are mentioned in the report. We need to ensure that the triage tools that are used are more sensitive to dementia, and that cognitive function is assessed, rather than simply using the Glasgow coma scale for people with depressed consciousness. There is a need for the use of appropriate tools to achieve much fuller psychological assessments, such as the mini mental state examination, a memory impairment scale or other validated brief intervention tools that would allow diagnosis. It is important that people in A and E are properly trained—the specialist nurses to which the report refers can play a part in that, along with places such as the Dementia Services Development Trust in Stirling. If people are aware and adequately trained, they will be much more able to deal with those issues. Staff need to consider issues other than those that are usually straightforward. They need to consider things such as hydration and nutrition, because dementia patients are often not aware that they have not had a drink or a meal. Issues such as drug toxicity, to which Dr McKee referred, are also important, because they can occur more in people who are confused and are not taking their medication appropriately. We have talked repeatedly in the chamber about violence towards staff, which is very unwelcome in any setting, but staff need to recognise and remember that aggression, for example, in some patients may be a presentation of pain. Other  members have referred to the emergency care record, which needs to be flagged up as part of the quality and outcomes framework contract in general practice so that NHS 24 can try to ensure that patients are managed at home and not brought to hospital. If patients do go to hospital, NHS 24 can warn A and E that the person suffers from dementia. Also, hospital pharmacists—not only in A and E, but in the general hospital—need to have access to the emergency care record. I have asked parliamentary questions on that matter. We can make progress, but it is important that this group of people, who are often neglected, achieve and receive the support that they need. Such people must never be boarded out—that is, they must not be transferred to another ward for the purpose of releasing a bed. Even moving a patient with dementia from one bed to another within a ward is not appropriate. Protocols and measures must be put in place. I welcome the Government's response to the cross-party group's report, and I again congratulate those who were involved in its early production. I was glad to be present towards the end of its production; I hope that my comments were helpful.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to ensure that every primary school pupil receives two hours of high-quality physical education per week. (S3O-5813)

It has become clear to the Health and Sport Committee in its current investigation into pathways into sport that, in too many schools, two hours of physical education are not being delivered, never mind at a high quality. How does the Government assess levels of physical literacy for primary 4 to 7 pupils? What steps will be taken to ensure that the physical literacy of individual  pupils is measured with the same emphasis as numeracy and literacy?

When the cabinet secretary next meets the chief constable for Tayside Police or other chief constables, will he discuss the treatment of people with substance misuse problems in custody suites? There is still a problem with treatment being interrupted when people go into custody suites because treatments other than methadone are used.

I congratulate Karen Whitefield on lodging the motion. Over 75 years, Diabetes UK has made an enormous contribution to improvements in care for patients with diabetes. The most important point is that it has demonstrated the need for partnership between those who provide care and those who previously received care but who are now true partners in the management of their condition. When Banting and Best discovered insulin, diabetes was a killer condition. Unfortunately, it is still a killer condition, in that the complications of stroke, myocardial infarction, renal failure and amputation with complications can all lead to death. Also, figures from ISD Scotland show that the prevalence of diabetes is reaching the level of 3.7 per 100. The management and treatment of diabetes are therefore enormously important. I remember that when I was a general practitioner in the 1970s, the regrettable death of one of our younger diabetic patients stimulated our looking into the care of diabetic patients in our practice. At the time, we assumed that the type 1 diabetics and the severe type 2 diabetics who  were on insulin injections were being looked after by the hospital alone and that we did not need to concern ourselves with them, other than in making referrals. We were slightly more doubtful about those whose type 2 diabetes was managed by oral medicine, but we thought that those whose condition was managed by diet alone were our responsibility. We carried out an audit, which showed that our assumptions were completely wrong: the hospital was not looking after all the type 1 diabetics, the type 2 diabetics were falling between the stools of primary care and secondary care, and many of those whose condition was being managed by diet alone were not being supported adequately. We then talked to our patients about their care. The fundamental difference that has been made over the past 25 years is that doctors and those who are responsible for providing care have talked to and listened to patients. Patients become experts in their own care, so our listening to them is of fundamental importance. We now have the NHS QIS standards of 2002, a framework that was introduced in 2006 and an overview of where we are that was produced by NHS QIS and Diabetes UK. We have improved, thanks to work by groups such as the Tayside medicines monitoring unit and the diabetes audit and research in Tayside Scotland study in Dundee, which have changed fundamentally the co-ordination of primary and secondary care—we now have mini-clinics and a degree of self-management. However, there is still a long way to go. We have to ensure that all the measures to which studies have quite rightly referred are instituted properly. The Scottish care information-diabetes collaboration project was implemented by only six health boards in 2007. I hope that the minister will tell us that 14 boards have now implemented it. Single records, whereby an entry by one member of staff goes on to a diabetic record that applies across the whole health service, are still not in place—they have to be implemented. There has to be regular audit, both collectively and individually. The quality and outcomes framework—the new GP contract—has helped enormously in the recording of all the measures around diabetes and its management, but, again, there is some way to go. I hope that we will have programmes that implement all the recommendations in the action plan. Way to go, which is run in the Forth Valley Health Board area, is an excellent example of an education programme. As Nigel Don said, we will be faced with the challenge of obesity. It is a fundamental challenge, as it could lead to an explosion of diabetes. If we  do not tackle it, we will have serious problems. We need to consider the use of insulin pumps and other technology, including information systems. On whole-organ transplant, we will need to increase the number of pancreas transplants in particular. Obesity is the main challenge, however, and it must be faced. The Government is going some way to doing that, but the issue must be addressed by the whole community—by the health service and the public alike.

That is the most rapid response to a question that I have heard from a Government. Does the minister agree that any response by the Government should be based not on the scale of the responses, but on the merits of the case, particularly recognising the low density and geographically disparate distribution of workers in the industry? Does the Government agree that the International Labour Organization convention 99, and article 2 of the Council of Europe's social charter, which calls for "additional .. holidays or reduced ... hours for workers engaged in dangerous or unhealthy occupations", apply to that group of workers? If so, does the Government accept that the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board is the most effective mechanism for regulating and setting agriculture workers' terms and conditions?

I echo the minister's comment that the whole chamber supports this programme. However, what are the arrangements for dividing confiscated criminal assets between the United Kingdom and Scottish jurisdictions for use by Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs and the cashback for communities programme? What discussions has the minister had and will he have to take the matter forward?

When the cabinet secretary next meets the chairman or the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, will she discuss C difficile, in the light of the inquiry into the issue at the Vale of Leven hospital and of the most recent figures, published yesterday, which show that the number of cases across the NHS rose by 10 per cent in the year to September 2008. Even Health Protection Scotland's preferred rate, the number of cases relative to the number of occupied beds, shows no diminution in comparison with the rate in England, where there has been an annualised reduction of 20 per cent. Will the cabinet secretary look at Labour's comprehensive proposals to tackle the problem? Will she raise some of those issues with the chief executive or the chair of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde?

Clearly, there is almost unanimity across the chamber for the principles of the bill. In no small measure, that is due to the work of the Health and Sport Committee and to those who gave evidence and responded to the consultation. I pay tribute to the responses that the cabinet secretary made in working with the committee. She also worked with the grain of the committee report in agreeing to make changes to the bill at later stages.  Cathy Jamieson outlined some of the history. There is no doubt that there is still a considerable measure of public dissatisfaction with the workings of health boards. That is notwithstanding the fact that since the Stobhill inquiry report—on which I had the pleasure of acting as reporter to the Health and Community Care Committee and which led to significant change in the consultation process at the beginning of the Parliament—we have seen the decluttering under which the number of boards fell from 42 to 14; the implementation of patient-focused public involvement in 2004; the creation of the Scottish health council in 2005; and the latest innovation of the independent scrutiny panel. From the evidence that the committee received and the general public discussion to which many members have referred, there is no doubt on the matter. I think that we all can agree on the need to strengthen the public consultation process. Albeit that many members have made the point, it is important that we all say on the record that direct elections to health boards will not of themselves entirely solve the problem. The purpose of the bill—I hope that it achieves it—is to improve the accountability of boards. Among many members, Jackie Baillie, Michael Matheson and Gil Paterson referred to public dissatisfaction about the perception, at least, of the lack of accountability. A number of members including Ian McKee and Angela Constance raised the issue of the diversity of boards. Based on Inclusion Scotland's evidence, it is true to say that the boards do not have wide representation. That is the case for those who apply for board membership and for appointees. Indeed, women make up 35 per cent of board membership and yet form 52 per cent of the population. The age range of the majority of those appointed is between 51 and 60. There is also an underrepresentation of the disabled, although there is reasonable representation from the black and minority ethnic community, in that representation is almost equivalent to the BME population of Scotland. Bill Butler and other members, including Michael Matheson, referred to the need for a change of culture. That is perhaps the bill's most important potential achievement—we will see from the pilots. The culture needs to be changed. The decision by diktat, which was manifest in most boards in the 1990s, has changed to a culture in which attempts at consultation are made, but the diversity of consultation and the variations in practice have not yet been ironed out by the Scottish health council—although it is only just over three years old. It has some way to go to ensure that best practice is followed in consultation. Whether that is done using an open forum, citizens' juries, or independent facilitators, the measures that are taken must provide confidence. If boards give  answers of the sort that Jackie Baillie mentioned, and it is revealed that no changes were made to the consultation process despite various pre-consultation discussions, that betrays a continuing attitude problem. The cabinet secretary and other members have indicated clearly that boards will still need to take some very hard decisions that will be against, or will appear to be against, certain communities. Today's debate has sparked some interesting discussions, some of which do not come under the general principles of the bill that is before us, although they will nevertheless be important for the Parliament to consider. The structure of the board as a whole is important, not just the questions of directly elected members and of the appointment of lay members and how the lay membership might be made more diverse. There is a question around the role of executive members and whether they are in effect a composite group, the bulk of which, as a result of their health expertise and knowledge, are able to exert a disproportionate effect and act as a payroll vote, as someone described it. As a collective, their contributions might have an overbearing effect on boards. Perhaps we need to address that in future. The issue of whether board membership should be 50 per cent plus one directly elected, or 50 per cent plus one local councillors and directly elected members will be determined at stage 2. Bill Butler has indicated his intention to move an amendment to apply the minimum to directly elected members. I very much welcome the fact that local councillors will have a legislated-for position on health boards, which will be helpful. One pilot that the cabinet secretary might like to consider would be to have 50 per cent plus one councillors on one board. That would certainly be a lot less expensive, and it would incorporate the local communities' views—councillors can be dismissed if they oppose the wishes of their communities. Most members have welcomed the intention to consider other pilots. Another pilot might be to give money to a board to strengthen the consultation processes in a way that is proportionate to what the elections would have cost. We could see what difference that makes. Hopefully, we are genuinely proceeding with what we have all agreed is necessary. Many members stressed the need for an independent review. That will be important for establishing the benefit of the directly elected boards under the pilots. Many of the problems to which members have referred involve the postal voting system. Christine Grahame, Cathy Jamieson and others indicated  that, if the elections are to be valid, postal vote verification will probably be necessary. We have had trouble with elections before, and we do not want something to happen with the postal vote—perhaps because of a strong community issue—that would throw discredit on to direct health board elections. We recognise that postal voting would increase the costs. Members raised the issue of 16-year-olds and 17-year-olds voting; the problem is not so much their voting, but whether the register, which would include 15-year-olds, should be open. That is a significant problem. The costs of the election pilots have risen from £2.85 million to £3.63 million. The costs of the elections themselves have already risen from £13.5 million through £16.65 million to £20.52 million, if we include—according to the letter from the cabinet secretary—postal vote verification. I am sure that she will correct me during her summing-up speech if that is wrong. The Royal College of Nursing was concerned about the diversion of funding from front-line services. Mary Scanlon and Jackie Baillie referred to the problem of the diversity in size of boards, and asked whether different constituencies within the board areas could be represented. That is indeed a significant problem, which will need to be examined closely. The need to ensure diversity and equality in the boards in totality once elected members join appointed members will create considerable administrative problems if we are to ensure that all groups are represented. The pilots will allow us to test the important point on which the Parliament now appears to be entirely agreed: given that the current boards, notwithstanding the best efforts of lay members, are still not adequately accountable—or are not perceived to be adequately accountable—changes are necessary. The pilots, which our party will support—including the Liberal Democrat amendment—will test that adequately. They will allow us to ensure that Scotland's health boards are recognised by their communities as accountable.

Will the member give way on that point?

In the past five years, the number of people entering custody has fallen below the number of those who receive non-custodial sentences. That reversal was achieved by the previous Administration and—to give credit—has been continued by the present Administration. The member should not ascribe policies to the Opposition in the way that he just has.

I do not think that the parties are in disagreement on that. Can I give the member an example? When I was working in her constituency, I was assaulted by a drug dealer, who then got four months. Is such a person not to go to prison for punishment? We are not going to alter his behaviour. He needs to go to prison for punishment, in my view. I say that as the victim in that case.

I will take a slightly different approach, by considering the historical perspective in more detail. The growth in our prison population began after the second world war. Since the war, prisoner numbers have grown from only 2,000 to the recent high of 7,400, which is one of the highest levels in the European Union. The trend cannot be reversed simply through statements, political will or diktat, and it is meaningless to set an arbitrary target of 5,000. If prisoner numbers are to be reduced, a careful analysis needs to be undertaken, so that we can understand, first, why numbers have risen, and secondly, why alternatives to custody have not achieved the objective that we all hoped would be achieved. I will consider why the efforts of the Administration in the first session of the Parliament, in which I was involved, which were focused on women offenders, were only partly successful. I will not have time to talk about some of the important issues that Nigel Don and others have touched on, but there is no doubt that the situation in our prisons and criminal justice system has materially altered during the past 25 years. Drugs are now a significant problem that comes on top of the continuing and growing problem of alcohol. Literacy and numeracy are also continuing problems, and mental health problems are increasing. Problems relating to personality disorders have always been around, and I urge the cabinet secretary to consider them closely, because there is a renewed interest in their treatment.  I will start by considering the numbers. The core of today's debate is about short-term offenders, and all speakers have mentioned them. However, the biggest increase in prisoner numbers has not been among short-term offenders; the biggest increase has been among prisoners on remand. Over the past four or five years, the daily prison population has increased by 600—or by 66 per cent. Over the past 25 or 30 years, there has been an increase in the length of sentences; and there has been a tendency to up the tariff. That is reflected in the increase in the number of people who are being recalled from licence—people who were released on parole from long-term sentences. The number of such people in the daily population has grown from 76 to 590, which is a staggering increase. The increase in the number serving a sentence of between six months and four years has been only from 1,413 to 1,736—although that is still an increase of 25 per cent. Since 2002, there have been some positive trends. For example, among those serving six months or less, there has actually been a reduction—from 540 to 490. As others have said, an understanding of the difficulties faced by the Scottish Prison Service is not complete unless we fully appreciate the difference between the daily resident population—the capacity that we have been talking about—and the admissions. Even if it were possible or desirable to eliminate sentences of less than six months—and I and the Labour Party would question whether that is desirable for more serious offences—it should be self-evident that it would not solve the capacity problems. The churn of admissions and liberations disrupts the SPS's ability to tackle the more serious and recidivist offenders, and the increase of 600 in the number of prisoners on remand is part of an increase from 16,000 to 23,000 receptions. In the same period, the receptions of sentenced prisoners have actually decreased from 22,300 to 18,300. The number of fine defaulters among that group has almost halved in the past six years—from 7,200 to 3,400. However, the reduction of 4,000 in the number of receptions has reduced the prison population by only 100. We can all agree that serious and violent offenders must serve lengthy custodial sentences; we can agree that the rate of reoffending is too high; and we can agree that short-term sentences—representing around 80 per cent of admissions—cause the SPS considerable problems. It was Henry McLeish who said that we should do something about women offenders. He has been quoted as saying that we should reduce the number of women offenders by half—although there is dispute about that. Iain Gray set up a  working group, and when I took up the work I said that we would not attempt to reduce the number in the daily population but would attempt to reduce the number of admissions substantially. At that time, in 2002, there were 800 women prisoners on remand, 600 serving short-term sentences, and 600 fine defaulters. By various means, we attempted to reduce those numbers. We wanted to reduce the number of fine defaulters by two thirds, and we succeeded in reducing it by half by using supervised attendance orders. We also proposed a community reparation order, but the pilots failed. They were not explained clearly to the judiciary, who did not understand them. The current Administration has apparently abandoned the pilots. They would have been visible to the community and would have helped to reduce the number of fine defaulters. Short-term custody is only a punishment. I worked in prisons for 23 years, and prisoners who are in for less than three months get nothing. If they are lucky they might get an assessment, but they will certainly not get any treatment. Who is punished by that? The offender is certainly punished through losing their liberty. However, we also punish the prison service because the churn makes it unable to address the more serious reoffending behaviour of the prisoners to whom Bill Aitken, Richard Baker and others referred. We also punish the families of offenders, especially if the offender was in work; the children of offenders, because they are taken into care; and society, because £20,000 for six months of warehousing is a very expensive way of tackling the issue. We therefore need many low and medium-tariff sentences to sort things out. We introduced DTTOs, drugs courts, restriction of liberty orders and the time-out centre, which has not been mentioned in the debate and which would take over 500 women out of the system. Why do we not have time-out centres for men? Why do we not extend that scheme? We have drugs courts, but we have not extended them either. We should extend that approach to alcohol treatment and testing orders. We should have alcohol courts and more time-out centres. Remand remains the most important area to reduce. We must improve the bail arrangements, arrest referral, bail supervision, bail information and transport, bail hostels and curfews, because unless we reduce remand we will still have significant problems of capacity.

What will be done about offenders—not that many, I admit—who are in full-time employment? Will they be restricted as well?

The one thing on which all speakers appear to agree is that the conclusions and recommendations of the task force are both worth while and to be accepted and acknowledged. Its work is extremely welcome. All the recommendations—apart from the contentious one on the opt-out problem—are clear. I will come back to them later in my speech. Whatever the outcome of the debate—which we may learn this year, next year or in five years' time—it is true that most members wish donations to be seen as gifts. I fully accept the points that were made by members who are concerned about the language of "presumed consent". Those of us who believe in an opt-out system have been struggling for years to find a term that would more correctly embody what we are seeking to achieve. I suppose that we have to return to "opt-out system" as the only term that does the job. Ross Finnie made some good points about the Parliament's previous attempt—through the Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006—to endorse authorisation and therefore give some legal status to people's wish to donate. He also made the point, correctly, that that has not changed the practice of seeking the family's endorsement of any decision, even if it is authorised. That practice continues. Personally, I feel that that is correct. The family's wishes must always be respected. It is inappropriate for a family in grief to be forced into making decisions—

Those who are experienced in the field have said to me repeatedly that, in practice, families will continue to be asked. That soft system is present in 12 of the 19 countries that have opt-out systems, and I think it is the correct one. The families still need to be asked. When the question is asked and the family is told that the deceased had expressed their wish to donate under a system that was authorised by the Parliament, the likelihood that the family will reject that wish is low. If they are asked to make a positive decision and say what the wishes of the deceased would be, they might not know, and they might not wish to make the decision at that time. It is too difficult for people to make that decision when they are in a situation of acute grief.

It is important and correct that we understand the wishes in life of the deceased. A number of the countries that I mentioned have both opt-out and opt-in registers, and it is perfectly practicable to have those, whatever doubts Jackson Carlaw might have about their maintenance. Public support for an opt-out system is undoubtedly growing. That is evidenced in the task force's report. Some say that the figure is more than 70 per cent—for example, the YouGov poll for the BMA—while others say that it is in the 60s. Whatever it is, the number of people who are in favour of an opt-out system is undoubtedly growing, so we will have to return to the issue. We all agree that, whatever happens, we need to implement all the recommendations in the task force's report. We need an increased number of co-ordinators and a specified professional person in every hospital, whether they are a full-blown transplant co-ordinator or have that task just as part of their job. That approach is crucial to the delivery of the task force's recommendations, because it will make it usual for donation to be considered. Mary Scanlon made the good point that we do not know how many donations do not happen because the family is not asked or the issue is not broached. I hope that the system of data collection and analysis and the audit of the process as it proceeds with the new recommendations will be undertaken appropriately. I look forward to seeing some detail on that.  I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement that there will be, as the task force recommended, an independent retrieval system that is co-ordinated nationally. I would like to hear—perhaps not today, but within the next six months or year—precisely how the cabinet secretary proposes to remove the financial barriers that hospitals face. If it costs a trust in England or a board or a hospital in Scotland money to undertake donation, I suspect that they are less likely to follow it through. In the UK, there are 1,000 deaths a year on the waiting list, and the number is growing. Donations from brain stem death and non-beating hearts are low compared with the rest of Europe and are declining. The transplant programme in the UK is, to be frank, being saved from a disastrous decline only by the huge increase in living donors. Angela Constance eloquently referred to liver donation as being an important element. Living donations are up quite substantially: kidney donations are up by about 100 per cent in six years to almost 680, and liver donations are also increasing. It is interesting—it is almost a sign of desperation—that families take the risk of death, which is one in 3,000 from a live kidney transplant, or one in 100 from a live liver transplant, because they know that their relative cannot get a cadaveric, or dead, kidney. The increasing number of live donations shows the extent to which the programme is supported. I praise live donations—the families concerned are among the people who most need our praise—but we should not rely on them totally. In today's debate, we have heard a spectrum of opinions. Some members remain almost entirely against an opt-out system—although even they take account of certain considerations—whereas others, such as George Foulkes and perhaps Helen Eadie, would like an opt-out system today and feel that the task force has missed an opportunity. Most of us, however, lie somewhere in between. The cabinet secretary said that we will review the matter at an earlier stage in Scotland if we need to. I moved the amendment in my name, which would allow us the freedom to do what we want in that respect and not be tied to the task force's recommendation, because Scotland's current level of donation, at 9 point something per cent, is already substantially below the UK's 13 per cent, and is a quarter of the level in Spain. Even with all the measures that the cabinet secretary will introduce, it is extremely unlikely that we will achieve anything like the European average.

I cannot accept the member's point. The UK task force will undertake a review at five years—that will take place, whether we want it or not. The removal from the motion of our adoption of the task force's recommendations will allow us to—and perhaps give a signal that we intend to—have an earlier review. Michael Matheson made a useful point, which I hope the cabinet secretary will address, if not in her summing up, then at a future point—perhaps in a statement on the progress that is being made. It is important that the triggers for that early review are defined. What will constitute sufficient success for us to decide that we can wait for five years? Perhaps we should wait, but we need to know what will constitute a sufficient improvement for us not to. The opt-out system is used in eight of the 10 countries that have the highest levels of donation at present. We might have to consider introducing that system, because lives can be saved, and lives are currently being lost unnecessarily. I continue to commend my amendment to the chamber.

I welcome the opportunity to have another debate on organ transplantation—our most recent debate on the topic was in March—in the light of the publication of the organ donation task force's second report. I do not want to reiterate everything that was said in the previous debate, but a few things are worth repeating on the record. The organ transplantation programme has been extremely successful over the past 50 years. It began with kidneys, but has been extended to include heart, heart and lung, liver, pancreas, bowel and cornea transplants. The number of organs that are being donated is gradually increasing. Thousands of lives have been saved and release from dialysis has transformed the lives of many people, because although dialysis is an excellent treatment, it ties people to machines for long periods. As we know, about 3,350 transplants are carried out each year, but 1,000 people die waiting for a transplant. There are 7,600 people on the waiting list, 698 of whom live in Scotland, but we know  from research that that is a substantial underrepresentation of the number of people who could benefit from a transplant but who never make it on to the list because their clinicians know very well that they will never get a transplant. We are not dealing with a problem that we can measure and analyse statistically; we are dealing with a far bigger problem, which could become even greater. The number of people who join the list has been rising by around 8 per cent per annum, but we face future challenges. As I have mentioned, the number of organs that can be transplanted is likely to grow. There are three additional challenges. The population is ageing and survival rates from earlier insults are better, with the result that people might seek transplants in their 60s and even their 70s. The increasing prevalence of type 2 diabetes will mean increasing levels of kidney failure. It is estimated that 20 per cent of hepatitis C sufferers might need liver transplants. The liver transplant situation has worsened over the past few years. Although organ transplantation has a proud history of innovation and success, the level of organ donation has been poor and is getting poorer. We are sinking down the table. Even though a Health and Community Care Committee report that was published in 2000 and for which I was the reporter made many of the points that are set out in the task force's report, our progress over the past five years has been negligible. Indeed, over the past six years, the number of cadaveric donations has declined. Of course, that is partly due to fewer fatalities through improved road safety, but that cannot be the whole answer. Since 1990, cadaveric donations have declined by 25 per cent. In contrast, in the time that our donations have stayed static or declined, Spain has substantially increased its level of donations to the highest in the world at 35 donors per million. The only thing that my amendment seeks to do is to remove the Parliament's tie to a five-year waiting period before a review is carried out.

I know that we have all been very busy over the past week, but it would have been better if we had been able to sit down and work out a common approach. I do not want to be tied to a five-year waiting period before any review takes place; I think that a review could be carried out earlier than that. I realise that the cabinet  secretary has not ruled that out and very much welcome her comments in that respect—indeed, I make it clear that I disagreed with nothing in her speech—but by agreeing to this motion we will put on record that we are tied to this five-year period. If we leave that out, we can review the issue when we feel it appropriate. The main reason for my approach is that, at 9.6 donors per million, the figure for Scotland is much worse than that for the rest of the UK, which stands at 13.4 per million. We might well need to address the problem earlier than the rest of the UK just to match what is happening there.

The cabinet secretary has put her personal views on the record, but she might not always be in that post. Labour members, too, will have a free vote in this debate and I do not know what is happening in the other parties, so we will see what the Parliament decides. I simply do not want the Parliament's hands to be tied on this matter. In the Scottish context—[ Interruption. ] I am sorry, Presiding Officer—I dropped my speech because I was getting excited.

You are quite right—I will just tear that page out. In its 2000 report, the Health and Community Care Committee highlighted a number of ways of extending organ donor registration; for example, GP registration forms, council tax forms, voter registration forms and other application forms could be used. Has the cabinet secretary considered any such measures? In the Ochil constituency, Gordon Banks MP has been running an organ donor registration campaign in the Alloa and Hillfoots Advertiser , and a similar campaign has been running in the Fife Free Press . I wonder whether the Government could find some way of stimulating local campaigns in order to increase registration. In the organ donation debate in March, the cabinet secretary indicated that she would take up  my suggestion of at least beginning the opt-out process by setting up an opt-out register. After all, according to the task force, 12 per cent of people strongly oppose a system of presumed consent. Those people should be given the opportunity to put their dissent on record and I hope that the cabinet secretary has raised my suggestion with those administering the scheme. I have said before—and it is worth repeating—that the problem with the current system is that the refusal rate, which stands at 40 per cent, is still very high. That figure has not changed very much, even though we know that, when they were asked a year later, the majority of families regretted making that refusal. I noted the cabinet secretary's words carefully, and I agree with what she said. We cannot be in any way patronising to people; we cannot simply say that the professionals know best and are going to take the organs. I have never suggested a hard system of presumed consent.

It would be excellent if we could come up with an alternative term—some people have been talking about an opt-out system. Out of the 27 European Union countries, 19 now have presumed consent. Seven of those 19 are opting for a hard system—with which I do not agree—and the other 12 for a soft system. A fact that we cannot get round is that eight out of 10 of those countries are represented among the countries with the highest donation rates. That may be for various reasons, but I imagine that presumed consent is one of them. The other pitfalls that the cabinet secretary has referred to are very important. Have we clarified totally the situation in Scots law with regard to non-beating hearts? That will be important in improving the number of donations. The Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006 went some way towards clarification, but have we clarified all the other Scots law issues? I will go through some specific recommendations from the report in the brief time that I have left. I am sure that we can agree on the need for a UK-wide organ donation organisation. However, should it come under the NHS Blood and Transplant system in England? Should it not be a separate UK system if the issue is serious enough to merit its own establishment? I welcome the appointment of John Forsythe as a national champion, and the establishment of clinical champions locally in each hospital, which was another recommendation. I also welcome the fact that we will have a better organ retrieval system, which will clearly be important.  I welcome the £5 million expenditure but, if it is Shona Robison who sums up, I hope that she will say how the money will be distributed to hospitals to remove the financial barriers in each board and hospital. Our 2000 report suggested that there were significant barriers. We need to be able to encourage individuals. Will the £5 million cover the costs of transplant co-ordinators in every hospital? Will it cover an increase in the transplant unit capacity in Scotland? That will be necessary if we are successful in increasing the number of transplants that we undertake. Will it also get rid of the barriers to retrieval, and create the independent retrieval team to which the cabinet secretary referred? The figures for black and minority ethnic communities are startling. I hope that the cabinet secretary will consider a specific education campaign on the promotion of transplants among those communities. I move amendment S3M-3124.1, to leave out from second "the" to "which" and insert: "those recommendations of the reports of the UK Organ Donation Taskforce that"

I can give Mr Brown specific evidence. New Zealand introduced random breath testing in 1996, and the number of road deaths and casualties associated with alcohol fell by 21 per cent in the first year and by 38 per cent in the second year. There is the evidence.

Dave Thompson has helpfully set out the history of the situation, which is an important aspect. Before I begin my speech proper, I point out that, given that the Scottish Government has been quite good at discussing and trying to reach consensus with the Opposition on drug-related matters, it is a pity that there has been no similar offer of discussions on the alcohol policy in order to reach a common view. I recommend that the Government take that approach, because the issues are serious and are not on the whole party-political—although I acknowledge that the parties disagree on certain aspects. The 80mg drink-driving limit was introduced in 1967 and it is clear that, since then, the measure has been extremely effective. I am just old enough to remember the situation before that change in the law. I recall as a student witnessing attempts to determine whether someone who was driving a car was inebriated. People were asked, for example, to walk a line heel to toe and to say the phrase "The Leith police dismithith us." I cannot even say it, and I am sober.

I should add that I was not partying last night; I have had no alcohol for the past three or four days. That demonstrates how difficult it is to say such a phrase if one does not have good enunciation skills.  There is also the perhaps apocryphal tale of the gentleman who offered to do a handstand and a cartwheel to show that he was not drunk. The police said that that would be absolutely fine, not knowing that the man was a circus artiste and was perfectly capable of such actions. Given that kind of very crude and inaccurate testing, the introduction of the blood test represented a very successful step forward. The new law, combined with much safer cars and improved roads, led to our having one of the best road safety records in Europe, in terms of a low number of fatalities. It is important to note that road safety here is much better than in many other places. Interesting reviews and evaluations of drink-driving campaigns have demonstrated that the campaigns are getting through to some extent. In the six years to 2006, the number of people who reported ever having driven after drinking reduced from 55 per cent to 43 per cent; and, over the past year, the number has reduced from 37 per cent to 25 per cent. The campaigns are having some effect, but it is the case that 43 per cent of people had driven after drinking, which clearly is unacceptable. The whole generation before 1967, who regularly drank and drove, had to learn. When I tried to intervene during the cabinet secretary's speech, I did not want to ask about the evidence for reducing the figure from 80mg to 50mg. It is clear that such a reduction would have an effect, and I will come back to that point. The question that I was trying to ask was what is the evidence that reducing the figure will make people understand better that they should not drink and drive? It might simply make them say, "I will drink a certain amount." Drink drivers fall into three groups: borderline drinkers, who try to judge how much to consume; heavy drinkers, either regular, binge, or one-off at a party drinkers; and the morning-after group, who do not realise that the amount that they drank the night before renders them liable to be above the limit. It is the borderline drinkers that I want to consider. If the level is set at 50mg—there is good evidence that that would have a significant effect—we will be back here in a few years' time saying that we will have to reduce it again. Like the cabinet secretary today, we will say that it is past its sell-by date.

I will come back to that point, but I am in favour of a reduction. With my medical hat on, I absolutely support the BMA's position on this. As I was saying, my concern is that individuals will continue to take risks. The issue is  problematic. We cannot reduce the level to zero, because people might be on cough medicines or might take liqueur sweets. Liqueurs can also be used in food preparation. There are all sorts of reasons why a small amount of alcohol might get into people's blood. Neither a zero level—in absolute testing terms—nor a level of 50mg or 80mg has any particular merit, although we must consider Dave Thompson's point that the more people drink, the more likely they are to have a problem and to be unsteady. Studies are done on groups of people, but individual tolerances can be quite different.

Mr Stevenson makes his point very well. We need debate and effective consultation, although I agree that consultation should not go on and on and on. I will be recommending to the UK Government that it consider carefully the report from the Royal Australasian College of Physicians and the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists called "Alcohol Policy: Using evidence for better outcomes", which is a most authoritative and detailed report on the evidence. It states clearly that reducing the level to 50mg is highly effective and is broadly supported by the research. The research also supports reducing the level for young drivers to zero, which has been achieved in a number of areas and states. In effect, a zero limit for young drivers has been in place in Australia since 1983, and it has had a significant effect on that age group. There is some evidence that a graduated driving licence is also helpful. Under that approach, a full driving licence is not issued straight away. There is also evidence that the new approach of using ignition interlock devices is helpful. Where such a device is fitted, the driver cannot engage the engine unless their breath test shows that their level of alcohol is below a specific limit. That approach has been used in the United States and Canada and has been trialled in Australia. Evidence from Canada shows that, where the device is used by people who have already committed an offence, recidivism levels are considerably reduced. We need to review the issue and reach a decision in the fairly near future. We should introduce a 50mg level not for the sake of its being highly evidence based but because, as the cabinet secretary said, the 80mg level is beyond its sell-by date and is no longer effective. The programme  needs a fresh impetus, and that would be provided by a change in the level. I see that the Presiding Officer is indicating that my time is nearly up. We were trying to help by extending our speeches, but I am glad to be asked to wind up. Finally, I make a plea that I made in the members' business debate on young drivers. There needs to be effective communication between the police and the health services on drinking issues. At present, general practitioners are not informed when the police are involved with people who have committed drink-related offences. As a GP for more than 30 years, I was never told that a patient of mine had a drink problem, so I was never put in the position of being able to help them to address it. I strongly urge the Government to use our powers to change that.

I hope that the cabinet secretary will cite any evidence he has that switching from 80mg to 50mg, as opposed to approximately zero, will be easier to understand.

That is shocking.

The amount of nonsense that is being talked is simply ludicrous. That Roseanna Cunningham should say that my colleague Des McNulty has not been involved in the process is unacceptable—he has been involved in it from the outset. We agree that there is a need to refine the number of continuing care beds in Glasgow—there is no problem with that—but Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board is going to replace the continuing care beds at St Margaret's with similar provision at Blawarthill hospital. Thus, it will condemn St Margaret's to being ineffective and inefficient and it is likely that the hospice will close. Will the cabinet secretary intervene in the process and ensure that St Margaret of Scotland hospice is maintained so that it provides a good and effective care programme for the community?

I join others in congratulating Alison McInnes on getting this topic on to the agenda for a members' business debate. During the first session of the Parliament, I became involved with some of my constituents in trying to promote post-test experience. As Alasdair Morgan has just said, post-test experience is vital. The insurance industry will reduce premiums if people complete a post-test learning programme. Indeed, Fife Council promoted such a system jointly with insurance companies. We need to have a system whereby the Government works with local authorities to try to promote post-test additional experience, including in night driving, motorway driving and driving on rural roads. Those are the situations that are important for young drivers who have just passed the test, given that most single-car, run-off accidents involve young people. The systems are in place to do that, but they are not being promoted universally. That needs to happen. No member has yet mentioned the green L-plate, which may be a useful thing to promote, albeit not as a measure of compulsion. I give cars that display red L-plates a slightly wider berth than normal, for my sake as well as that of the learner driver. Perhaps greater use of green L-plates should be promoted. The United Kingdom Government is consulting on driving and alcohol levels. The matter is reserved but, nevertheless, in his discussions with our colleagues in the UK Government, the minister could promote the adoption of a system whereby drivers who are under 21 have to have a zero alcohol level. There is an evidential base for measures to tackle the combination of alcohol and inexperience in driving, unlike some of the other proposals for under-21s that the Parliament has rejected. It is recognised that people under 21 are less tolerant of alcohol. In light of that clear evidence and the fact that young people have less experience of driving, we need to support the large majority of youngsters who are much better than my generation at not drinking and driving at all.  Another issue is that young people tend to purchase and drive older cars, with much lower national car assessment programme scores. That is not good, but there is little that we can do about it. My final point relates to the Scottish driving assessment service at the south-east mobility and rehabilitation technology services centre at the Astley Ainslie hospital. As a doctor, I used that service extensively for patients who were suffering from an illness that might affect their driving. The majority of people whom we referred were older people. We were trying to establish whether their impairment was such that they could no longer drive, and the centre provided them with a good assessment and support. However, there are two peaks in referrals—one for people between 16 and 25, and another for much older people. People aged 16 to 25 who have a sensory or other impairment that requires them to be assessed properly before they start driving are an important group. Currently, the waiting time for assessments is six months, as the centre is underfunded. I encourage the minister to undertake in his response to talk to the health ministers about ensuring that the service, which is promoted by both the national health service and the Scottish Government's transport directorate and is essential to the safety of patients and the public, is properly funded, to allow assessments to take place in a timely fashion.

What is the cabinet secretary's response to the Auditor General for Scotland's deficit funding report, which shows NHS Orkney's recurring deficit to be 2.7 per cent this year and predicts that it will be 6.7 per cent next year? Other island boards and NHS Highland also show a deficit. How will she ensure that boards are adequately supported and that they can afford equipment such as CT scanners?

I join other members in congratulating Marlyn Glen on securing a members' business debate on this important topic at this time. Others have referred to the fact that the number of new cases of HIV recorded for the past full year—more than 450—is the highest number since recording began in 1984. It behoves us all to take a fresh look at the situation and at HIV. HIV is almost becoming a forgotten condition, which is unacceptable. The rises in the number of cases of HIV throughout Scotland, including in Forth Valley, which is one of the health board areas in my region, require every health board to look anew at addressing training for staff in awareness of the condition. It is sad that, just this week, a potential vaccine that showed so much promise in animal testing has failed in tests on human subjects. That is regrettable. We must hope that the vaccine will continue to hold out promise. However, that should not prevent us from ensuring that the present situation is managed effectively. Other members have referred to the worldwide nature of the problem, particularly in regard to the African continent. The rise in the number of cases globally from around 10 million in 1990 to 33 million now indicates that the problem is still significant. Furthermore, 2.7 million new cases have been reported worldwide in the past year. That has happened in areas where the health services are under enormous pressure and the systems are extremely weak. For example, the British Medical Journal this week describes the health service in Zimbabwe as being in total collapse, with those who have HIV in absolute  despair about the management and treatment of their condition. In other countries, too, corruption has led to drugs not being dealt with in an appropriate way, even when they are available. As Patrick Harvie said, there are still people in the world who will speak out against the use of condoms. That is totally and utterly unacceptable. We need to send out a loud message, in the international field, that we will not support that sort of nonsense. What about the situation in Scotland? As others have said, as many as a third of those with HIV might not know that they have HIV. We have opt-out testing systems in place, but we need to do more in terms of testing. Patrick Harvie referred to home testing kits, and that issue needs to be considered carefully. I am concerned about the question of school nurses. They are under enormous pressure to deliver the human papilloma virus vaccination programme. That programme is extremely welcome but, unless they receive additional resources, it is difficult to see how they will be able to continue to provide vital sex educational input and support to young people—particularly young gay men coming out. I ask the minister to consider the issue carefully. I am also concerned about the HPV vaccine in relation to general practitioners as well, but this is not the time for that. We need a new campaign—not the old tombstone campaign—that will raise awareness and increase the level of information that people can access. Scotland is extremely poor in that respect. We need to readdress and reinvest in the mental health aspects of the management of HIV. It is now a chronic condition with which people live, and the Government has given particular attention to that. However, we need to examine the mental health aspects of the situation, because it is difficult for people with HIV, who are still subject to discrimination, to live comfortably with the condition.

So almost nothing new since the crisis started.

Does the Deputy First Minister agree that,  in the short term, we should seriously consider introducing an opt-out register, so that people who definitely want to opt out can do so? Will she also join me in welcoming the fact that, in my area of Clackmannanshire, the Alloa and Hillfoots Advertiser has been running a campaign to increase the number of people in the donation system? Should we not encourage all local newspapers to engage in similar campaigns? That will at least help the situation in the short term.

Does the member agree that there is concern that foster parents in Scotland foster more children than do foster parents in England? In England, there is a limit. I am not suggesting that we should have a limit, but we could phase one in when there are complex needs. Overplacing children with foster parents places an undue burden and expectation on those foster parents.

I declare an interest in that, until August 2008, I was involved in the development of an electronic single shared assessment, which includes elements of child protection and child care. Also, my wife is a consultant in interagency training in child protection, and I have a son who is a medical specialist in addictions. I will talk about addictions today. The number of looked-after children in Scotland has risen from about 11,500 in the first Parliament to 14,000 now. To some extent, that reflects the fact that we now recognise the fact that families in which there are problems with drugs and alcohol are often significantly damaged. On the medical aspects of looked-after children—the other aspect that I will address—we have the Adoption and Children (Scotland) Act 2007, but we still await the regulations and guidance for that act, although I understand that they will be forthcoming shortly and are being consulted on. I would be grateful if, in summing up, the minister could give us a timetable for that. It is vital that there is no slippage on it, that there is effective training in relation to the 2007 act and that we achieve an implementation date of June 2009. An area that interests me, and on which I have questioned the minister previously, is provision of medical information to adoptive and foster parents. Under section 74 of the 2007 act, medical information must be supplied to adoptive parents. However, that addresses only adoption, not permanency, which is a significant problem that is of concern to me. In 1989, I wrote to the General Medical Council in my capacity as, at that time, the chair of the medical British Association for Adoption and Fostering Scotland, because I was concerned that medical practitioners were not providing information on the family histories of children who were being placed for adoption and fostering because the families refused to allow that information to be transmitted. I think that section 74 of the 2007 act will deal with that, but I would like the minister to say whether he has had discussions with the General Medical Council about the need for instructions to be given to doctors to ensure that that medical information is passed on. I also suggest to the minister that, if it is possible, any children's bill should incorporate a change that extends the measure to include permanency and not just adoption. We are no  longer dealing with the clear-cut situations that I found when I started work as an adviser in adoption and fostering in 1974-75. At that time, there was adoption and there was fostering. There was a very clear gap between the two. Once a child was adopted—I was adopted myself—the family was left on its own, with no support, and that was the end of it. Now, however, there is adoption with support, although provision is patchy; adoption with or without contact; and permanent and temporary fostering. In addition, a process of concurrent planning is being trialled in London. It has been highly successful, particularly in relation to families with drug problems, who must be given a chance to change. When I was lead clinician in addictions in West Lothian, I found no drug-addicted parents who did not want to love and care for their children, but there were many who were unable to do so because their addictions got in the way. It is necessary to give those parents chances, but those chances must not be at the expense of the ability of that child to attach. If the basic trust of the child is damaged badly in the early years, we end up with an older person who will need the services that others have described—40 per cent of the children about whom we are talking require child and adolescent mental health services. The services have to have clear guidance about how they should tackle the issues of addiction and the management of children, but I do not believe that they have that at this time. When I was chair of the medical BAAF in the 1980s, I was engaged in the development of a medical passport for every looked-after child, which would be held by the adoptive parent, foster parent or local authority until the child reached the age of capacity. When used in conjunction with the child's family book, which gives the child's family record, the medical passport should give a clear medical history of the child. I suggest that the proposal is still an important one. I used to lecture in social work—Scott Barrie and David Stewart make me feel old by reminding me that they were students of mine. At that time, the health issues that we were concerned with in that context were continuity of care and smoking among foster parents, which are still issues for looked-after children. When children are moved around and placed with different foster parents, continuity of care is often broken. The minister should consider that issue. Around 100,000 children live in families with drug and alcohol problems. We need to provide support not only in the early years but in the ante-natal period. In Edinburgh, there is a specialist team that provides such support, and research into the issue is going on in Glasgow, but we need such specialist teams in every area. The current  guidance is that there should be a case conference at 20 weeks. However, we need to manage and support those families from a very early stage of the pregnancy—as soon as it is confirmed. It is not sufficient for that to be done only by the midwife. There must be social work, health visitor and drug specialist involvement from that early stage.

I could go on for many more minutes, but I will curtail my speech. I understand the Government's desire not to legislate in this area but, with regard to the sharing of information, I must say that I spent my time after I left Parliament in 2003 trying to implement policies around information sharing in respect of drugs and alcohol, which I had been trying to promote as a minister. The electronic single shared assessment on which I have been working has been on the blocks since 2003 and is still not operational. That reflects not only my experience but the experience of everyone who has been active in this area in the more than 35 years since the Maria Colwell inquiry. Information sharing is absolutely fundamental to the development of effective shared care. I hope that there will be full information for all, not just adopted children; that preplanned support for their medical needs will be provided in a way that ensures continuity; that there will be prior and guaranteed access to child and adolescent mental health services, which is an issue to which the Health and Sport Committee will return in its inquiry; that there will be specialist drug and alcohol teams that will intervene in the antenatal period and at least the first year after birth and will also work with addicted children and those suffering from foetal alcohol syndrome; that there will be an end to voluntary information sharing and that it will instead be made statutory; and that there will be effective guidance on managing children in families with drug addiction problems.

I join other members in congratulating James Kelly on securing the debate. I congratulate the Parkinson's Disease Society on holding an excellent meeting this afternoon, when I met constituents from Perthshire and elsewhere in Tayside, from the Forth valley and from Fife. It was very interesting to listen to and talk with them. Kenny Gibson referred to some of the symptoms of the condition, which are highly variable although it is a progressive condition. They include tremor, bradykinesia—difficulty in initiating and completing movement—rigidity and loss of balance. There are also lots of secondary symptoms, which I will not go into as we do not have time. Parkinson's is a difficult condition, but the most important thing about it is that it varies greatly among patients. It is not a simple and straightforward condition, so one needs to examine the patient very carefully and work with them. Of all the diseases that I worked with in general practice, Parkinson's could almost be said to be the one for which the concept of partnership between the patient and the professionals who are involved in their treatment is most vital. That partnership must be equal. In the hospital setting, treatment of Parkinson's is about empowerment of patients and recognising that patients are not done to, but worked with. That is fundamental to the attitude that we need to inculcate in hospitals. It exists among the best staff, but among other staff there can still be problematic timetabling of medicines, as other members have mentioned. As Mary Scanlon mentioned, Parkinson's is a condition for which the patient is often the best judge of when they need the next dose of treatment. I appeal to the minister to examine carefully the guidance that is currently issued on administering medication in hospital for Parkinson's and other conditions. The time has come for us to stop the process whereby people come into hospital and have their medicines confiscated. I found too often that patients whom I had got on to a reasonably stable dose of levodopa, in various forms of slow and quick release and in various types, went into hospital only to have their medication taken from them and be given a different set of medications, ostensibly to do the same job. That, however, created absolute havoc with their condition. The time has come for respect to be paid to primary care. If the condition is being managed by the network that supports patients with Parkinson's and if the medication is balanced, that medication should continue in the hospital. If possible, it should be self-administered. I realise  that that is not always possible—in the late stages of Parkinson's, there might be issues to do with the patient's capacity, and there might also be issues around people being able to take and swallow the medicines themselves. Despite such issues, the general guidance should be for patients to self-administer. The vertically integrated network concept that I am talking about includes the neurologist, the physician, the specialist nurse, the occupational therapist, the physiotherapist, the speech and language therapist and the primary care doctor. That is the group that should be working with the patient, on a care-plan basis. I have said before that such patients should have care plans that they understand. When they go into hospital, they can present their care plans and say what drugs they will self-administer and when. There are concerns about specialist nurses. In a discussion about neurology nurses, the minister undertook to try to keep up the pressure on boards to ensure an adequate supply of neurology-trained nurses to support patients with Parkinson's and other conditions. I would like to hear in the minister's summing up what has happened in that regard. I hope that the minister will examine the arrangements and guidance for the administration of medicines, and that she will review how far we have got in ensuring the adequacy of specialist nurses across the board in Scotland. I apologise to members: I am due to chair a meeting on stroke this evening, so I will have to leave just before quarter to 6.

Like Jamie Stone, I would have liked to welcome the debate as constructive, but this has been one of our least constructive debates. I say to our Conservative friends that I did not recognise the two Conservative speeches as coming from the same party. Mary Scanlon rightly talked about the problems that NHS Highland faces, but Jackson Carlaw mounted his hobby-horse and disappeared into the far distance. Serious issues are involved; Ross Finnie, Malcolm Chisholm and other members raised them in their speeches. The Government—and the SNP is the Government—made the decision in the comprehensive spending review to cut revenues by £1 billion. I hope that the cabinet secretary and the minister accept that. The SNP Government  decided to cut revenues in a variety of ways. As a result, it has £1 billion less to spend on public services. Our public services have to take the strain of that reduced revenue. That would be fine if the settlement to health boards reflected the allocation that Scotland has been given, but it did not—it is the lowest uplift since devolution. The SNP Government also failed to recognise the new situation of increased inflation and the fact that health service inflation always outstrips ordinary inflation. Furthermore, it failed to lay out clearly what should be included as so-called efficiency savings and what should be proscribed as cuts. There are some incontrovertible facts in the debate. The SNP Government's budget was increased by 1.8 per cent in real terms. However, based on headline inflation of 2.7 per cent, the real-terms uplift in the Government's general allocation to health boards was 0.5 per cent. The Wanless King's Fund report stated that the NHS needs an annual increase of 4 per cent in real terms just to stand still, and in England Labour has provided the necessary uplift to achieve that, even though it, too, is faced with the new situation of higher inflation. It is true that, on the calculations that we have been given by economists, our per capita health expenditure is on a trajectory to go below that of England by 2012-13. Labour in England is giving more to health than the SNP Government is giving in Scotland—that is a fact. The special NHS inflationary pressures are recognised, and the Audit Scotland report demonstrates them: an ageing population; agenda for change; the European working time directive; new and more drugs, including a 4 per cent uplift in drug expenditure predicted for Grampian; and new and expensive technology. I would also include the need to clean our hospitals, as demonstrated by the audit report this week. That is health inflation, but we must also consider general inflation. General inflation is not 2.7 per cent, as the headline inflation was, but considerably higher. If we consider fuel and food, which the NHS has to deal with, the level is even higher than the headline inflation of 5.2 per cent. Those are all realities that the cabinet secretary will have to face in the next year or so. We may be lucky—inflation may drop to zero and there will not be the same pressures in later years. However, for this year and next, the pressures undoubtedly exist. Another incontrovertible fact, which disappoints me, is that both the cabinet secretary and the Minister for Public Health have said repeatedly that Labour is scaremongering, when the reason for the debate—I see Keith Brown nodding as well,  although I welcome Christine Grahame as no other SNP member of the Health and Sport Committee has been present, which is a shame—

Time is short; I must get on. Anyway, the cabinet secretary refused my intervention, decided to take it and then messed around. The Labour Party made a freedom of information request to every health board in Scotland on the efficiency savings that they were making and the pressures that their budgets might be under. That is a responsible approach for the opposition to take, and everything that Labour members have said today has been lifted from the reports that we have received from health boards. Nicola Sturgeon and Shona Robison might sit there, shaking their heads yet again, but are they saying that the health boards are lying to us in response to freedom of information requests? If so, they are making a dangerous assertion.

I will not answer that question, because this debate is about the SNP Government facing the reports that we have received from individual health boards about the cuts that they are having to make. Let me go into that point in more detail. We have heard about NHS Highland, which is talking about £10 million of cuts in addition to the efficiency savings. NHS Forth Valley has spoken about cuts of 1 per cent across the board, while NHS Grampian is having to consider a 5 per cent cut to balance its budget. What are the efficiency savings, and will they affect front-line services? Shona Robison referred to dealing with vacancies—

In Shetland, but I am talking about other areas. [ Interruption. ] Shona Robison may sit there and laugh, but the fact remains—

No, I will not take another intervention. We have heard from a number of health boards that they will use a delay in filling vacancies to achieve efficiencies. Are the ministers really sitting there and saying, from a sedentary position—

No, I will not. The minister is commenting enough from a sedentary position. Is she saying that the health boards are not delaying vacancies? [ Interruption. ]

Is the minister saying that delay in filling vacancies is a reasonable way of achieving efficiency savings? Such delay puts pressure on front-line staff who have to cope without the consultant or nurse who has not been appointed. That is not an efficiency saving. Many of the savings that were noted in the responses to us were one-offs, which are not efficiency savings. I will list them: property sales of £42 million; cuts in supplies, not improvements in procurement; capital to revenue virement reductions; accountancy adjustments; and freezing uplifts to budgets. In summary, it is not Labour members who are saying that there are problems with efficiency savings; we are repeating the reports that we have had from health boards. The higher levels of inflation and the reports from health boards are serious issues that, as Ross Finnie said, need to be addressed seriously.

Will the member give way on that point?

From the replies that we received to our freedom of information requests, we have found that £42 million of property sales have been included in efficiency savings. Property cannot be sold more than once.

Will Ms Sturgeon give way on that point?

On a—[ Interruption. ]

Is it in order—

On a point of order. Is it appropriate for Nicola Sturgeon to say that Cathy Jamieson did not take an intervention when she did?

It is clear that the minister and the Government are not going to reconsider central funding, and that national organisations such as CSV will have to apply to the 32 different local authorities, but will he extend the current funding so that we can attest that the transition is as he says it should be?

I congratulate Nanette Milne on obtaining the debate, which is important not only for CSV but for the general principles of funding volunteers and volunteer organisations. The days have gone when volunteers were considered simply as interested amateurs: volunteers require training and support. Indeed, it would be inappropriate for volunteers to be allowed to enter without appropriate training many of the situations into which they are put, and to do so could expose them to harm and risk. The professionalism of the core organisation needs to be recognised as an absolutely crucial partner in the delivery of many of our care operations. I was delighted to attend a meeting in the Golden Lion Hotel in Stirling last year of volunteers in the Stirling area. Stirling has one of the highest rates of CSV-supported volunteers—I believe that there are more than 400 of them. As Nanette Milne indicated, there are many different schemes. For example, I learned that it takes only one volunteer to change a light bulb. Volunteers will go into a person's house to change a light bulb for them if they are unable to reach high enough. Such small tasks help to maintain people's independence and can be crucial to their wellbeing. The range of volunteering is absolutely massive; it might involve driving people to appointments, performing an advocacy role—even if it is not a formal one—befriending someone or taking part in walking groups and knitting circles. It is vital that we support all those volunteers. Too often, older people—I can say this, as someone who has reached pensionable age—are seen simply as a cost centre for Governments, when in fact they are the most important resource for developing the cohesiveness of our society. As the age demographic changes and life expectancy continues to increase—it has increased by two and half years over the past 10 years—large numbers of people in their late 70s or early 80s will volunteer. They will be fit and active, and able to make a major contribution. I have a suggestion to make in addition to the one that was made by my colleague Jack McConnell, which relates to work that I did with volunteers in the nursing home that I was involved with in Manchester. I got volunteers to help tell stories to the young people whom we brought in to the nursing home at teatime, as they were on their  way home from school, which meant that they stopped being latchkey kids and got involved in their community. It was a mixed community—there were many older West Indian people in it. By getting someone to train them to tell their stories properly, we were able to establish a verbal history for many families, which was important. That is just one illustration of what can be done. During the power cuts that occurred in the 1970s under the Conservative Government—I say to Nanette Milne that that was just the way that it happened—we were extremely concerned about elderly people in our community being left isolated for long periods during power cuts. We got together a group of local volunteers, but our problem was that because we did not have contact with CSV, we could not train them. Training, which we were lacking, is extremely important. Another volunteer organisation that I have been involved with played a huge role at the Strathcarron Hospice, but in that case we trained the volunteers. I am becoming repetitive, so I will stop. CSV is an organisation that requires funding, for the sake of all the good that its volunteers do.

Does the minister agree that, given his efforts and those of the First Minister and others to introduce kinship care allowances, it is unacceptable for a local authority such as Stirling Council to announce that it will not provide such allowances this year? There are continued problems with the voluntary placement of children with grandparents or other kin. If the child is not under a supervision order or accommodated under section 25 of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, their carer does not receive such an allowance. Does the minister agree that that is an unacceptable catch-22 situation that needs to be addressed?

Does the member welcome, as I do, the interim target and the setting in law of a target on the elimination of child poverty that the UK Government is adopting?

The debate has been consensual as far as the concept of patients' rights is concerned, but it has not been consensual on whether the argument for legislation on the matter has been appropriately and fully made. David Carlaw went on at considerable length about names. That might have caused some amusement, but it conveyed two things. First, the question of names is a matter of dignity, and, secondly, it is a matter of hierarchy and power  within institutions. Names are important in that regard, so his point was well made. Mary Scanlon made a number of important points. If we introduce statutory waiting time guarantees and legal obligations, the unintended consequences will be substantial. She addressed mental health and referred to infertility and addiction, and Cathie Craigie mentioned audiology and deafness. If the bill is to take a non-discriminatory approach—it will be challenged by the Health and Sport Committee on that issue—it must ensure that all patients have equal rights, regardless of their condition. That will be a major challenge for the Government. I know that it is considering the mental health issue, but there is serious discrimination against mental health patients. If statutory guarantees are imposed for one set of conditions, health boards will apply money to meet those guarantees at the expense of other patients. That is already happening. It is a major challenge for the Parliament to ensure that we do not have discrimination. A number of members mentioned the unintended consequences, which are potentially legion. I will give an example. A GP refers a patient to a consultant, who then refers them to a physiotherapist and asks to see the patient at the end of the physiotherapist's intervention. In that case, the treatment guarantees will apply. However, if the patient is referred directly to the physiotherapist, there will be no guarantees even though the condition might be the same. Furthermore, if the consultant does not ask to see the patient at the end of the physiotherapy treatment, the guarantees will not apply. We are dealing not with simple issues but with the complexities that will be inevitable if statutory guarantees are introduced. I remain unconvinced on the issue. We will see whether the arguments are made more effectively in committee and in the consultation responses, but I do not believe that they were made effectively today. I offer the chamber another example. England has just announced that, within two hours of a coronary heart disease event, 90 per cent of all patients will get a primary intervention. With our geographical spread, such a target would be a lot harder to achieve—90 per cent would probably not be achievable. If such treatment is required within two hours, will we give patients a guarantee? If we do not give that guarantee, are we saying that they are not entitled to that treatment when it should be available? An absolutely fundamental issue that has not been raised today is that, for a lot of patients, managing a long-term condition is more—or as—important as treating an acute condition. Therefore it is the patient pathway, to which some speakers referred, that is important. As the Labour Party  said in our manifesto and in subsequent discussions, we need personal contracts with individual patients so that they agree to what is practical and possible for them. The alternative, which has been explored by some speakers today, is that we end up in a situation in which we might have draconian patients' responsibilities, as Jackson Carlaw said. I will return to that in a minute.

I would agree entirely, if what Christine Grahame suggests is what really happens. However, there are doctors out there who say that one should not treat patients who smoke if their condition is a consequence of their smoking. I disagree profoundly with that approach, but I promise Christine Grahame that there are doctors who believe that. Unless one defines such responsibilities, there could be difficulties. Independent support, to which several speakers referred, is important and I very much welcome what has been said. Christine Grahame talked about the complaints system, with 4,000 out of the 7,000 complaints submitted being upheld. Having a system of no-fault compensation in the proposed bill is alluded to in the consultation but not dealt with in any detail. As Mary Scanlon remarked, such a system would be fundamental in changing the culture. As a doctor, I can tell members that at present, if a doctor does something that might not be appropriate and the patient makes a complaint, the Medical Defence Union will often tell the doctor not to say anything, because the matter might become a legal case. There is a culture of not saying things when, as Jamie Stone said, often patients just want a reasonable explanation of what went wrong and an assurance that it will not go wrong again. Although my party does not have a position on the issue, my personal opinion is that no-fault compensation could be very helpful.

I do not want to get into that question today, but I will refer to consent and its withdrawal. If the bill is enacted, we will have to relate it to the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 and consider the situation carefully.  We all want genuine choice for patients, but as Cathie Craigie said, that has to be approached carefully. If patients are offered the opportunity to go to one hospital but wish to go to another because they prefer the surgeon or the reports on hospital-acquired infections from that hospital, or because they have relatives nearby who might support them, will they lose their guarantees? The matter is difficult and complex. We need a culture in which patients who raise concerns about their treatment are welcomed and not treated as a problem. I have cases that relate to hospital-acquired infection. In one case, a patient who intervened because the staff had not washed their hands was treated unpleasantly. That culture has to change. Although the cabinet secretary cannot change it, the Parliament, together with the cabinet secretary, can make it clear that we want to change the culture. I do not have time to address all the remaining issues so I will finish by saying that there has to be a balance between a charter—rights that the Parliament indicates are appropriate for patients—and a legal framework. That is the main point to come out of the debate. Medicine is not a product like a car with a guarantee that one can hold over another individual if things go wrong. Medicine is very complex and the choices that have to be made between one treatment and another might not depend entirely on a strong evidence base. Ian McKee's illustration of being offered alternative treatments for his Achilles tendon was valid. To ask patients to make such a choice is wrong; one should discuss with the patient the benefits and risks of each treatment and then, in partnership with the patient, agree what treatment to use. We in this Parliament should foster that concept of partnership. If we pitch one set of rights against another, it might lead to unintended consequences that will not help to improve the quality of care for patients.

I add my congratulations to Kenneth Gibson on obtaining this members' business debate. Lupus is yet another of the long-term conditions that we have so often discussed in Parliament and it shares many of the attributes of other such conditions. It is imperative that individuals are diagnosed early and treated early and that they are given advice on how to manage their condition. Lupus tends to be a long-term condition, but it is not necessarily lifelong, given that it can sometimes go into considerable remission such that people can come off their medical treatment. However, the condition is very serious. As a very young general practitioner, one of the earliest emergencies that I was presented with was haematemesis—vomiting of blood—as a complication in someone with lupus. Regrettably, the lady died. It was one of the most horrendous experiences of my medical career. That was a long time ago. It is much more important for patients now to recognise that the possibilities for the treatment, management and control of lupus have improved substantially. Lupus is slightly unusual in that it predominantly affects women; approximately 90 per cent of sufferers are women. It is also more common  among Afro-Caribbean, Asian and Chinese people. Again, that is a group for which communication is not as good as it is in the general population. We already know that some ethnic groups have problems with access to medical care, so how the Government and other parties tackle health inequalities has to be reflected in our management of the condition, as is the case with so many others. Treatment is sometimes relatively straightforward, but it can involve significant and serious drugs. Steroids are sometimes vital and even life-saving when acute flare-ups of the condition occur. Of course, if it is continued for any length of time, steroid treatment can have serious complications, so such treatment is reduced or eliminated whenever possible. Treatment can also involve the use of immunosuppressive drugs, such as azathioprine, methotrexate and mycophenolate—or mofetil—which are quite powerful drugs that have to be administered very carefully. I make that point because it is important that individuals are managed by specialist services. It is not practical to ask a general practitioner to manage individuals with the condition. The condition illustrates the need to tier services appropriately. It will be perfectly practicable and possible for the primary care network to manage the overwhelming majority of people with some chronic conditions, but it is vital for conditions such as lupus to have a national managed care network in which individuals can support each other and patients, and where nursing expertise is developed to provide the long-term support to which I have alluded. I welcome the formation on Government advice of the Scottish lupus exchange. It clearly provides the basic background to developing a properly managed care network. However, as there are about 5,000 patients, I believe that it will be important to train some sub-specialists, such as nurses or general practitioners with a special interest, to ensure that patients are given the effective treatment that they deserve so that they can lead as normal a life as possible, and manage their condition with professional support.

I add my congratulations to Michael McMahon and acknowledge his long-term interest in heart failure. Until now, palliative care has largely applied to cancer patients. The hospice movement took off in the 1970s, first with in-patient care, then with day care and finally with outreach, and it has radically changed the approach to the management of cancer care over the past 30 years. In my area—Forth Valley—that change included the appointment of an individual from a hospice whose job was to go round primary care units and assess their capacity and desire to be involved in the palliative care of their patients so that the hospice, the hospital and the primary care unit provided complementary services that were balanced according to the ability of each to provide the  service and according to the needs of the individual patient. That, of course, is a vertically integrated managed network, which is what is needed for heart failure patients as well as other groups. Indeed, it could be expanded to many other groups—we have had correspondence on the motion from the Parkinson's Disease Society of the United Kingdom and other neuromuscular disorder groups. However, tonight we are talking about heart failure. Heart failure has been underdiagnosed and usually significantly undermanaged. The amount of specialist care has been limited. As Mary Scanlon, who illustrated what needs to be done, said eloquently, the problem is that care has been largely reactive. We still need reactive care, and it is important that "Living and Dying Well" and other recent announcements mention the use of measures such as living care plans, living wills and electronic care plans, which can be transmitted to the other services that may be involved—such as NHS 24 or the specialist care hospital units—so that people are all singing from the same sheet. One of the major problems that we face in the health service—this applies generally—is how to transmit appropriate information so that patients do not have to repeat it all the time. If a patient who has a chronic condition that is not life threatening goes into hospital, they might not mind repeating all the information that they have previously given, but uncertainty is an acute fact in heart failure, because patients tend to die suddenly and unexpectedly when we think things are going well. To prevent that in an acute situation, it is imperative that the appropriate information is available to the people who are looking after them, whether that is NHS 24 or a specialist care unit. Patients with brittle asthma—very acute asthma—face the same sort of uncertainty, as an attack might mean death and almost certainly means admission. In Forth Valley, we established direct links between such patients and the hospital ward. They did not have to go through NHS 24 or any practice; they phoned the unit and were admitted immediately. That would be appropriate for some patients with advanced heart failure. Kenneth Gibson referred to the sensitive sharing of information. That is fundamental. It is important that the staff are well trained, understand the condition and know what they are dealing with. Having specialist nurses support generic community nurses provides that possibility for key workers—close support from the community nurse backed up by the specialist nurse.  How information is shared and at what point will depend upon the family and the individual. Those two do not always coincide, because patients with heart failure may well be in denial just as cancer patients can be. In fact, one of the hardest cases I had was a patient whom I tried to persuade that his condition was so serious that he required a heart transplant. We got him to the hospital and began to get the transplant organised but, having accepted it, he went back into denial. Movement in and out of denial is a problem. The distress that it caused that man's family was enormous and, I am sad to say, he died without getting his transplant because he would not accept that he needed that treatment. The topic is important not only for its own sake, but in the context of "Living and Dying Well". We have moved a long way as a community, but a recent survey suggested that 70 per cent of Scots feel that we still do not discuss death enough. Although the movement has been significant, we have some way to go. Heart failure should be one of the issues to which quality and outcomes framework targets apply; I do not know whether it is, although the matter has been discussed. There should be local enhanced service contracts with practices that are able to provide enhanced, more specialist services, which should be supported. I thank Michael McMahon for securing this debate. I welcome the funding moves that the Government has already made in recognition of the Audit Scotland review of palliative care services, which we do not have time to go into today, but much more needs to be done.

When I was the Deputy Minister for Justice, one of the things that I was most proud to promote was the fact that Scotland was one of the first countries to have computerised registers of deaths, births and marriages, and the link to the register of sasines. I therefore make the suggestion—it may have been taken up already— that what the motion proposes should be a pilot project for establishing linkages to Fife. If someone is undertaking a genealogical search—something that is now very popular—and they come up with a Fife name, a link is provided to Fife and all the wealth of history that Christopher Harvie has talked about. That would enhance the whole thing.

At present.

I congratulate Jim Tolson on securing his members' business debate on an important issue, which now requires political impetus behind it. That is the point—nobody is asking for hard cash at the moment; rather, a feasibility study is being asked for, which is appropriate. None of us is an expert on rail, but we know what our constituents want—connectivity and good public transport. Part of that will be brought about by the delivery of the new connection. I understand that steam trains are already running on the line—trains have been coming up from York—but that it is not suitable for passenger traffic at the moment, because of the slow nature of the line and problems with signalling. Nevertheless, such issues can be addressed.  When I was first elected in 1999, I had three objectives for my constituency of Ochil, which is now represented by Keith Brown. The first was to end the road to nowhere, which seemed to be the epitome of bureaucratic nonsense—two roads, partly European Union funded, to join Alloa and Stirling that failed to meet across a 600yd gap. The second was the creation of an upper Forth crossing. I am delighted to be the first person in the chamber to say that it is now called the Clackmannanshire bridge, for which I thank the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change. When I was MSP for Ochil, I campaigned for it, and I know that Keith Brown has campaigned for it, too. The bridge name helps to open up Clackmannanshire. The third objective was the Alloa railway. That project was a long struggle, and costs rose in a way that none of us predicted. Notwithstanding those important measures for Clackmannanshire, further connectivity into Fife is important. Although other members have mentioned the connection to Edinburgh, which is important, as Jim Tolson indicated, the east-west connection, joining up with Glasgow, is also important. At the moment, people in Fife have to go to Edinburgh before going across to Glasgow, and people travelling from Alloa have to go via Stirling and Edinburgh and then over the Forth bridge to get to Fife by rail. The connectivity that the proposed scheme would provide is important. A freight line exists, but I do not know how heavily it is used. Having an up-to-date freight line that goes through to Rosyth will be important for strategic development, as will passenger transport to Rosyth if our ferry system is to work effectively. I understand that there are problems with connectivity to Edinburgh, relating to the Forth bridge. I do not know how much of the capacity problem is related to signalling, or indeed to absolute capacity, but I am sure that the feasibility study will investigate that. I am delighted to support the projected addition to rail connectivity, to connect parts of my constituency of Mid Scotland and Fife in a modern way.

To ask the Scottish Executive what funding has been allocated to deal with new flood management issues in Scotland. (S3O-4422)

The minister will be aware of the significant flooding that occurred in Tillicoultry and Milnathort, which are in my constituency. After that flooding, Clackmannanshire Council and Perth and Kinross Council held public meetings to inform residents about future flood defences and how to prepare themselves for possible future flooding. What steps has the minister taken with SEPA and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to ensure that members of the public who may be affected by flooding in the way that my constituents in Tillicoultry and Milnathort were affected are given direct advice on how best to prepare themselves properly for that threat?

The debate and the way in which the Government has approached it are not good because they distract us from the central problem. I believe firmly that, if we are to move ahead with tackling what is undoubtedly our most serious health problem next to tobacco use, we should do so on the basis of consensus. However, the proposal to raise the age for buying alcohol from off-sales from 18 to 21 gets in the way of consensus and of tackling a serious problem. Dave Thompson's speech had only one phrase in four minutes with which I disagreed—he said that the Government's proposal would make a significant contribution—and I agreed with what he said in the rest of his speech. Indeed, many of the speeches from the SNP, which have not focused on the issue—

No, I am sorry. The time is so short that I cannot give way. The cabinet secretary can deal with my speech in his summing-up speech.  Nobody will disagree when SNP members say that alcohol misuse is a big problem, so let us move on from that. Parliament has just achieved clarity and parity over the age restriction of 18 for alcohol and tobacco purchase, but the Government's policy proposal confuses that. The Government is not clear whether the proposal is a public health measure or a public safety measure. If it is both, it fails on the public health test and on the public safety test the jury is still out, as Sheila Bird has said. However, if the law currently allows local communities to undertake the sort of experiments that have been undertaken in the name of public safety, I for one am not concerned if they continue, with the agreement of all the stakeholders. However, a blanket policy that attacks everyone between 18 and 21 would be counterproductive. On the experiments, I was involved in alcohol work in the late 1970s, and my group undertook a study of 14-year-olds and drinking in Stenhousemuir. I must report to members that 14 per cent of those 14-year-olds were drinking regularly. We must tackle the underage drinking, not the 18-to-21 group. If the Government needs further evidence on that, there is clear evidence from the Scottish schools adolescent lifestyle and substance use survey—SALSUS—that the number of underage drinkers is huge. The other point is where they drink. The figure for those who drink outside has risen from 39 per cent to 45 per cent, so let us use the public-place ban more. I welcome the fact that Fife has just introduced such a ban for another nine communities, starting in October. However, the ban on drinking outside should be universal. Test purchasing is important in addressing underage drinking. Evidence gleaned from a parliamentary question in April 2008 showed that we have made only 632 test purchases—there are 17,000 off-sales—and 14 per cent of the premises that were tested failed. If we implement the current law, we will achieve a much greater response. If the Government needs further evidence, it can consider the fact that 60 per cent of 18,000 young offenders who were discharged from prison admitted that their offence was related to drink, and 45 per cent said that they would have a problem with drink when they went back into the community. It is that hard-core group of under-18s whom we need to address and not the 18 to 21 group. I plead with the Government to drop its policy and to co-operate with opposition parties. I am sure that we will all co-operate with the Government in trying to achieve change in the drinking culture. I ask the Government to note that the community—

I add my congratulations to those of other members on Trish Godman securing this debate and on the way in which she graphically illustrated the tragic early loss of life that can result from sustaining a DVT that moves to a pulmonary embolus. The numbers involved, however, must not be confused with those for total thrombosis, where the number of deaths is substantial. Trish Godman's parliamentary questions elicited the response that about 172 deaths were recorded from that cause in 2003, which reduced to 130 in 2007. That indicates a measure of progress, although it is not enough. Almost every one of those deaths—not all, but almost all—would have been untimely. Tackling the problem is an increased priority, especially because it is, to an extent, preventable. It is important that measures are taken to identify risk, and that, if something  occurs, there is early diagnosis and rapid treatment. What about screening, which is a core part of the motion? Dr McKee graphically illustrated the fact that there are rules surrounding mass screening. One of the fundamental tenets is that we must not create a situation in which we cannot ameliorate the condition that is being screened for. Frankly, it is not possible at present for us to do anything about the genetic condition of the so-called factor V Leiden gene. However, that does not mean that we should not have focused screening. It is certainly true that anyone who has a personal or family history of the condition needs to be much more aware of the potential risk and should be entitled to have screening if they so wish—that should be made available to them. One of the best developments in surgical procedures in the past few years has been the pre-assessment of risk prior to the patient coming into hospital. That is undertaken by nurses, who are good at looking at lists of risk factors of the sort that NICE has produced, some of which were referred to by Jackson Carlaw and Ian McKee. However, as they said, the list is considerably longer and neither they nor I have time to address all of it in this debate. I have particular concerns about two issues. One is the use of oral contraceptives, which is not generally recognised as a risk factor. The other is the use of hormone replacement therapy. Those two treatments have their consequences in increased risk, so tackling that in terms of stopping oral contraception before surgery can be important. For the pre-assessment of risk, it is important to look at the list and assess the likely risk for an individual. The second part of the risk that needs to be assessed is whether the procedure, the likely stay in hospital and the degree of immobility are likely to contribute to increasing the risk. If they are, steps should be taken. At the most extreme, there should be prophylactic treatment in a preventive form, using either low molecular-weight heparin or aspirin. For very high-risk procedures, particularly orthopaedic ones, that may be an appropriate measure. For people at intermediate or slightly lower risk, the proper and effective use of compression stockings is believed to have considerable benefit. During my professional life, we have moved a long way. In the past, for many surgical procedures one was required to stay immobile for long periods, and one was often kept in hospital for long periods. We have moved on—and I believe that we may at some point have a debate on day surgery. The amount of day surgery has increased enormously, and that reduces the risks of venous thrombosis. However, the great  disparity between health boards in the rates of day surgery is regrettable. We could contribute to the reduction of unnecessary deaths by making further movement in that direction. The use of regional anaesthetic rather than general aesthetic can also make an important contribution to reducing risk. This matter is important. The deaths are preventable and we must address that. We must assess risk carefully, and we must provide prophylactic treatment when appropriate. I close with an issue that I have not yet referred to, although Trish Godman referred to it in more detail. If any signs of problems are seen, there must be rapid and appropriate testing, diagnosis and monitoring. Sometimes the venogram can be equivocal, but simply to send somebody home is not good enough. People should be monitored in some way, so that risk can be assessed and treatment applied. In the cases that we have been discussing, treatment would prevent death. As I have said, such deaths are unnecessary and should be prevented.

I join the many members who have paid tribute to the petitioners. The petition is one of the best illustrations of the petitions system working: a petitioner who had a personal problem and difficulty with the system generated a debate and pursued the issue vigorously for the greater good. Ross Finnie said that the issue is not just about cancer. We should not lose sight of the fact that it is about many drugs other than cancer drugs. The report on cancer that is due to be published might help in relation to cancer drugs, but it will not solve the problem altogether. A point that has not been made so far is that doctors are human beings and wish to do their best for their patients, irrespective of the realities of the evidence. They are taught to treat where possible. Sometimes treatment can be more harmful than beneficial to the patient, so the assessment of risks to and benefits for the individual patient has to be carried out in a partnership involving the doctor, the patient and, sometimes, another independent element. Cathy Jamieson, Christopher Harvie and Jackson Carlaw referred to the fact that almost every one of us will be touched by cancer. The lifetime risk of developing cancer is one in three, and the risk applies especially to the over-65s. Annually, two in seven of all deaths in Scotland are cancer related. Many survival rates have improved, but cancer remains a massively important area of health. Cancer accounts for much palliative care and raises problems to do with extending life in a reasonable way. No member has criticised the initial process of licensing a drug in Europe or in the UK. The question is whether that process is enough. In some countries, it is enough. Ian McKee suggested that if a drug is licensed—if it is effective and safe—it must be given if a clinician recommends it. However, we have chosen a different route, which involves another tier—the Scottish Medicines Consortium. We should take heart that many praise that system and that, in evidence, it was described as one of the best systems in Europe.

I am not sure—I must think about that. The important point is that the Scottish Medicines Consortium draws together the evidence—such as it is, as Ross Finnie said.  Some evidence about cost effectiveness from the pharmaceutical industry is still probably not as good as the industry would like and is certainly not as good as we would like. I will return to that. Scotland has another tier. I understand that advice is not statutory, so the area drug and therapeutics committees decide when and at what speed drugs will be introduced in Scotland. I gather that the cabinet secretary will examine that, which is fairly important. We do not know exactly what happens. The new national medicines utilisation unit is giving us information, but we need better data collection to allow the Government to decide whether the system is working as well as we would like. I have described the basic system, but we are concerned about what happens beyond that. If a drug is not yet approved by the SMC, is awaiting appeal after rejection or is finally rejected, that means that a licensed drug that appears to be effective in some circumstances is not recommended for use on the ground of cost effectiveness. Here enters SIGN, which does not have to take into account cost. SIGN makes recommendations only on the basis of effectiveness. That is a potential conflict that needs to be resolved. That brings us to the exceptional needs situation, to which many members have referred. On 11 March, I wrote to ask every health board how it deals with exceptional needs. I was staggered by the variety of their replies, which ranged from a massive document from NHS Grampian—I recommend it to the cabinet secretary as a good starting point—to four lines. The criteria, the committees that ran the system and the appeals procedure were unclear. If that is just the general information that one can gather, how much harder is it for a patient and their clinician to wend their way through that complexity? One point from the committee's report on which we agree is that we need total clarity. We cannot continue to have the situation—to which Jackson Carlaw, among others, referred—in which Sutent, which is a kidney drug, is approved almost totally in some areas but rejected in others. Co-payment is a fundamental and really difficult issue. Perhaps the original design of the NHS is no longer adequate. Duncan McNeil argued eloquently that whatever we do must be equality proofed. We must not introduce a new system that creates further inequalities or separates groups further. The two-tier issue will remain extremely difficult. The Richards report might help us, but one possible solution is to have a new partnership with the industry, to which Malcolm Chisholm referred. In essence, under that partnership, the industry  would pay for what does not work and we would pay for what works. That is a principle to which we could sign up to with the industry if it, too, was prepared to sign up to it. Such a partnership would remove the problem that some, but not others, are eligible on the ground of wealth. No member in the chamber, whatever their party, would accept a situation in which the ability to pay affects how someone copes. Last year, the drug bill for Scotland passed the £1 billion mark. Back in 1999, that figure would have amounted to almost 30 per cent of our total budget; today, it is about 10 per cent. As a result of the Public Petitions Committee's excellent report, we need to review the interlocking structures in the NHS, QIS, the SMC and the cancer management networks, which I have not yet mentioned. Also needing review are the SIGN guidelines, the role of NICE in relation to the SMC, and governance issues between boards and the area drug and therapeutics committees. We must ensure that there is data collection, to inform us and to be analysed. We must also ensure that the exceptional needs criteria are generally understood and readily available to the patient and that there is transparency in the system, including the appeals system. We need to avoid postcode discrepancies. We must achieve resolution and clarity in terms of co-payment. The basis on which drugs are issued should not be the ability to pay.

I congratulate the minister on pursuing the  anti-suicide work of the previous Administration. Is she aware that choose life funding has been reduced in four of the 23 local authorities who replied to me on a freedom of information inquiry? Will she comment on that? Has the minister or her team discussed a possible legislative consent motion in relation to the United Kingdom Government taking powers to control suicide sites on the internet?

I congratulate Michael Matheson on securing this debate on such an important topic. I, too, want to express my appreciation for the work of the Macmillan adviser in the Forth valley area, because—as Mr Matheson pointed out—that work has reaped huge benefits. Living with cancer is now a fact of life. The five-year survival rate for people who have been diagnosed with prostate cancer has increased by 35 per cent, the survival rate for those who have been diagnosed with breast cancer is up by 20 per cent, and the survival rate for those who have been diagnosed with leukaemia is up by 25 per cent. The figures go on. Improved cancer care is being developed in Scotland, and palliative care has improved enormously over the past generation, with the founding and development of the hospice movement in Scotland. However, living with cancer or in a palliative care situation is made infinitely harder if only the  person's medical symptoms are dealt with. Enormous stress for the individual and their family can result if a social care package is not adequately developed. We know from considering cancer survival rates and deprivation characteristics that there are still significant inequalities in those rates. A factor in that is that the situations of people who are already in poverty or are close to poverty are made worse because they do not get the support that they need. Successive UK Governments have developed systems with various care packages, but those packages have been extremely complex—as Michael Matheson rightly said—and the benefits that have been available have been difficult to work through. If a person has an illness that is clearly terminal, the general practitioner can sign them up for attendance allowance, for example, and their claim can be fast-tracked. They then get that allowance, which is helpful. However, it can be tricky to claim the other benefits that are necessary to people who are living with cancer. A person may have to take prolonged periods off work for treatment in the hope and expectation that they will return to work. It is important that adequate support is provided in the intervening period. I am not sure that our national and local systems are yet sensitive enough to support such an approach. Today, Parliament has been concerned with the demise of HBOS. I praise HBOS for what it did for one or two patients I had, who had cancer or who had a partner with cancer. HBOS was particularly supportive in allowing them to have time off, and its return-to-work process allowed them to get back to work at a speed and in a manner that they could manage. Balancing what to do for their benefit was difficult, but important. It is also clear that other groups, such as citizens advice bureaux, have been particularly helpful to patients in guiding them through the process. It is important in the cancer strategy that we join the cancer networks, which are among the most successful developments in the health service in Scotland, with the social care package. The Maggie's centres do quite a bit of that and are extremely important in that regard, but we need a universal package that means that a person who is diagnosed with cancer will be supported through a social care package. Cancer sufferers have other problems. For example, they find that there are difficulties with insurance if they wish to travel. I am pleased that a new company—I cannot remember its name, but I have been trying to find it—is offering travel insurance to people aged over 65 who suffer from cancer. It is particularly difficult for those people to get travel insurance. I welcome the approach that insurance companies have taken to providing  insurance to allow people to travel, but that is only a small part of the package.

I welcome all the reports. On the data issue, does the cabinet secretary agree that, notwithstanding her saying that there was no evidence of deliberate manipulation, there were signs that the service was under pressure? For example, the recategorisation of calls trebled in the three months up to the investigation, but the auto-reporting accounted for 25 per cent of all the improvements, so there was a procedural issue. Can the cabinet secretary clarify that, because it involves a matter of public confidence? Apart from the welcome £4.7 million, the service is under huge pressure from, for example, single manning, increased general demand and new services such as primary angioplasty. Will the cabinet secretary undertake to review the overall funding in light of the service having to address those issues?

This is a very important debate. Some of the misconceptions that are around are being partially, but not fully, addressed. People are confusing receptions and the daily prison population, but they are two distinct things. There is also some confusion between remand and sentenced prisoners. For example, the latest statistical bulletin from the Scottish Prison Service, shows that the number of prisoners who were admitted for remand has gone up from 15,000 to more than 20,000—the exact figures are in the tables in the bulletin. That is a huge increase over the past seven or eight years. The daily population has also increased from about 800 to approximately 1,500 or 1,600—again, the accurate  figures are in the tables for anyone to see. Half of those who are on remand will not be convicted. Deal first with remand. Should we be remanding people? The Conservatives' point is that, if public safety demands it, we must put people into prison on remand—of course we must. I heard that debated in Parliament last session, when I was not a member—and it is a very important debate—but it seems to have led to a huge escalation in the numbers of prisoners on remand for petty offences, which is totally inappropriate. If prisons are to be efficient, they are faced with problems if they have high numbers of receptions. So the debate about the difference between the daily population and the receptions applies to fine defaulters—my colleagues in the SNP were trying to make that point. When I was minister in 2001, there were 7,000 fine defaulters. I am very pleased to say that the figure has dropped in the past year to 3,600. That is progress in the right direction. However, 3,600 is still far too large a number. There will always be some who have to go to prison because they are totally recalcitrant—we have no alternative—but 3,600 is 3,600 too many. The Audit Committee report says that it costs £180 every time the court goes through the process, which means that £6.5 million is being spent on people who have defaulted on their fines and who should be paying into the community. Getting the number of receptions down for remands and fine defaults will free funds within the prison system so that it can be more efficient and effective in addressing reoffending. That was my first point.

We introduced supervised attendance orders in the 1990s and they were of some help. We tried the community reparation order pilots, which did not succeed, and I strongly advise that we look at why they did not succeed and go back to them. They are a way in which unsupervised people can do minor work within their communities to address their offending behaviour to the extent of their fine, and thereby pay it off. That sort of payback, to which the commission refers, is quite appropriate. The one thing that I do not like about what the cabinet secretary said was the implication that the Labour Party did absolutely nothing when we were in Government. When I was Deputy Minister for Justice, we authorised and completed the estates review, and authorised the construction of two  prisons, both of which were to be built by public private partnership, although one was to be run publicly. So to say that nothing was done and that suddenly they—I am sorry, Presiding Officer, I mean the new Government; although you are not even "they", if not "you"—have commissioned the new prisons is somewhat misleading. I have some suggestions that might be helpful. We are all agreed that we want a system that has the public's confidence and which locks up those who put the public at risk and commit heinous or serious offences. However, what we cannot agree on is the best way of disposing of those who have committed minor offences. We must reduce the reoffending rate. The problems with the reoffending rate are partly due to drugs, but we still do not have an integrated system for dealing with drug dependency. Reoffending is also due to alcohol, with 50 per cent of young offenders and 33 per cent of adult offenders having alcohol problems; yet we have almost no alcohol programmes and certainly none that are connected to the outside. I suggest that we build on the success of the drug treatment and testing order—which I agree needs to be refreshed—by having alcohol treatment and testing orders. ATTOs could be used where medically appropriate and provide disulphuram as treatment. We also need to address the employability of offenders, but not in the way that the cabinet secretary suggests, by releasing people dangerously on to building sites. That is entirely inappropriate. I introduced the Wise Group to Barlinnie. We need to build on that sort of thing and train people to go back to work. As Angela Constance said, the mental health issue is crucial. I would make it a key performance indicator for the SPS to record the literacy of every prisoner and set targets for the reduction of illiteracy. There also needs to be cognitive behavioural therapy within prisons. At the moment, it is provided in Barlinnie but not in the other prisons. We need to deal with mental health and literacy issues. Offenders' connections to their families are important; therefore, we should perhaps have more remand centres close to families. Also, as the report recommends, the time-out centre—which I launched when I was a minister and which the report hails as a success—should not be unique after seven years. We must have more time-out centres for women and we should pilot a time-out centre for men. That would deal with the drug and alcohol problems. The Presiding Officer requires me to finish—

Therefore, I do not have time to deal with the issue of personality disorders.  Nevertheless, treatment for personality disorders is fundamental to medical treatment in the prison system. There are ways forward and we should have a longer debate on how the way forward is to be developed.

I do not disagree with the member's point about fine defaulters, but the figures are quite different. The number of fine defaulters was 3,600 rather than 6,000. That needs to be corrected. However, she is right to point out the discrepancy between turnover—that is, admissions—and the daily prison population. Those are two different issues that are very important to this debate.

rose—

C difficile is somewhat different from MRSA. That recognition should be the starting point for the debate. The prevalence of C difficile in the population at large means that, when  someone goes into hospital, it is important that every measure is taken to ensure that the infection is not spread or does not become more serious. Given that we know many of the factors, I will mention just three: overcrowding, poor hand hygiene, and failures in antibiotic policy. Under the previous Administration and continued under this Administration, attempts have been made to tackle some of those issues. For example, overcrowding was exacerbated by delayed discharge, an issue that has been largely eliminated. The Government achieved that in March 2008. I accept that the antibiotic policy that was put in place in 2002 has been updated, but its implementation still needs to be questioned. For example, NHS Lothian has implemented it much more strictly, with good results. That has also been done at the Maidstone hospital in Kent following the outbreak there, and the results have been demonstrated to be effective. The matter has to be taken seriously. Hand washing is a matter of considerable concern. The cabinet secretary has indicated a target of 90 per cent, which sounds good—indeed, it sounds excellent to have such a target. As Ross Finnie said, we know that nurses are better at hand washing than doctors are. Other measures can also be put in place. One of the problems is that the alcohol gels that are widely used in the system are not the answer, because they do not deal with C difficile. Also, the current inspection regime does not distinguish between hand washing and hand hygiene. There are therefore two flaws in setting the target, which is intended to help to restore public confidence. In the self-reporting that occurs under the inspection regime, staff are not required to wash their hands at all times. The reporting is therefore meaningless, which is regrettable. The issue could be addressed in a public inquiry—

I will finish the point, cabinet secretary, and then let you in. If one looks at the latest figures under the hand hygiene inspection regime, the denominator—the number of observations—reported by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde was 300. However, the number reported by NHS Forth Valley, which is a much smaller board with only two hospitals, was 480. Those figures show that no pattern is emerging from the inspection regime. There is an absolute need for an independent inspection regime. That issue should be looked at.

I absolutely accept that. The problem is how we can see the whole picture. Many things cannot be understood by reading the report conclusions. For example, why did 55 cases produce 18 deaths at Vale of Leven? The expected mortality level for C difficile—and there is such a level—is around 2 to 3 per cent, although in associated cases it may go up to 6 per cent. At the Vale of Leven, the level was almost 30 per cent. The report says that people did not know why that occurred. With due respect to the cabinet secretary, if neither her specialist committee nor her civil servants know the reason, a public inquiry is needed in order that we can understand all the factors and know where we should be going. The Lord Advocate's inquiries will not achieve that. As other members said, the reports that we have received are helpful. However, they give us neither the full picture nor the full answer. Too many questions have not yet been answered. As I mentioned, the number of deaths at Vale of Leven is not explained. Also, the HPS review was undertaken over only a six-month period. We do not know whether deep cleaning, which both Gordon Brown and the cabinet secretary have ordered, does any good. We need to understand that. Too many issues remain unanswered. The families are entitled to understand, as far as possible, that all the composite measures that were undertaken by this Administration and the previous Administration, based on the knowledge that we had at the time, were sufficient and will be sufficient going forward if we are to restore public confidence. All testing and surveillance is not yet standardised, and reporting is not done hospital by hospital. Hugh Henry and Wendy Alexander referred to that. In England, reporting is done by hospital so that if things move in the wrong direction, that can be identified right away. The HPS report now refers to that for the first time, and shows that deaths in the Vale of Leven hospital were above predicted levels in January and March. If a reporting system that indicated that had been in place in March, we would not have had to wait until the Dumbarton and Vale of Leven Reporter invited us to examine the issue. Some reporting systems are in place, but they are not effective and they are not being used properly. Do we want a hospital-based reporting system? Will that restore confidence? We need to consider that as part of a public inquiry.  HPS issued the C difficile associated disease care bundle only on April 1, but its status was only advisory. The website said only that HPS "would like to hear from" people who were using the care bundle. That does not indicate attention to what actually needs to happen. There should have been directives that were independent of inspection and which had teeth. The cabinet secretary has said repeatedly that the issue is being taken seriously—I do not deny that—but the families and the public do not believe that the Parliament is taking the issue seriously enough. We need a public inquiry to show us the way ahead and to help us to understand what has happened.

I accept what the member says about fatal accident inquiries, but the broader issues are the problem. Clostridium difficile-associated disease is an issue not just for the Vale of Leven but for the whole of Scotland and the whole of the NHS.

I thank the minister for her words about the work of the previous Government. The action plan reflects the fact that progress is being made. I say to Jackson Carlaw that there is a distinction between what the Government can achieve—which may be limited—and what the individual can achieve, and the concept of responsibility as it has been promoted by Conservatives in the past. For example, that concept was promoted by hiding away the Black report on inequalities, which also dealt with diet. The individual's responsibility was used as an excuse for inaction—that is how it might be perceived. Of course individuals have to take some responsibility for their own care, but that should not be the main focus of our attention. Do we have a problem? As all speakers today have said, undoubtedly there is a problem. Margo MacDonald referred to the European situation. The EU report of the international obesity task force indicated that 22 million children were overweight and 5 million were obese, and the numbers are rising. As both Nigel Don and Michael Matheson said, it is about not just the figures but the trend. For the most part, the trends are going in the wrong direction. That is our concern. The causes clearly are complex, as most speakers have highlighted. Elaine Smith, Margo MacDonald and James Kelly said that deprivation and poverty contribute  to obesity. For women, the connection between deprivation and obesity is clear, although it is less well understood in the case of men. Nevertheless, deprivation is important. A number of members made the point that if someone is poor, the foods that they buy tend to be less good for them. Good food is sometimes considered to be more expensive. Inequalities undoubtedly play a part in obesity, as do the diet that we eat and the exercise that we take. A number of members referred to the consequences listed in the BMA report, so I will not list them all again. The important point is to recognise that, because of current trends, there is likely to be a great increase in, for example, the incidence of type 2 diabetes, and a growing number of people will be affected by complications and problems relating to cardiovascular disease and cancer, which are two of the three priorities for this and the previous Government. Should we take a general or a targeted approach? It is clear that, without the knowledge of what we should actually be doing, it is important that we try to target things better. As Professor Mike Lean indicated—and as Michael Matheson mentioned—the balance must lean towards diet. Diet is more important than exercise, although exercise clearly plays a part. As the action plan indicates, we need to increase the consumption of fruit, vegetables, cereal and oily fish, and we need to reduce the intake of salt, fats and simple, as opposed to complex, sugars. Surprisingly, the plan does not cover alcohol—it is merely alluded to, and it is not dealt with under diet. We have been clear about the massive growth in the alcohol problem in Scotland, which involves calorie intake as well as other aspects. Managing alcohol is important in this context. Frank McAveety and Mary Scanlon, who mentioned labelling, referred to alcohol. Alcoholic drinks need to be labelled with regard to calories so that people know how much they are taking in. Our diet is important. The previous Government concentrated on children eating fruit and vegetables and learning habits early, with the P1 to P3 programme and the provision of fruit at nurseries. I found it most rewarding when I went to a nursery school and saw young children eating fruit. The parents came in and saw some of the fruit that had not been eaten and asked, "What is that?" It was a kiwi fruit. They took it, and said, "Actually, that's very nice." People do develop good habits. Despite the despair, doom and gloom that all members who have spoken in the debate have referred to—while not quite reaching the point of assassination, to refer to Ian McKee's typically eloquent speech—I wish to highlight an area in which we are doing a little better: Scotland is high  up in the charts for children eating fruit and vegetables. Unfortunately, only about 24 per cent of them are reaching the target, but that comes right at the top end of the list for the European Union. We have made some progress up the charts, which indicates that what we do here can have an effect. I refer to the hungry for success programme, the active schools programme and to what Ian McKee, Margo MacDonald and Jamie Stone said about teaching school pupils about nutrition and cooking. All those things are important and form part of the whole. On the educational process, curriculum crowding, to which Ross Finnie referred, is important. If we turn out citizens who are going to die younger than the current generation, that means that the educational process is failing. Tackling the problem must be given a much greater priority. I welcome the priority for mothers—prenatally, antenatally and postnatally—and women at the pre-conception stage, because helping them to understand nutrition is of considerable importance. I welcome the emphasis on breastfeeding, although I hope that the minister will answer the question about targets, which was raised by Elaine Smith, who has done considerable work in that area. Breastfeeding is important for a healthy diet and the start that children get in life. If diet and intake are important, so is exercise. Why? Not just because it balances calorie intake to a modest degree—which I accept is less important—but because of the mental wellbeing that exercise creates. If people feel better about themselves, they might not comfort eat or eat food in the way that was described so graphically by Stuart McMillan and other members who mentioned deep-fried Mars bars and pizzas and so on, which people sometimes eat as comfort food. Improving mental wellbeing is helpful. The exercise side must be developed by, for example, having more cycle routes and opportunities for walking. The policy of free access to swimming facilities, which was in the SNP manifesto, needs to be followed through. All those things need to be developed. As Jamie Stone said, we must ensure that sport does not mean just rugby, football, lacrosse and hockey—or even physical education; it must be what people want to do in the way of exercise. The why dance programme for adolescent girls is a good example of what should be done. We need to understand what people want. The Scottish centre for healthy working lives is mentioned in the action plan. We need employers to give much more consideration not just to workplace canteens but to opportunities for their workforce to exercise in the workplace. Investment in developing such opportunities would not be  unselfish, because workers' productivity would increase. I welcome the action plan and the debate, the consensual nature of which demonstrates the Parliament's intentions. We will make progress.

Does the member agree that, pending the results of the free school meals pilots, the Government should absolve kinship carers from being tested for the provision of free school meals, which still happens in some areas?

That was a manifesto promise by the SNP. The numbers, which were given in a parliamentary answer to me, went down between 2005 and 2007, from 300 to 220. [ Interruption. ] Not only were the figures not going in the right direction in 2007, when the current Government took power, but they are currently going in the wrong direction—they are not doubling.

Why has the First Minister failed to indicate whether expenditure on the health service in Scotland will be overtaken by that in England within the next four to five years because of the reductions that he made in the previous budget and has failed to redress in the proposed budget? Will the tobacco control element of the proposed health bill include a ban on vending machines, a ban on smoking in cars where there are children and a curtailment of product placement? The last of those is a major problem, because the tobacco industry is one of the most sophisticated at overcoming public health measures.

I thank the minister for her letter, which arrived today. However, when the new PD cylinders—which require a separate head that the patient must insert—are found not to be full, patients have no confidence that their oxygen needs will be met when they are out. That is a very serious issue. We now have only one supplier in Scotland, as the two other suppliers have withdrawn. Will the minister undertake to review the efficacy of the traditional local pharmacy contract, which is unique in the United Kingdom and which appears to me to be no longer suitable for supplying our needs? Lastly, will she ensure that BOC does not divert lightweight cylinders to England, as a number of individuals have suggested is happening? The lightweight cylinders are supposed to be returned and recycled, but the number of them that have disappeared from circulation is far in excess of what can be accounted for by the need for regrading.

Will the minister confirm that the ferry service was a commercial success but did not prove to be sufficiently profitable for the company to maintain it?

I thank the minister for her statement. This is the third emergency statement that she has had to make in the chamber. I understand that mistakes can be made in the transmission of data, but questions need to be  asked about the mechanisms. What procedure will be put in place to inform ministers about the loss of data? There was a one-week gap between TNT accepting that the data were missing and the minister being partially informed—it was the next morning before further information was passed to her. It is important to get these things right for the confidence of the public and staff. I need to know, and the public is entitled to be assured, that the randomly generated 15-character password that accompanied the encrypted data was not in the letter in the package, because that has happened in the past. I seek reassurance for the public on that point. The fact that this is the third occasion on which data have gone missing in Scotland—the Scottish Public Pensions Agency lost data in October 2007 and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council lost data in January 2008—means that the publication of a report on data handling is timely. However, I wonder why we need to transmit data on 1,000,000 patients at one time by hard disk, and why it was not chunked up into bits and sent via the NHS network—to which the cabinet secretary referred—which is secure, as far as I know. What period of time is covered by the almost 1,000,000 pieces of data? That information will let the public know the period about which they can call the helpline.

The Parliament has welcomed and supported the main thrust of the discussion paper, which is that Scotland faces an almost unique alcohol problem. The measures of harm from alcohol and the associated numbers, to which many members have referred, are generally moving in the wrong direction. Although there are some exceptions, the speed at which those figures are moving in the wrong direction is worrying. There are a number of elements to the discussion, including affordability, availability, licensing law and its enforcement, and education, information and advertising—strangely, advertising has not been referred to, but that is perhaps because it is a reserved matter. There is the question of the culture of drinking, to which Bill  Aitken referred, and there are also the matters of diagnosis, treatment and support. Specific groups of people have been referred to in the paper and in members' speeches, including pregnant women in connection with foetal alcohol syndrome. How children are affected by alcohol has been raised, as has adolescent and young adult alcohol misuse. Ian McKee mentioned hazardous, harmful and dependent consumption and the question of how we tackle it, and there are issues around offenders. In an eight-minute speech, it is not possible to do justice to the subject—its complexity makes that impossible—but I will try to deal quickly with some of the issues that I have mentioned. First, there is the question of affordability. The one thing on which there is clear international evidence that we must accept, is the fact that price and consumption are inextricably linked. Given that the evidence on the policy is clear, we must support a close examination of the concept of minimum pricing. I would like to know what the legal advice is, but the idea of a unit pricing system is worthy of consideration. It has been considered in other areas. Personally, I believe that it should be considered on a UK and European Union basis, but if that cannot be done, we should certainly consider it. Pretty much all members agree that minimum pricing, which is associated with unit pricing, should be considered. The banning of loss leaders and the gifting of free alcohol with other products that are on sale are covered in the provisions on irresponsible drinks promotions in schedule 3 to the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005. The powers exist for the Government to deal with the issue. I am sure that it will gain general support in dealing with deep discounting and the inappropriate promotion of alcohol, which needs to be tightened up. There are still some problems with sales, particularly in relation to internet sales, but that is perhaps a matter for another day. I have discussed affordability, but what about availability? Licensing boards have new powers, and I do not think that the importance of the licensing forums was fully brought out in the debate. They are crucial to the delivery of what communities want, as Jamie Stone said. What we do must be effective, but it must also be acceptable, and we can ensure that that is the case by fully empowering the licensing forums. They have been established, but the Government has not re-established the national licensing forum. A number of people in the field are calling for it to be re-established and I hope that when he sums up the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will accept that that should happen.  The concept of requiring all alcohol to be in one section of a supermarket seems sensible, and we could support that. The introduction of standard measures will be slightly more difficult, but the idea has merit in relation to the educational aspect of people knowing what they are drinking. People assume that a glass of wine is one unit, whereas even the standard, old-fashioned, 125ml glass is now 1.5 units. Understanding what one is drinking is crucial to being able to deal with it. In part, availability will be better managed by the roll-out of the ServeWise training programme. Indeed, some student unions have received awards for their training and delivery on the matter. The proposal that grabbed the headlines is the banning of off-licence sales to under-21s. Labour has taken the initial position that we want to examine the idea. We do not want to give an immediate reaction to it because we want to consider why and on what basis the proposal has been made. We were unclear about whether it was a public safety issue, a community safety issue or a public health issue. Having read the documentation and considered the Cleveland and Armadale experiments, we are still unclear about the wisdom of imposing a national ban on one particular aspect of purchasing, based on what were experiments in community safety. We also heard about the examples in Falkirk and elsewhere. The licensing forums and licensing boards, supported by public health bodies and the police, should discuss with local retailers the imposition of specific bans in specific areas as part of measures to tackle antisocial behaviour, but the step should not be taken as a public health measure. As many speakers said, the problem is not specifically about 18 to 21-year-olds. It is about the drinking of all adults. That is the difficulty. What about licensing and enforcement? Implementation of the 2005 act is moving forward, but we are not there yet. The figures that the Government has given are welcome, but people have the general impression that we do not yet have tough enough enforcement in relation to illegal sales. We need to ensure that there is a clear, strong public message on the matter. Labour has spelled out what it thinks should happen, and that will now be a matter for discussion. However, we are pretty much agreed that the existing provisions need to be enforced. Other measures that are relevant include antisocial behaviour orders, dispersal orders and the use of community wardens. Indeed, dispersal orders, the taking home to their parents of intoxicated youngsters and arrest referral were important aspects of the Livingston experiment. Perhaps the banning of drinking in public places  should be covered in a national law rather than just in bylaws. I will not discuss the drink-driving issue, which Kenneth Gibson mentioned, because it is a UK issue, but there is merit in the proposal. Education, information, advertising and culture are difficult areas, but they are important. Universal education does not work, except perhaps by creating a general atmosphere in which other policies can be introduced. On workplace involvement, the report does not mention the Scottish centre for healthy working lives, or what used to be SHAW—Scotland's health at work. Engagement with the centres would be important. I will not deal with treatment because I do not have time, but I will make one comment, and my earlier intervention may indicate where I am coming from. There is an absolute need to consolidate existing alcohol services: too many are hand-to-mouth and temporary. There are two areas in which the report is weak, and we should revisit them. First, as Mary Mulligan mentioned, the only reference to children affected by alcohol misuse is to a survey on foetal alcohol spectrum disorder—and I am not sure how that will work. There is a need to spell out more specifically and widely the effects of alcohol misuse on children. That may be done in other areas, but we need clarity. Secondly, the report is weak on the question of prisoners and offenders. There are only two or three paragraphs on that and criminal justice needs to be covered in greater depth. In conclusion—this is my last sentence, Presiding Officer—everything that we do must be evidence based, but it must also be based in our culture, not that of other countries, so there is a need for pilots and research before we introduce substantial new policies, and what we do—

—must be clear in purpose, enforceable, practicable and acceptable.

Albyn house was threatened with closure but was saved. However, staff there have now been told by the national health service in Grampian that their funding is temporary and that the situation is being reassessed. Is the member aware that, although the service seems to be very successful, the local NHS does not seem to be offering the staff any sense of permanence?

Will the member give way?

We need to study the report in detail. No one can disagree with the general thrust of it. I have about 100 questions, Presiding Officer, but I know that you will allow me only one, which is really an extension of Ross Finnie's question. Where does the joint future agenda lie within the new proposals, and where do initiatives such as family centres, sure start and home start lie? Has the Government still abandoned the policy of providing nursery places for two-year-olds in deprived areas? I realise that that is more than one question, Presiding Officer.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to ensure that pupils' additional support needs are being met. (S3O-3872)

The minister will be aware of the attainment gap between deaf children and their hearing peers. In the light of the United Kingdom children's commissioners' collective report to the United Nations on the poverty of information on the performance of disabled children in mainstream education, what steps will the Government take to monitor that performance? In view of the fact that the Scottish National Party made a manifesto pledge to make available an additional £10 million for support needs, has the pledge been kept and, if not, when will it be kept?

I congratulate Claire Baker on securing this important debate. I was president of the Scottish Union of Students almost 40 years ago and failure to return deposits was an issue even then. The issue is not new, but it now requires to be resolved. We know that about 10 per cent of households are in the private rented sector and that roughly 70 per cent of tenants in that sector have to pay a deposit. As Claire Baker said, it is estimated that between £50 million and £80 million is now being held in deposits. The Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 allows the introduction of a deposit protection scheme. It is important that we now move forward. The evidence from NUS Scotland that 33 per cent of students reported unfair deductions from their deposits or delays in their return is borne out by anecdotal evidence of which I am aware. Some 15 years ago, a member of my family was a resident in privately rented accommodation. At the end of one year, their £800 deposit was withheld in its entirety, until I intervened and threatened to take the gentleman concerned to court over the issue, at which point he said in exasperation, "But I've always kept the deposit." I hope that not many landlords still have that attitude today. As Robert Brown said, legislation is required to deal with the issue, because some landlords do not play fair. The evidence from the NUS shows that in many cases there were unfair delays in the return of deposits as landlords held on to the money unnecessarily. Many of the students concerned will require to move on into other privately rented accommodation, for which they will have to pay another deposit. They cannot afford to delay their move. Research by the University of St Andrews students association reports that about a quarter  of students there experienced unjustifiable deductions or delays. The minister could say that deposits should be returned with speed and that disputes about deductions could go to a form of mediation. I am sure that good landlords would welcome that, because there are occasions on which such disputes arise in the natural course of things, and it is only reasonable that a form of mediation should be available. I think that Robert Brown said that we need to strike a balance between those who are engaged in the private rented sector, which is an important part of housing provision, and those who rent. At the moment, I suggest that we have not struck that balance. We already have a scheme in England and Wales, which, with the caveats that Jamie McGrigor has expressed about its introduction, seems to be working extremely well. I can see absolutely no reason why Scotland should be any different in that respect. We have the opportunity to learn from England. We should grasp the nettle and the Government should introduce a scheme with considerable rapidity.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I crave your indulgence and request that the vote on whether we are voting on the financial resolution should be taken first, because the procedures following will depend on that.

I am sorry, but I am not asking you to conduct a vote on the financial resolution. I am asking you to conduct a vote on whether permission has been given for the motion to be withdrawn. That was proposed by the Minister for Parliamentary Business, and we objected to the motion being withdrawn. You must hold a vote on that, please, before you proceed.

The reporting system that was put in place in October 2006 was updated in 2007. It requires cases to be notified to Health Protection Scotland, which in turn notifies the Government through a file note, as it did in this case. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the remit for the independent review that she proposed in her statement is insufficiently wide, in that it does not cover notification from the Vale of Leven hospital to the Greater Glasgow and Clyde Health Board infection control committee or Health Protection Scotland? Indeed, it also does not cover any triggers for informing the Government of what action has been taken or could be taken. I give notice to the cabinet secretary that, if she is unable to extend the remit, I will raise the matter in the Health and Sport Committee and seek an investigation of the failures of the reporting systems up the line. When did the cabinet secretary know about the five deaths that were mentioned in the Dumbarton and Vale of Leven Reporter ?

I would not in any way try to compete with Jackson Carlaw, but I will say that his speeches are always greatly interesting. We have had two lectures on history—one from Jackson Carlaw just now, the other from Dr McKee during the stage 1 debate.  I should perhaps begin by thanking Ross Finnie for his kind—I think—remarks about the joint consultation on the bill that Dr McKee and I undertook. Like others, I will try to be consensual, but when I started writing this speech—

But, although I had intended to start my speech by saying that this bill is historic, I feel that that word is becoming devalued through overuse. That point has not yet been recognised, but it may be in due course. This is an important piece of legislation in an otherwise fairly threadbare legislative programme, but that does not detract from the bill’s importance. I want to thank the minister for her gracious remarks on the previous Administration’s work on the bill—the Liberal-Labour coalition did all the consultative work. The bill reflects the needs of a modern society. Members have raised various issues—Christine Grahame, for example, referred to anthrax; an old friend that reared its head again recently, giving us important lessons on why we needed a modern framework—but the need is also driven by the emergence of new diseases.  As I said during the stage 1 discussions, as medical students we were under the false impression that, after 20 years of the national health service and of modernisations in medicine, infectious diseases would be conquered and would not confront us in future, but HIV/AIDS has emerged as a hugely important problem. There is also the possibility of an avian flu pandemic. We faced a near epidemic with severe acute respiratory syndrome, which is another new condition. Those are only three of an enormous number of new conditions that are emerging, such as Ebola virus, which, thank goodness, has not hit this country. Although Ross Finnie was joking, he is quite right to say that we scrutinised the list of organisms closely. There are powers in the bill to add new organisms to that list and I expect that the minister will do so regularly. As a result of the three stages of scrutiny of the bill, I believe that we now have a modern public health framework that is robust and sustainable and will allow us to prepare for the challenges that I have just outlined. The original Infectious Disease (Notification) Act 1889, to which Jackson Carlaw referred so eloquently, is not the oldest act that is affected by the bill; I discovered that the Public Works Loans Act 1887 is also affected. Indeed, the 1889 act is not the oldest act that we have challenged in the Parliament; in our first session, we amended bills from the 16 th century. In moving towards modernisation of our legislative framework, we are undoing some of the past acts that have, apparently, stood us in good stead for a long time. I will not dwell on the original drafting of the bill. It is regrettable that it was not up to the usual excellent standard of Government bill drafters. Mary Scanlon has detailed the problems that we faced at stage 1. Suffice it to say that those matters have been addressed appropriately and that the bill will now meet the needs of the Scottish courts, which is important. Many of the points that were raised in committee have now been embedded in the bill satisfactorily. Thanks should go to the witnesses and stakeholders who gave evidence and to the minister and her bill team for their excellent engagement, which made it a pleasure to develop the bill appropriately. A number of important issues arose, which were based, at least in part, on the need to balance public health protection with the rights of the individual. I am glad that we changed the sections on providing information to individuals. Mary Scanlon made an interesting point about the relationship between the bill—and many of the other bills that we have passed—and the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 and the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Act 2007. People must be aware of the need to ensure that individuals, even those with partial capacity, understand what is happening. On the whole, we have struck a balance between protecting public health and maintaining civil liberties. Ross Finnie’s amendment on entry into private dwelling houses helped us strike the appropriate balance. That illustrates how we took the bill forward. Members have referred to the need for an integrated, joined-up approach, which is vital. At stage 2, I argued that the joint public health protection plan should not be made after consultation with the local authority, but should be agreed jointly. However, I accepted the minister’s assurance that plans will be agreed jointly in practice. As James Kelly, Michael Matheson and others have said, the regulations and guidance associated with the bill will be important in ensuring that an integrated approach is taken.  The addition of the requirement to notify the authorities of a person’s place of work or school, which the Government accepted, is important. Although individual general practitioners might be aware of individual cases, they might not recognise the overall importance of a butcher’s shop or a nursery school or school. Reporting people’s place of work or school, as well as the other elements, allows the authorities to coalesce information to determine whether there is a problem, such as the problem that we had with E coli at a butcher’s shop and other problems that we have had in schools. The issue of sunbeds, on which all members have paid credit to Ken Macintosh, has been debated fairly fully. The decisions that we reached are reasonable and balanced, and we should all be reassured by the minister’s agreement to revisit the issue if the current light-touch approach does not work. I thank the minister for her emphasis today on the HSE pursuing that work. It is important that we ensure that the public are reassured about what is happening. The most important point to come out of that debate is the message that sunbeds alone are not the most important aspect of skin cancer and that the phrase "a healthy tan" should perhaps be dropped from the lexicon. It is important for children—indeed, for us all—to understand that exposure to sun, particularly when it burns the skin, leads to higher rates of cancer. The rate of skin cancer, if not at epidemic levels, is rising significantly. As part of our selling the legislation, we should put out the message that we should perhaps return to our predecessors’ view and be proud of having pale rather than tanned skin. I thank the minister and her bill team for their engagement, and the convener of the Health and Sport Committee for the way she held the reins in committee. I am not sure that the task was too difficult, but controlling individuals who always have a lot to say can be difficult. I also thank the clerks to the committee for their support during the passage of the bill; it was a great help. I also thank my fellow committee members for the way in which, collectively, we were able, with the Government, to develop the bill. Even if it will not stand the test of time for a period like that from 1887 to 2008, it has produced a modern and robust framework that should stand the test of time for some time to come. Labour will support the motion.

Does the minister agree that the committee’s concerns at stage 2 were about the modification of machines that were approved under the European Union regulations when they were sold? It is the modification that is the difficulty. We unearthed a considerable discrepancy between the views of those on the environmental side who are charged with protecting the public and the views of those who enforce health and safety. Will the minister comment on whether the Consumer Protection from Unfair Trading Regulations 2008 will help to protect people in that regard? Will she consider that in relation to the provision of information and, in particular, the provision of misleading information that contains claims about the health benefits of sunbeds? Will she also reconsider enforcement and the inspection of equipment to ensure that it has not been modified in a way that might cause a problem? At stage 2, we were made aware that there would have to be proof that damage had occurred. That reactive rather than proactive approach does not seem appropriate.

The Labour Party will support Ross Finnie’s amendment because in the cases—which will be extremely rare, as he said—in which an individual did not consent to the entry of an officer who sought to ascertain whether something unlawful was occurring, it would be unsatisfactory for that to put an end to the matter. When there is a supposed breach, it is important that the law should be enforced. Doing so under a warrant that has been given by the sheriff on the basis that Ross Finnie has outlined appears to be appropriate.

I separate the issue about fees from the issue about support for members who lodge amendments. On fees, GPs constantly complain about the administrative burdens under which they are placed in relation to dealing with quite small and nominal fees. The fee for notification is particularly small. If the number of notifications were large, the aggregated administrative effort of dealing with the fees would be worth while. However, the minister gave evidence to the Health and Sport Committee that it is likely that 85 per cent or thereabouts of notifications will be abolished. In those circumstances, the retention of this small fee for a decreasing number of notifications does not seem an appropriate use of general practitioners’ time or their staff’s time. They need to be engaged on other issues. Whether the BMA cares to come back to the Government and renegotiate general practitioners’ total salary package on the basis of what is lost by this measure is a matter for the BMA and the Government. That is a matter in which, for the moment and until 2011, Labour Party members will not be involved. I turn to the issue of drafting advice for members. I was a member during the first session of the Parliament, when Labour was in Government and I was a minister. At that time, one was able to turn directly to the drafters to ask for their comments on amendments. I am surprised at the paucity of support that is currently made available to individual MSPs in preparing amendments such as that which Mary Scanlon lodged. In legislative terms, the provision of such drafting support is vital. Presiding Officer, I ask you and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to take another look at whether additional support should be provided to members. Doing so would mean that amendments are not only judged as competent, and therefore passed by yourself as being competent, Presiding Officer—as I assume amendment 1 must have been—but that the drafting of the amendment properly reflects the intentions of the member who lodged it.

Does the First Minister agree that it is a matter of concern that workers for a number of voluntary organisations that work on drugs and alcohol face redundancy notices and have done so for a considerable time? Will he undertake to have the Cabinet Secretary for Justice examine the issue? It is a serious matter that such organisations not only do not have three-year funding but do not even have funding for this year. Does the First Minister agree that it is inappropriate that workers in this area should constantly and repeatedly face redundancy notices?

This has been a good debate. I start by inviting the cabinet secretary to get through one debate without accusing the Opposition of scaremongering when it tries to make serious points.

I want to make some progress. I will give way to the cabinet secretary later, but it would be helpful for her to drop the word "scaremongering". We are having this debate because, as the cabinet secretary rightly said, it is important that people in remote and rural communities and everyone else have equal access to health care. The geography of Scotland is one reason for the Barnett formula, as we need additional funding to support necessary services in remote and rural areas. Members have referred to factors other than geography that are important. There are differences between the health needs of remote and rural areas and those of other areas. Jackson Carlaw mentioned higher suicide rates, a higher incidence of alcohol-related disease, a higher number of accidents and a higher palliative care load. Five areas need to be addressed, but none of us has time to consider them in the necessary depth. Members have referred to recruitment and retention; education; the fact that organisational structures in remote and rural communities need to be different; ambulance and emergency care services; e-health; and the vexed question of NRAC. I propose to deal with as many of those issues as I can in the time that is available to me. On recruitment and retention, no one has mentioned the little-understood term "proleptic appointments", to which the report refers. The issue is fundamental, as the situation in remote and rural areas is different from that in towns. We need to appoint people in advance of their taking up posts, to ensure that their induction is not brief and to recognise the peculiar needs of rural communities. In other words, there needs to be extended induction. That requires funding, because it is vital to appoint people three months ahead of time to prepare them. Ian McKee and others referred to the need for multiskill training. The day of generalist surgeons, who operated until recently throughout Scotland, has almost gone, so how do we prepare people for work in more remote and rural communities, where they will have to undertake more traditional roles? That needs to be addressed, and the report goes into the issue in considerable detail. Multiskilling and multitasking are not just for groups such as general surgeons, but for all  workers in remote and rural areas. The report does not emphasise sufficiently the need not only to provide the different skills that an extended community care team requires but to make use of the different skills and aptitudes of individuals, which is especially necessary in remote and rural communities. People also need to be integrated and matched with facilities. A detailed set of management and human resources tools is required. Another issue that has not been referred to is the role of volunteers. Volunteers are important throughout the health service, but their importance in rural communities is even greater. Jamie Stone and others referred to the problem of volunteer drivers; I am referring to other groups as well. Some members referred to agenda for change and the European working time directive, which are particular issues in remote and rural communities. The directive makes providing out-of-hours care extremely difficult. On agenda for change, the peculiar skills of individuals need to be recognised, which is particularly difficult for those communities. The extended community care model that has been referred to builds community resilience, which is particularly important. The need to integrate all services to provide good out-of-hours cover was illustrated extremely well by Murdo Fraser. The situation is difficult, now that GPs are no longer prepared to work 24 hours a day. Jeremy Purvis referred to the cost of the out-of-hours service in the Borders being twice the cost of that in NHS Lothian, but in the Highlands it is actually six or seven times the cost in Glasgow. There are huge differences. The report refers to replacing fragmented services, different organisations, duplication and a mainly reactive service with one that is integrated and involves partnership, seamless delivery of care and anticipatory care. I will illustrate that briefly with the example of the Ambulance Service. The report states that, for some areas, further embedding that service within the territorial boards would seem to be appropriate. Mary Scanlon referred to that. The cabinet secretary and the Minister for Public Health should consider that carefully. The pilot in which paramedics provide anticipatory care reflects a need for a much stronger degree of embedding within the territorial boards than has happened hitherto. In the report, we find that there are six different levels of nursing care and eight different levels of allied health professionals, all of which are assisted by support workers. I welcome that—it is appropriate for rural areas—but, as Mary Scanlon said, we need to consider carefully the terms and conditions of those workers.  The bit of the report on e-health is not as strong as I would like. A number of members, including Rob Gibson, Ross Finnie and Ian McKee, referred to the importance of e-health. The report appears to stress the need for service-to-service connection. That is important for delivering diagnostic services in remote communities that are served by primary health care teams, linked to hubs. The report deals with that adequately. However, as Nigel Don referred to eloquently, the report does not deal with the concept of e-health as a tool for monitoring individuals in their homes. West Lothian has one of the leading examples of that in Europe. About 3,000 homes are monitored. We could develop that by monitoring bed pressure and movement, and, as one member suggested, by working with patients to provide online facilities. Northern Ireland has just announced £46 million for such an initiative. Our budget for that is considerably less. Nigel Don's concept was of a vision for the future. I understand the constraints, but the report is weak on e-health and it needs to be strengthened. We may have difficulties with the detail of NRAC, but we must remember that Arbuthnott was set up by Labour and with the agreement of the Parliament, and was welcomed by everyone. However, it led to problems, for example in Grampian, where the allocation was cut. I remember Mike Rumbles's eloquence in the first session of the Parliament about that "terrible" cut. It is understood that some will be winners and some will be losers, but the concern is that the new system is less transparent and that, by using small areas to define the formula, it loses something that Arbuthnott had. My final point is one that I made in the Health and Sport Committee. Primary care is fundamental to remote and rural areas, but it has not been considered. That was also a criticism of Arbuthnott. NRAC has admitted that it does not have the data to deal with the issue. The cabinet secretary may be concerned about how Labour members are expressing themselves, but there is no doubt that there is concern about the cuts. We may argue about the figures, but we estimate that there will be cuts of about £12 million or £13 million for the Borders, over a period of time. Without a cut, costs will rise year on year, but, as George Foulkes said, the rises will not reflect the needs of communities. Labour makes an important suggestion about NRAC in its amendment. We are not scaremongering; we are inviting continued debate with NRAC. The Liberal amendment refers to that, too. RARARI has done excellent work. I praise Paul Martin, Dr Gibbins and the 30 members of RARARI for their hard work, which comes on top of Lewis Ritchie's community care report. We have  vital models, but we need to consider e-health and revisit NRAC from the point of view of its transparency.

Does the member agree that the fact that the Western Isles NHS Board will have a reduction in its budget—

Under NRAC, the health board will eventually receive £7 million less of adjusted money.

The point is that, relatively, that will be an additional burden. I apologise to Mr Foulkes.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate and on his robust and interesting speech on the subject of the 60 th anniversary of the NHS. I have served the NHS for something like 40 years as a professional. I pay tribute to my colleagues in the service—not just the doctors, nurses and allied health professionals, who have already been mentioned, but all the others, such as the porters and cleaners, who are part of the NHS family. Thank God they are being brought back into the NHS after the services that they provide were privatised, which meant that they were removed from the family. They play a hugely important role, as do the volunteers in the NHS. After all, volunteers kept our hospitals alive before the NHS was set up. Subsequently, they played a major part in helping the NHS, and they could play a much bigger part, which perhaps we should consider. I also pay tribute to the managers in the NHS. Although we doctors did not like them very much, because they kept telling us what to do, they played a hugely important role in delivering the visions of successive Governments. In addition, I pay tribute to the many boards on which volunteers, people selected by Government and  others have played a role down the years in directing the NHS and ensuring that the public interest and political interest are represented and that things are done properly. The NHS is a massive undertaking—after all, it is the third largest employer in the world, after the Chinese army and the Indian railway. We should not forget that. When I studied medicine in Edinburgh in the 1960s, the dean of faculty was Sir John Brotherston, who went on to be our chief medical officer. He described to us in graphic terms what was happening when he studied medicine. The squalor that some members have mentioned, the deaths associated with infectious diseases and the malnutrition that resulted in rickets—those were all factors in the unequal society in which he lived. As many have said, the NHS has delivered on one fundamental aim—it is essentially free at the point of need. If one asks any family in this country whether they worry about the cost of becoming ill, the answer is no. That is the greatest gift that Nye Bevan and the Labour Party gave Britain when they created the NHS following the Beveridge report. In America, 40 per cent of personal bankruptcies are due to health bills. That is a society in which I have never wanted to live. Indeed, my colleagues might be amused by a story from when I went to North Carolina to visit my soon-to-be brother-in-law in 1966. Obviously, we discussed health services in the state and, after a week, I was labelled as a Communist—that was people's attitude there towards socialised medicine. As my colleagues know, it would be hard to find someone much further from being a Communist, in British terms, than I am. One thing is clear: whatever happens, under whatever Government, this country will never go back from a position in which the NHS is fundamental to our care, even though we might have different views on how to go forward and we face many challenges. One thing that Nye Bevan got wrong—he did not get a lot wrong—was that he persuaded Stafford Cripps that the budget was tolerable because, if we introduced a national health service, the costs would go down. That demonstrates his great powers of persuasion because, of course, that was not the case, and the Labour Government subsequently was forced to introduce co-payment in a number of areas of the health service. No socialist wanted it, but it was recognised to be necessary on a pragmatic basis. We will face huge challenges as we sustain the national health service. However, we are all committed to it. We will drive it forward one way or another and retain the basic principle that people  will be served by a health service that is, essentially, free at the point of need.

Will Jamie Stone give way?

Has Jamie Stone talked to the Highland youth council about its response to the education programme that became compulsory under my watch? He might find that interesting. The issue is not only education but how we deliver it and the quality of it.

I begin by referring members to the declaration in my register of interests on the work that I continue to do for the Edinburgh alcohol and drug action team on the single shared assessment. No member can take issue with the direction of travel that is embodied in the strategy. Obviously, recovery is important, but the clear message that the Parliament must send out is that recovery is not as Kenny Gibson has just described it. What  he proposed is entirely the wrong message for the Parliament to send out. The message that the minister is carefully trying to give is that recovery is about a staged and progressive "movement and dynamism" from a situation of chaos that probably includes criminal activity and damage to family, children and relationships towards—yes, perhaps—the ultimate ambition of being drug free. However, the constant opposition to harm reduction and recovery is damaging to the people who deliver drug services, to users and to communities. That cannot be the Government's intention; I am sure that it is not. In 2001, when I was in Fergus Ewing's position, I looked at the integration of services. The effective interventions unit produced a good statement on the integration of silo services. Service integration is fundamental to the delivery of recovery projects, however they are defined, yet we do not yet have service integration out there. In 2001, we produced the report "Moving On: Education, training and employment for recovering drug users", which my successor updated in 2003. Today, many addicts are stabilised on methadone and yet do not have the opportunity to get into education or skills training because the services are not there for them. Indeed, when I was out of the Parliament for four years and working as the lead clinician for addictions in West Lothian, the first service that was cut by the otherwise excellent local authority and health board was the moving on service. The clients whom I was seeing at the time and who I was stabilising on methadone could not get on to that vital programme—that route to recovery. Getting people on to the road to recovery takes resources. In our amendment, Labour is saying that the resources that the minister has indicated thus far are not sufficient to do the job that we all want to see done.

I am sorry, but my time is too short for that. I regret that the time for the debate had to be cut. I think that all members are finding that difficult. Perhaps we should return, sooner rather than later, to the subject in a further chamber debate. Other members mentioned training, which is a fundamental aspect of the debate. When I was in office, we set up the Scottish training on drugs and alcohol—STRADA—partnership, which continues to receive support as we move forward. I do not have time to go into the whole area of criminal justice. I say to the minister in a friendly way that, back in 2001, I wanted the roll-out of drug treatment and testing orders to happen immediately, yet the final roll-out did not happen until 2005. It takes time to deliver. Labour  members recognise that, but ministers need to set outcome targets—however general they are. Such targets need to be put in place, or service providers in the community, particularly the ADATs, will not be held to account in their application of the resources that they have to deliver the strategy that we all want to see. I have a question for the minister from the Royal College of General Practitioners. The college says that the methadone programme, which is the most evidenced drugs programme, has to continue. It asks him to confirm that, as a result of his statement on "The Road to Recovery", no one will be forced to come off methadone and that reductions will never be made without patients' knowledge. I seek a guarantee from the minister that the responsibility of clinicians in that situation will be retained. Harm reduction and recovery are not two opposites. As we read in the excellent "Essential Care" report, harm reduction and recovery are part of a continuum. That is the message that should go out from the Parliament today.

Will the minister confirm or deny that he is dropping the target of getting an additional 10 per cent of people with drug problems into treatment, which has been the prime target for drug action teams and drugs services over the past eight or nine years?

I join other members in welcoming the speed with which the cabinet secretary has responded to this undoubted glitch in the Ambulance Service, which is an otherwise excellent service. The cabinet secretary has responded by means of four different units: a panel under Ken Corsar, an inquiry by a senior clinician, the internal inquiry on the action plan and the chief medical officer's review. I am concerned about whether the public and staff will be able to respond to those four different inquiries. There is no sign of integration. We wanted a single integrated inquiry. How will she integrate the inquiries? Which inquiry will deal with using the  global positioning system to report attendance within 200m of an incident? It is difficult to determine whether that relates to staff or data sharing. Will the cabinet secretary find a mechanism that will allow staff, who feel quite harassed, to speak freely to the various inquiries without fear of retribution?

How does the Minister for Public Health intend to improve the mental health of people in West Dunbartonshire and other areas, given that the Government will preside over a reduction in the number of nurses entering training for mental health nursing from 550 to 340 in August 2008? Will that number remain stable or will it increase again in order to meet the various Government targets on mental health?

I will save my detailed comments for the debate on the drugs strategy next week, but I have a couple of specific questions. Has the minister dropped the previous Administration's target of getting an additional 10 per cent of people with drug problems into treatment? When will the delivery reform group that is working on an outcomes-based framework produce a report? There was no mention of alcohol and drug action teams in the minister's statement. How does cutting the funding to data-sharing partnerships—from £150,000 per year to £50,000 per year in the Lothians—help to deliver on the information sharing that the minister believes is fundamental to the delivery of the part of his strategy that relates to children?

All members have made it clear that we commend the work of the Scottish Ambulance Service, the staff of which have risen to many challenges over the past decade. It is the only health board to have achieved level 3 performance under the NHS Quality Improvement Scotland standards. We must acknowledge that the service has an excellent history. Members have praised the present staff for their efforts. The need to treat thrombolysis in the golden hour has been a challenge. Primary angioplasty, which requires patients in the Glasgow area to be transferred to the Golden Jubilee hospital and patients in the Ayrshire, Arran and Lanarkshire areas to be transferred to Hairmyres, is a new challenge. There is the problem of increasing demand—as Mary Scanlon said, demand rose by 12 per cent last year, on top of rises in previous years. In addition, there is greater need for intervention by paramedics rather than by technicians. As well as those clinical challenges, there have been administrative challenges, which other members have mentioned. Agenda for change, which staff, management and Government agreed in partnership was the appropriate way forward, cannot always be applied to all areas satisfactorily. As with any national scheme, the geography of the rural areas needs to be taken into account. Nigel Don and others mentioned that. The change in the call centres has been a challenge, as has the fact that sickness levels are still at 5.5 per cent, when the national target is to get them down to 4 per cent. Financial challenges are faced in information management and technology. Fuel prices, which have not been mentioned much, and modernisation are important issues, too. On top of that, the Government has imposed a 2 per cent efficiency target. Although the service gets to keep the savings, achieving them is an additional challenge to management in a service that already faces major challenges. James Kelly referred to that. In the past, all the challenges have been met through an effective partnership between Government, management and staff. Reports from bodies such as Audit Scotland have shown how well the service is doing financially and in other ways. However, it faces an additional financial challenge in that its budget uplift has reduced from around 6 per cent a year during the Labour-Liberal  years to 4 per cent a year. In last year's annual report, Nicola Sturgeon referred to the 12 per cent increase in demand, but went on to talk about the "disappointing performance against the target set ... to reach 75% of category A calls within eight minutes", as the eight-minute target was met in only 55.7 per cent of cases. The cabinet secretary can now say that a 74 per cent rate has been achieved and that we are within striking distance of the target that was set. However, if a service that is under the stresses that I have mentioned moves from 55 to 74 per cent, that makes one wonder what is going on. Is it a tick-box exercise, or is the service not only meeting the target, which we all agree is important, but improving the patient experience? Yes, the Labour Government introduced the rapid response vehicle system, but it has been expanded beyond all recognition to meet the target. That rate of expansion is causing enormous stresses and problems and is almost certainly leading to deterioration in the patient experience. If a single-manned motorcycle or car arrives at an incident, what can that one person achieve in a serious situation? They can achieve something and many are experienced—[ Interruption. ] The cabinet secretary shakes her head, but the most recent information we have is that not all the vehicles are manned by paramedics. In Glasgow, 80 per cent were manned by paramedics and 20 per cent by technicians. If somebody has a very serious issue, which would they prefer? Angela Constance was absolutely correct about that. If I was a patient having a serious heart attack, I would prefer a double-manned vehicle with paramedics rather than a single-manned vehicle with a technician who could not meet my requirements. The cabinet secretary keeps shaking her head, but those concerns are being expressed to many members by the public and, more important, by ambulance crews. The reduction in double manning, with a reduction of 70 shifts in Glasgow, rather than just the rapid response system, must be considered carefully. That is one of the core issues, but staff have raised other issues, about cleaning, training and safety. More important is a letter from the staff, dated 21 May. I should declare that I am a member of Unite. A press release from Unite states: "Partnership working in the Service was always amongst the most forward thinking within the Health Service in Scotland". Today, I have received a collective grievance letter from staff. The Unite press release mentions the possibility of strike action, if those grievances are not tackled. I appreciate that the cabinet secretary has not seen the letter and that it is not reasonable to ask her to respond to it now. However, we have  moved from a service with one of the best records in the health service to one in which there is "a bullying and harassment culture" and a feeling that jobs are under threat. That situation has, in part, led to the collective grievance being registered.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that, but the point is that by pushing for the eight-minute target to be reached in 75 per cent of cases in one year, we have put enormous pressure on the management. We need a far deeper and greater understanding of that. I do not have much time.

Right. I am sorry that I do not have time to cover rural manning and other issues. The suggestion in our motion is the appropriate way in which to proceed. We need an independent investigation of the issue now, before the service breaks down.

The point that the cabinet secretary made about the response rate rising from 55 per cent to 73 per cent is the crux of the problem. How many of the responses in that 73 per cent were made by single-manned or rapid response vehicles, as opposed to the previous figure of 55 per cent, of which the overwhelming majority were double-manned and therefore able to treat the patient immediately, on the spot?

I, too, congratulate David Stewart on securing this debate. I am slightly disappointed that there are not more members in the chamber—indeed, one party is not represented at all—because diabetes is very serious and important health issue, the complications of which, as Nanette Milne has made clear, have massive consequences for not only individual suffering but the cost to society. Over the past 20 or 30 years, diabetic care has improved substantially, and the shift to primary care has been fundamental in ensuring a much more proactive and individualised approach. The creation of care plans, for example, has been important, but we are still some way from the establishment of key workers, which I think is also fundamental to the delivery of good care. In the early 1990s, during the time of fund holding, I was among those who were invited to carry out a study on how fund holding and commissioning could be used to drive forward a retinal screening programme in my locality. In two years, the subsequent programme increased the level of screening from 60 per cent to 92 per cent. What levers are available nowadays to deliver on these matters? The information that we have received makes clear the extreme range of provision. For example, the figure for those with  diabetes who have insulin pumps is 0.1 per cent in Ayrshire and Arran, but 2.7 per cent in Tayside. I am glad to say that two out of the three health boards in my region of Mid Scotland and Fife—NHS Tayside and NHS Fife—are doing quite well in that respect. I should also point out that Tayside has the most highly developed diabetic programme in Scotland. In identifying diabetics and ensuring more integration of care, the diabetes audit and research in Tayside Scotland study, which involved the Tayside medicines monitoring unit, has helped to drive up care levels in that area in a way that perhaps has not happened elsewhere in Scotland. It is therefore no surprise to me that the figure in Tayside for those with insulin pumps is 2.7 per cent, a full 1 percentage point above any other area. I suggest that the benchmark for Scotland should be in the region of 2.5 per cent and that we invite the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to use every available means to hold health boards, particularly the outliers, to account and to ask them to explain these massive discrepancies between one area and another—to her, to the Government and to the Parliament. Pumps are not suitable for everyone, but for people for whom they are suitable, particularly those who are unstable and require a background delivery of insulin, savings can undoubtedly be delivered. One of the problems for the health service is the demand that we place on it to achieve efficiency savings. That demand is entirely appropriate, but it is far too often recognised only in the short term. We need a system that allows health boards to invest the savings that they make and encourages them to invest for future savings. We need to raise people's sights and horizons to savings that could be made down the line, which will involve thinking beyond the spending cycle that, to a large extent, governs our actions. In the 1980s, I made proposals to eliminate a nine-month waiting list for vasectomy that I said would have a one-off cost that would be paid for in six years. The health board's response was that it did not think that far ahead. We need to think that far ahead.

This has been a consensual debate, which reflects the continuing desire of the Parliament to tackle the problem effectively. Brian Adam, to whom people have paid tribute for the work that he has done, referred to the fact that phase I of the action plan gathered the evidence and assessed what things are like. He made the important point that we are going to proceed on the basis of that evidence. Many members have commended the phase II action plan. It is a model of clarity in setting out the objectives and how they might be achieved. I will not go over all the figures regarding our situation, but members referred to them and to the fact that the situation is worse here than in some other parts of the UK. However, as Helen Eadie, Michael Matheson and others said—referring to both the outcomes and the numbers involved—it pales into insignificance in world terms. The most striking thing in the action plan is the target figure and the funding for treatment that is associated with it. Members also referred to that. Increasing the number of treatments from 450 in 2006 to 2,000 annually after 2011 is quite a tough  target. I commend the Government for setting it, and I wish it and the health service well in delivering it. If we treat 2,000 people in 2011, we will treat as many as we have treated in total so far. That indicates the scale of the target that we have set. Mary Scanlon said that integration is crucial, and it is. Her view is supported by speakers such as Ian McKee and Michael Matheson, who referred to the family and the patient, who must be the focus. I have concerns about some of the systems that we are setting up, in particular the substantial bureaucracy that is being created. Mary Scanlon alluded to that by asking who is in charge. According to the action plan, there will be 14 health board leads, a Scottish Prison Service lead, 32 local authority leads, a lead for each managed clinical network, a co-ordinator for each network—which might mean up to another 14 people—and leads for prevention, national information, education, training and awareness. That is a lot of people, and the action plan lays out how many times they will meet and discuss issues. I suggest that that aspect needs to be examined closely to ensure that we do not end up with an overly top-heavy bureaucracy. We need to ensure that the focus is at the level of the individual. Ian McKee said that the fact that there are so many non-attendees is important. Both he and I know from experience that we are dealing with a highly damaged group who, in relation to attending clinics, are not as responsive or as responsible as others are. We are dealing with what many speakers have referred to as a silent killer—an asymptomatic disease—facing individuals who have many other problems to face. The disease may not be a priority for them, and that makes it difficult to deal with. I reiterate the point that it must be dealt with sensitively. Ian McKee rightly indicated that it would be dealt with sensitively under new plans and that there would be innovative ways of tackling it. However, we need to understand what they might be. I used text messaging for many such patients when I worked with drug addicts before I re-entered the Parliament, and they responded well to that. Jackson Carlaw and others referred to primary care and the fact that 90 per cent of GPs did not identify a single case of hepatitis C last year. It is perhaps worse that 80 per cent of GPs do not ask about risk factors. GPs are on the front line of prevention and early identification, so we need to ensure that primary care is engaged. CHPs get only a brief mention in the action plan, but they are central to integrated delivery across local authorities and the voluntary sector. I would like the managed clinical networks to consider closely how the CHPs will deliver on those issues.  David Whitton was the main speaker on prisons and addressed the fact that the only one of the 41 actions in the first plan that was not fulfilled was the needle exchange pilot that was to be carried out in Aberdeen prison. That is regrettable but perhaps understandable. The issue is difficult for prisons to tackle—the culture in this country is different from that in Switzerland, Spain and Germany. Nevertheless, I reiterate and reinforce his call for the Government to seek early discussions to identify what the barriers were, tell us what they were and try to introduce the pilot as rapidly as possible. Prisons have addressed a number of issues. For example, they are giving back needles that were confiscated on admission if they were supplied in police custody. That practice has been rolled out across the Prison Service, which is also training staff in hepatitis C, so the picture is not totally negative. There are 25,000 admissions annually to Scottish prisons but only around 7,000 residents at any given time, as David Whitton indicated, and a quarter of them might be infected. Many of the 25,000 will have a drug problem, and up to 40 per cent of those will have been intravenous drug users. That is a captive population that could be educated, tested and offered treatment. It is startling to note from the action plan that, out of 450 patients who were treated, only 30 were prisoners. Given the fact that the prison population has an overabundance of people who are infected with hepatitis C, that figure of 30—only 12 were treated inside prison—does not reflect the real proportions. I hope that, as we increase the number of treatments, the number of people who are treated in prison will increase. I know, because I have asked, that the Government will reach a decision shortly about restoring the provision of medical services in prisons to the NHS. That is fundamental to the delivery of the plan. It is another reason for ensuring that the discussions between the NHS and prisons address the relatively small disparity in funding, in order to deliver an English-style system in which the NHS is responsible for medical services in prisons. Several members have highlighted the importance of pharmacists. They deliver much of the needle exchange programme and therefore have a huge educational role to play. My colleague, Margaret Curran, who was going to sum up the debate, intended to raise the issue of the hepatitis C inquiry budget line, which we are not totally clear about. It has been suggested that we need to make a freedom of information inquiry about that. It would be good if we could get a little clarity around that budget line, so that we can understand the overall budgets.  The debate has been highly consensual, with little criticism. The calls for speedy action from many of us are perhaps a good thing, as they keep the pressure on the Government. It is not easy to deliver on expansive plans such as this action plan, and I wish the ministers well. We will certainly keep them up to speed on the targets that they have set for themselves.

First, I draw members' attention to my declaration of interests. I still do some work in the drugs field, on single shared assessment. Unusually, we lodged an amendment that changes the wording of the Government's motion from "acknowledges" to "commends". I do not know whether that is unique in the Parliament, but it is a measure of the fact that we welcome the phase II action plan, which undoubtedly takes forward the previous Executive's phase I plan in a way that should transform the management of hepatitis C and maintain our leading role in the area. Following the Labour and Liberal Executive's statement of intent in 2004 and the consultation on the draft action plan in June 2005, the phase I report set out in detail the challenges that we face in tackling the problem. I pay tribute to Keith Raffan, who is no longer a member. He was forceful in drawing our attention to the matter in the first session of Parliament. He constantly railed against the Scottish centre for infection and environmental health's estimates, which the centre itself admitted grossly underestimated the problem. At the time, we were told that the number might be 30,000. Now, we know that it is probably nearer 50,000. As the Minister for Public Health said, the main route of transmission by a huge margin—some 45,000 of 50,000—is current or previous intravenous drug users. It is worrying that hepatitis C is not diminishing. Indeed, the report is correct to estimate that 1,000 to 1,500 new intravenous drug users are infected annually. In the phase I plan, we endeavoured to collect information and detail the existing services. The plan contained no fewer than 41 action points, including the delivery of a comprehensive national examination of the problem; work to build on the  efforts of existing services; the examination of co-ordination, prevention, testing, treatment, care, support, education, training, awareness raising, surveillance, and monitoring; and the piloting of a number of concepts. One of the most important things is that we now have two managed clinical networks and it is clear that, as a result of the action plan, the work will be rolled out. Traditionally, managed clinical networks are horizontally integrated but, as the minister said, they also need to be vertically integrated and to include voluntary organisations and NGOs as well as user groups. I have been unable to find out from the action plan how many user groups were involved in the stakeholder group and it would be helpful if the minister could put that on the record when she sums up. I want to take us through a hepatitis C patient's journey. As the action plan shows, the problems that we face begin with diagnosis. Many substance misusers are treated in general practice. The involvement of primary care is vital to the delivery of an effective diagnostic service, yet the action plan states that approximately 95 per cent of GPs did not diagnose a single case of hep C in the previous year. There are also problems with needle exchange services. They were set up in response to HIV and were successful in that regard, but they have been unable to test for hepatitis C because most are based in pharmacies and they do not have the necessary facilities. Such services need to be developed. Many of them are open from 9 to 5 on Mondays to Fridays, which is not satisfactory for the group. A further problem is that hepatitis C is significantly more infective than HIV, so the challenge that we face with the spread of infection by needles is even greater than it was with HIV. We must not let up on tackling that. I know that there has been a separate report on that, which is important. Another point is that numerous drugs services are offered by voluntary organisations and social workers, neither of which groups is easily positioned to offer testing. It is also disappointing that prisons, which should be in the best position to test, are yet patchy in their response. Even when a patient is counselled and gets to the point of being shown to have the hepatitis C virus on the basis of the test, that test is not standardised throughout the country. Again, the report indicates that that needs to be tackled. If someone tests positive and requires specialist assessment and treatment, they are usually managed as if they were a typical patient: stable, with a clear or at least some understanding of their illness, and possibly symptomatic. However, we know that the illness is asymptomatic. As the minister has said, it is silent. The patient often  does not understand why they need to be treated as they do not really have any problems, apart perhaps from being a little tired. The result is that between 20 and 70 per cent of patients fail to attend the specialist clinics. Even when they attend, the clinics may judge that they are not suitable for treatment on the basis of their continued drug use or their social circumstances. Again, such decisions are not based on a standardised, common assessment tool. It will depend on the clinic that someone goes to and the attitude of their clinician as much as the circumstances in which they find themselves. Once someone gets to the clinic, they may still be somewhat chaotic and there may be many other things with which they are still dealing, such as benefits meetings or appointments with drug clinics or general practitioners. If they fail to attend the clinic for whatever reason, they may be subject to the new ways waiting times. As Dr McKee and I have said, the patients in question will find that difficult to follow. As the report advised, there needs to be a careful look at non-attendees. I suggest that the new waiting times will damage further the attendances at such clinics, so there needs to be a sensitive application. If patients attend and are treated, some will relapse and require further courses, some will fail to complete the course and a number will not be treated because their type of hepatitis does not respond. Some estimates suggest that 20 per cent of those untreated may require a liver transplant, and it is clear that the increased treatment programme must deal with that. We need to improve that difficult journey; the managed care networks will do that. Of the 41 action points in the first phase of the plan, 40 were found to have been completed. One, in relation to prisons, was not completed, and my colleague David Whitton will deal with that. It is an area that requires particular attention. I want to use my final few minutes to offer some constructive criticisms of the report, which, as I have said, we warmly welcome. First, other routes of transmission appear to be rather neglected in the second phase. There is a brief reference to pregnancy but almost no reference to the acquisition of hepatitis C from abroad. We know that such acquisition of HIV is increasing and it will almost certainly be increasing with hepatitis C. Secondly, I suggest that the deadline of 2010 for the standardisation guidelines to be produced by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland seems far away, given the urgency and the good targets of increasing treatment set by the minister. Thirdly, the managed clinical networks are important but, unless they involve primary care  and community services, there will be problems. However, there is only one reference to community health partnerships in the report. There is no indication of whether the national enhanced service contract for those practices participating in substance misuse services will be examined to incorporate testing and dealing with hepatitis C. There is no indication of whether the quality points for either preventive or testing work for other GPs will be examined. There is little mention of pharmacists, who play an important role in connectivity to the group. Will the minister examine that? We are talking about a difficult service for often difficult people who can be homeless, previous offenders, unemployed, living on benefits and struggling to manage even day-to-day living. Therefore, we have to be sensitive to their challenges. I want to make one point on the question of records. Hepatitis C patients may have up to nine separate clinical records: GP, voluntary sector drug services, social work, the health service, the blood-borne virus clinic, the needle exchange, the specialist drug service, the mental health service and the hepatitis clinic itself. That is not satisfactory. We need a patient-focused service. I do not have time to deal with training, but STRADA—Scottish training in alcohol and drug abuse—is not mentioned in the report as the prime provider of services to tackle substance misuse. I hope that, rather than there being fighting over which board will lead, STRADA might be involved in that delivery. I conclude by saying that we warmly welcome the report. The funding is excellent and I hope that the Government will be able to deliver, along with the health services, which are undoubtedly committed to making Scotland a leading player in tackling hepatitis C. I move amendment S3M-1943.1, to leave out "acknowledges" and insert: "commends the hard work undertaken by those staff involved in delivering 40 out of 41 action points in Phase I of the Scottish Government's Hepatitis C Action Plan and welcomes".

I will try to assist you in that, Presiding Officer. I welcome the minister's statement and thank her for providing an advance copy. I join her in commending the action plan, which is excellent. We entirely agree with many of the measures that  are proposed, which follow the advances that have been achieved through the national ban on tobacco advertising and the ban on smoking in public places, which was a landmark for the UK. There are worrying signs of a growing gap between the genders in relation to smoking habits. Some 12 per cent of 15-year-old boys smoke, whereas around 18 per cent of 15-year-old girls smoke. That needs to be addressed. I welcome the new targets for 16 to 24-year-olds, which will focus minds usefully. The Royal Environmental Health Institute of Scotland and ASH Scotland have both expressed concern to me about the new system of funding through local authorities. According to REHIS, there is evidence that "the funding may not even reach Environmental Health Departments, let alone be used specifically in support of smoke-free legislation." In the context of proposed legislation and the emphasis on test purchasing, will the minister say how she will secure with local authorities clear agreements on delivery? My second and final question relates to budgets. According to Scottish Government replies to parliamentary questions, the smoking cessation budget has been reduced from £601,000 to £500,000 and will flatline, the voluntary sector budget is being reduced from £770,000 to £737,000 and will flatline, and the communications budget is being reduced from £601,000 to £500,000 and will flatline. How will that approach support the Government's proper emphasis on the problem of smoking through smoking cessation measures, through support for the voluntary sector—which delivers for young people in particular—and through focused communication?

I, too, congratulate John Park on securing the debate, which is important because it considers the consequences of an important decision that Donald Dewar made during the election in 1999. At that time, he came to the constituency for which I was seeking election and confirmed that we would have a new upper Forth crossing. That was welcomed by everybody in the area. It was one of three projects that, when I served as the member for Ochil, I and others regarded as vital to opening up  Clackmannanshire, which was otherwise isolated. Members may not remember, but there was something called the road to nowhere, which involved two Europe-funded roads that failed to meet by a matter of a mile and a quarter, which was appalling. If they had been connected, Stirling would have been joined to Alloa with a decent road. I was glad that Jack McConnell, when he was Minister for Finance, quickly agreed to fund a project to join them. So we got the decision on the bridge, followed by funding to connect the Alloa road to nowhere. As Keith Brown said, today, Stewart Stevenson opened the Alloa to Stirling passenger rail service and the freight service to Kincardine. I do not agree with Keith Brown on many issues, but I agree that we must think carefully about having a passenger service right through to Dunfermline. We must consider that in the context of the overall situation of the new Forth crossing, the lower Forth crossing's problems and possible closure, and the impending closure of the old Kincardine bridge. With a link to Dunfermline, we could get freight and traffic off the road relatively quickly, because the lines already exist. I urge the minister to consider that. On the closure of the old Kincardine bridge, is 18 months the shortest period of time possible? Can funding be provided to enable the work to be done in a much shorter time? That obviously would benefit people in Kincardine, who undoubtedly will have to endure yet another period of significant traffic pollution. I hope that doing the work in a shorter time is possible, if we cannot keep one lane on the bridge open while the maintenance is carried out. I hope that the minister will give people in Kincardine some help on that. As Fife and Clackmannanshire open up and more and more people go to live in the area, the need for effective transport across the Forth will increase. As members have said, the pressure on the villages to the north of the Forth, in both directions, will increase. I hope that, at some point, the minister will produce plans for traffic calming in the area, as part of a comprehensive plan to deal with the possible problems with the lower Forth crossing. If we get into the worst possible scenario with that crossing, those villages will be in a much more desperate situation than they have been up to now or will be as a result of the closure of the old Kincardine bridge. Serious long-term planning issues arise. I am sure that the minister and his department are addressing them, but they must rapidly reassure the people of Fife and Clackmannanshire, particularly those in the villages to which Keith Brown referred, and ensure that we do not have long-term suffering as well as the short-term suffering that inevitably will occur.

This has been a curate's egg of a debate. It will have been a wasted opportunity if the Parliament is unable to unite around the Labour and Conservative amendments, which provide a reasoned approach that will allow the Parliament as a whole—all of us together—to approach the UK Government to discuss the attendance  allowance question. We oppose the SNP motion because of its tone—as David McLetchie and Mary Scanlon made clear. If our amendment is voted down by the nationalists with the support of the Liberals, they will be responsible for losing this opportunity to achieve consensus.

No, I must carry on. The minister will have a chance to respond in her summing up. The Labour Party is clear that it supports free personal care, but we had hoped that this welcome debate would provide an opportunity to consider the situation that the Parliament faces. Lord Sutherland has made it clear—this also emerges in the Wanless report—that, as a country and as a United Kingdom, we are faced with demographics that we can only guess at. Let us remember that when the original Sutherland report was approved and the policy of free personal care was implemented, the funding that was put in place was based on demographic information in a report that was published in 1998-99 and that, within six years, those figures were wrong—the demographics were underestimated and the costs rose much more quickly than they were expected to. If that can happen in six years, what is the likelihood—given the sort of medical advances that we are seeing—of even greater changes in the five-year period over which Lord Sutherland believes the policy is fundable? Within those five years, changes could occur that would cost huge sums of money.

I will give way to Mike Rumbles when I have finished this point. My point is that the debate should be about how we can take forward a policy on which we are unanimously agreed and which provides dignity to old people. It is regrettable that, instead, the SNP has tried to use the debate as an opportunity to kick Labour. That is what the SNP has been about, and it will suffer for it.

Mike Rumbles is trying to rewrite history. I accept that there were divisions in the Labour Party, but we have to consider why. There  were divisions because of the Lipsey minority report, which was important because it pointed out exactly what we should have been debating today: the long-term sustainability of the policy. Mike Rumbles is forgetting history. In the 1980s, in Scotland, there was long-term continuing care for the elderly as part of the health service. The Conservative party decided that that was not the way to proceed, for some good and some bad reasons. The result was that people who had planned their old age were unable to meet the requirements, so they had to sell their homes and so on. That led to the Sutherland report. Some bits of history are crucial. I am not denying that we were divided on this issue, but the division was on whether the policy was sustainable in the long term. We cannot come up with policies that we will have for only a few years; policies have to be long term. Labour's amendment states clearly that we feel that we need to enter into discussions to try to achieve short-term reversal of the attendance allowance policy, but not to regain the attendance allowance as it stands, which would be impossible. That is why it refers to the benefit commissioners. We are talking about a benefit that goes to individuals, but any money that we got back would have to come within the block grant, not to individuals, because that would be against the benefits rules. The UK Government is not going to unravel the benefits system for the sake of a very small number of Scots whose position has been altered by this Parliament's policy.

No, I need to make progress because I am almost halfway through my time. There have been thoughtful contributions. I thought that Irene Oldfather's speech was the best I have heard in this Parliament for a long time. To use Jamie Stone's words, it really did go to "the core" of the issue. The debate is about the dignity of the elderly, equity and fairness and the clarity of the policy—which the cabinet secretary failed to mention in her speech. A lot of people still think that free personal and nursing care means that if they go into a home, everything is free. We heard nothing from the cabinet secretary about clarity of expectations, to which the Sutherland report referred. She did not mention that aspect of the report, although she accepted the recommendation. We heard nothing from her about improving local accountability or about ensuring that the costs are monitored and reported accurately. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary accepts those recommendations, but she did not address them in her speech.  Mary Scanlon and Alison McInnes made good points about nail trimming, which is another example of where the policy needs to be clarified. The Conservative amendment, to which Mary Scanlon and David McLetchie spoke so persuasively, makes it clear that the Parliament's message today is that charging for food preparation must cease now, not tomorrow when the Government has the chance. The Sutherland report has made clear what the situation is. I accept that there have been inequities in the policy. The charging to which the Conservative amendment refers is not the only inequity that has not been addressed until now. Having made the statement that the Government now accepts that the policy is clear on that, it should not expect individuals to sue the remaining councils, which they will have to do unless the Government sends a clear message. The whole question of equity is important. Other members made helpful speeches. Helen Eadie's comments about waiting times were important, and I ask the Minister for Public Health to provide a clearer answer to that question when she sums up. Last week, after her statement, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing was asked what she meant when she said that those assessed to have critical and serious needs would be dealt with within six weeks. Surely everyone who is assessed should be dealt with. There must be equity in waiting times. This was an opportunity to have a really good debate on all the issues that are raised in the Sutherland report, which we all accept. Some members attempted to have that debate but, apart from Angela Constance, those on the Government side simply reiterated the same points about the attendance allowance. I urge the Parliament to agree to the Conservative amendment, which relates to food preparation, and to coalesce unanimously around Labour's amendment, which proposes that we enter into discussions with the UK Government to get this money back. After all, we all accept that that is appropriate. If we do not do that, the SNP will forgo the opportunity to send a clear, unanimous message from this Parliament on how these issues might be addressed.

That is a gross misinterpretation of the Wanless report, the point of which is the need for a broad and strategic review of the policy. Indeed, that is why the UK Government accepted it. We do not support in any way the abolition of free personal care in Scotland, but we are not prepared to accept an approach that will simply lead us into disputes. Ross Finnie has not got this correct.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that the dignity of women in custody is upheld. (S3O-3209)

As the cabinet secretary pointed out, at last week's First Minister's question time, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said unequivocally that "the handcuffing of pregnant women in hospital" was "absolutely unacceptable".— [ Official Report , 1 May 2008; c 8177.]  However, that night, the director of the SPS, Mike Ewart, said on "Newsnight Scotland" that it could still happen in exceptional circumstances. Moreover, in a written reply to an earlier written question of mine, Mr Ewart said that women would be unhandcuffed to hold or feed their babies. Does the cabinet secretary agree that we need to instruct the SPS to cease these practices in relation to pregnant and newly delivered women? If so, he will certainly have my full support.

I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing  the debate and on finding a graphic way of highlighting the function of communication aids. In the first session of the Scottish Parliament, we passed the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, which was a landmark bill. It was heralded in Europe—although not in Scotland, because, at the time, there was a huge debate about irrelevant issues—as a massive advance. Debates on the bill concentrated quite considerably on the question of communication, and dealt with the fact that people who cannot communicate are often perceived as being unintelligent or unable to formulate thoughts. That is simply not the case. The problem of stigma has not been referred to much in today's debate, but there is a need for a campaign—like those that are designed to deal with stigma in other areas—that helps people to understand that people who use communication aids are often very intelligent and are perfectly able to communicate, if they are given the tools to do so. The question of price really should not enter the issue. Others have talked about that issue, so I will not go into it. We hear about the postcode lottery in relation to many services—the best service is good, and the worst service is poor, and whether someone gets the service that they need depends on where they live. Undoubtedly, that needs to be addressed. Trish Godman was right when she said that, in this debate, one gets a sense of déjà vu, as the wheelchair debate dealt with a similar situation. Over the years, I—like, I am sure, Nanette Milne—had considerable experience of patients with communication difficulties. The difference that the application of technology made over the 40-odd years that I was in practice is absolutely enormous. Forty years ago, it could not be said that we had the means to help people communicate. Now that we have the means, we must have the will to deliver aid to everybody who needs that help. If we do not, we will allow children to grow up without the ability to meet their aspirations because of a lack of relatively inexpensive equipment, because of a lack of training on the equipment, or because they have the wrong equipment. We need a skilled and specialised service if we are to ensure that the right equipment is delivered and the proper training is provided. We have another good news story in Scotland. Our 30-day-and-beyond stroke survival rate has increased substantially, and will continue to increase due to the specialist stroke and rehabilitation services that we have put in place. However, people who have suffered from a stroke are in a situation in which their ability to manipulate their environment and communicate can be affected. That loss of control and  independence can have a devastating psychological effect. If that devastation can be prevented by the provision of a piece of appropriate equipment, we owe it to those individuals to ensure that they have access to such equipment at the appropriate time. The challenge to the Government is to update the survey of need; establish standards in order to eliminate the postcode lottery; provide entitlement to a maximum waiting time, because people in these circumstances cannot and should not be made to wait; and provide funding for the service that will end the charitable lottery on which people in some areas are forced to depend, as well as the lottery that arises as a result of the fact that some conditions are eligible for charitable support and some are not. We need a clear strategy and additional funding in order to solve the problem.

The Labour Party welcomes much of the statement. We were in favour of the policy, which was put through by the whole Parliament. It is clear that the funding that has been announced is welcome. However, my colleague Margaret Curran asked a question to which we still have not received an answer. What will we do in the very short term, over the course of the next year? If every time that Labour spokesmen ask questions the cabinet secretary attacks them personally, says that they are scaremongering and then does not answer their questions, we will not be able to get constructive relationships on matters that the cabinet secretary rightly said should be consensual. I would like an answer to my colleague's question. My question is on a slightly different issue: the targets for assessments and action to address needs. In her statement, the cabinet secretary referred to people with urgent and priority needs, whereas local authorities usually refer to people with critical and substantial needs. Whichever words are used, we are talking about the top two categories of need. How does what the cabinet secretary said square with the Government's decision, which she continually states, that the six-week target on blocked beds will be met, if only those with substantial and critical needs or urgent and priority needs will have their needs met within the six weeks that Lord Sutherland suggested? To achieve uniformity, what will happen to those targets if the needs of other groups are not met within that time period?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of her statement and join her—as I am sure that all members do—in expressing deep regret to the people who contracted hepatitis C and other diseases via contaminated products. I very much welcome her statement and I agree that Lady Cosgrove's agreement to undertake the inquiry is extremely welcome. We should thank Lady Cosgrove. The cabinet secretary said that she is aware that Lord Archer is due to report the findings of his independent inquiry in the next month or so. In an answer to a parliamentary question in November, the Government said that it would wait until that report was published before it determined the scope of and legal framework for the inquiry. That position has changed. The cabinet secretary accepted that many reports have been produced and much evidence will be available to Lady Cosgrove. She gave illustrations of matters that might be in the inquiry's remit, but will she provide the Parliament with clarity on the inquiry's boundaries and scope? When will the remit be fully clarified?  Will the cabinet secretary provide further justification of her decision to include HIV in the inquiry? Given that other conditions, such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, are associated with contaminated products, why will just HIV and not other conditions be included? Indeed, why is HIV included, given the specific nature of the hepatitis C issue, because of the nature of the non-A, non-B hepatitis that was originally identified? The cabinet secretary has indicated that the inquiry must investigate the circumstances of the deaths of the Rev David Black and Eileen O'Hara, and that it should review any related deaths. How will those related deaths be determined? How many such deaths are involved? I assume that HIV deaths, as well as hepatitis C deaths, will be included in that. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that? How much has she budgeted for the inquiry? I am sure that we all hope that this inquiry, together with the Archer inquiry, will give some closure to affected individuals and their families, and that it will also conclude the issue for the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service. With all the evidence that is out there, we might not get all the answers that we want, and we should be sanguine about that.

This has been an interesting debate. As Jamie Stone said, interesting colour was provided by the historical perspective of my older colleague, who referred to events that took place well before my time. It is important to take an historical perspective on the bill. Although we do not see mass cholera deaths, the bill prepares us for the possibility of catastrophic events. A SARS epidemic did not occur and an avian flu pandemic has not yet occurred, but we need to be prepared for such events. The pandemic planning that has been undertaken and the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill put us in a better position. When I followed Ian McKee into medical school, we had an excellent lecturer on infectious diseases, whom Ian McKee will remember—Dr Murdoch. Although his lectures were good, they were poorly attended because most doctors believed that they had solved the problem of infectious diseases. Dr Murdoch said cogently that we should watch out, as mother nature has a way of biting back. What has happened since that time? We have had HIV, SARS, Ebola, MRSA, the potential for avian flu, and extensively resistant tuberculosis. The health protection annual report for last year referred to the anthrax outbreak that Christine Grahame mentioned. There was also an outbreak of Q fever at Bridge of Allan meat plant in my constituency. It is important that we modernise our legislation to deal with such situations. The only discordant note in the legislative  process, which has been a hugely co-operative effort between the Health and Sport Committee, the Government and witnesses, has been occasioned by the sloppy drafting or incompetent legislation to which many members have referred. That must be addressed. It is a double shame that the problem has occurred when very little legislation is being introduced. The Parliament can only hope that it does not recur. Why do we need the bill to be carefully drafted? I will read to members from the international edition of the New York Herald Tribune , which states: "The ... Hospital ... is like a prison for the sick. It is encircled by three fences topped with coils of razor wire to keep patients infected with lethal strains of tuberculosis from escaping. Escaped patients have been tracked down and forced to return; the hospital has quadrupled the number of guards. Many patients fear they will get out of here only in a coffin." As many members have said, the bill must balance the protection of the public and individual freedom. If we do not achieve a balance, we could have the appalling situation that is found in South Africa, which has three prison hospitals of that sort in which people are incarcerated until their death. The balance between individual freedom and protection of the public is important. We have to get the definitions, including the definition of the competent person, right. I think we have that. We need to have joint health protection plans that do not arise from consultation, as the bill sets out, but that are agreed between the local authority and the health board. Consultation is not good enough—God knows, we have had enough trouble as a result of health boards consulting on issues. If we leave them to consult, it will not be sufficient. Several members, including Michael Matheson and James Kelly, mentioned that. The duty of co-operation in section 6(3) is not enough and I ask the minister to look at it again. Mary Scanlon's comments on the balance between the rights of the individual and those of the community are important in relation to anonymity. Although I agree with the minister that we have the data protection measures pretty much right, I am glad that she has said that the Government will include schools and places of work in them—as I suggested in committee. That will assist if there are outbreaks at nurseries, butchers' shops and so forth. Notwithstanding that commitment, we have to ensure that the right to anonymity is adequately protected. I strongly suggest that, when we make the regulations, a privacy impact assessment should be undertaken, as the information commissioner proposed. The definition of health risk needs to be tight. There could be unintended consequences of the bill, although I am sure that that will not happen  under the present Government or the future Labour Government. In America, people cannot get into education unless they have been vaccinated. If we do not draft the bill clearly and correctly, future Governments could introduce that sort of restriction on an individual going to school simply by regulation. There is the risk of exclusion simply because someone is not vaccinated. We need to inform people. In committee, I spoke out strongly on section 31(5). Indeed, I went so far as to say that the proposed power is draconian and must be removed. Jackson Carlaw referred to it as a "sweep-up" section. We cannot allow, as the bill would, the absolute excuse not to inform an individual. The committee recommended strongly that that provision be amended as quickly as possible. I welcome the fact that, in her various correspondences with the committee, the minister has accepted the point and said that she will address it. A considerable number of members have referred to sunbeds. The tributes that have been paid to Kenneth Macintosh are entirely appropriate. We have some tough decisions to reach. Kenneth Macintosh has said that unstaffed sunbed parlours should go, that 18 should be the minimum age of anyone who uses a sunbed, and that a requirement for individuals to be properly informed of the risks should be added into the bill. I would go slightly further. By way of amendment at stage 2, we must ensure that nothing should stop local authority licensing departments licensing parlours as they see fit. I would go yet further and suggest that the Government should seriously consider taking reserved powers to introduce a licensing system, should that become necessary at some point in the future. Enforcement is important, and so is the need to ensure balance between the individual's right to use these machines and their protection from the development of melanoma. I hope that that will be considered. The bill is vital for the public interest. As many members have said, it will achieve—it must achieve—protection for the public while maintaining a balance between individual freedoms and the public interest. It is a good illustration of the sort of engagement that the Parliament has been set up to undertake—engagement between the Government, parliamentary committees, experts and the public—to create a legislative framework that will ensure adequate protection and sustain individual freedoms. I welcome the minister's responses of 6 February, 28 February and 14 April, in which she accepted many of the points the committee raised. We look forward to the stage 2 amendments that will incorporate the changes that we seek.

They cannot.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Mr Brown acknowledge the comment that was made to me at a meeting last night by a representative of the voluntary sector, that it feels as though we have gone back to 1996. Does he agree that the minister has singularly failed to address the uncertainty among voluntary sector workers, many of whom have received redundancy notices and have only temporary funding?

Dr McKee has demonstrated the difficulty that the medical profession faces in this debate. We want to do our best for patients by supporting them and supporting their wishes, but being involved in ending life when one's whole creed is based on sustaining life presents an enormous difficulty. I met the group to which Jeremy Purvis referred. After discussing the topic, I was still left wrestling with it, rather as Dr McKee is. I began my work in the field back in the early 1970s, as part of a team that comprised a surgeon, a psychiatrist and a nurse who were supported by the Scottish Health Education Council to go round Scotland to raise the issue of palliative care. The first hospice in Edinburgh was founded at that time and St Joseph's hospice in London had just been founded. After that, I was associated with the group that founded Strathcarron hospice. I served on the hospice's board of management and eventually served as its chair over a period of some 12 years. In a sense, a lot of my professional life has been associated with the end of life as well as with supporting sick people in other ways.  Occasionally, despite all the best efforts being made, palliative care is insufficient to prevent death being difficult, troubled and disturbing for the individual and the relatives. It is not perfect, but I believe that we have made progress. It was, frankly, a disgrace throughout the United Kingdom. The journey is not yet complete by any means, but there have been enormous advances. It is vital that we focus on palliative care at home, because the purpose of the hospice movement is to provide symptom relief and restoration of the best possible function, and to allow people to return to where the overwhelming majority wish to end their lives—at home. At the moment, that does not happen because there is inadequate symptom control, because palliative care teams are not strong enough, because there are not adequate resources to maintain primary care teams or because individuals feel that they will become an overwhelming burden on their relatives. People fear death. We cannot remove that fear totally from patients, but in the overwhelming majority of cases we can take away fear of the symptoms that are associated with death. In my experience, the vast majority of people accept psychologically the process of death and dying as natural for them and as a transition that does not require assistance. At this stage, we should not amend the law. We should continue the debate and discussion that is under way, promote palliative care at home, ensure good symptom control and ensure that living wills and advance directives, which we have debated in the chamber, are sustained and improved. The burden on individuals and professionals of introducing euthanasia is too great. Thank God we are not in the same situation as America, where 40 per cent of bankruptcies are caused by health problems. Patients here are not subject to the same stimulus to desire death to lift a burden on themselves. The time is not yet right for Jeremy Purvis's motion, but I thank him for giving us an opportunity to debate the issue.

As all other members who have spoken have said, the debate has been consensual, informed and of a high standard. As Jamie Stone said, that should give comfort to people out there. The problem is not new—it used to be called hospital-acquired infection. More than a century ago, Semmelweis solved some of the problems of puerperal deaths by getting people to wash between practising anatomy on cadavers and attending women in childbirth. That simple approach saved many lives. Jackson Carlaw is right that some of what we need to achieve is simple, or appears to be simple, yet it has been hard to achieve.  The first step in dealing with any such matter is to recognise the problem. I thank the cabinet secretary for her courtesy in accepting our amendment. I pay tribute to the 2002 action plan and the establishment of the ministerial task force, which, led by the chief medical officer and chief nursing officer, has been instrumental in setting up a model that has been praised as being excellent. However, despite that work, levels of MRSA have remained stubbornly high and consistent in the past few years. Members mentioned some of the factors in that. Ian McKee referred to overoccupancy, although I must say that, despite the references that he made, the number of acute beds per capita in Scotland is still substantially greater than in England. However, it is true that overoccupancy rates of more than 90 per cent are associated with increased rates of infection. Delayed discharges were a major problem, because they increased the occupancy problem. The target that was set to eliminate delayed discharges by March 2008 has freed up more than 3,000 beds, which is a massive contribution to tackling the occupancy problem, as well as to tackling the problem of people who are kept in beds for a long time in hospital being more likely to contract a condition. Important changes have been made. The rapid throughput of patients is another contributory factor, as has been said. Another factor that contributes to the problem is boarding out—rather than hot-bedding—which is the movement of patients between wards to allow more acute patients into the appropriate wards. Several members referred to those pressures. Members have also referred to antibiotics—their type and their appropriate use. Such issues are of great importance, as Sandra White, Ross Finnie and others said. Not only must we have a public education programme on the appropriate use of antibiotics, but we must have antibiotic pharmacists in every trust, who can teach junior doctors and ensure that prescribing is appropriate, stating which antibiotic should be used, when and for how long. That will help to reduce rates of resistance. The national guidance that the cabinet secretary mentioned is indeed welcome. Michael Matheson and other members referred to the physical environment. Redesign of some of the less appropriate elements will be important. Another important issue is decluttering—removing from wards items that do not need to be there. A more pristine environment can help. Effective control of sterilisation of instruments is needed, and that issue has been tackled effectively. Irene Oldfather spoke about cleaning of soiled clothes, and that issue should be investigated. It would be useful if the task force could comment on whether the issue is important.  Helen Eadie, Ian McKee and others also spoke about clothing. Jackson Carlaw wittily but seriously discussed the clothing of all staff. It is important that people's clothing is right, so I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement of a national clothing specification. The BMA would say, "Ditch the tie." In Ian McKee's early days and mine, if a doctor turned up without a tie, he was not allowed on the ward, but now he must turn up without a tie or he will not be allowed on the ward. That, I suppose, is progress. Helen Eadie referred to cleaning of wards. I take issue with Nanette Milne about one issue among her reminiscences about the good old days. It was the Conservatives who, in effect, privatised cleaning services in hospitals; but it was the Labour Party, when it came to power with its Liberal colleagues in 1999, which said that there would be a presumption that the services would be taken back in-house. Cleaners are a very important part of the care system.

I hate to say this, but I could tell Nanette Milne numerous stories of when contract cleaners have come in, done their bit and gone away, leaving the question of who would clean up the mess in the toilet when someone was sick. Senior nurses end up having to do that. That is fine—we all have to muck in and do the job—but because the cleaners are not part of the team, they are not there all the time. Taking the services back in-house is important. Important too are the overall staff structures. When she responds to the debate, I would like the Minister for Public Health to address the December 2007 report—"National Hand Hygiene NHS Campaign". Under the heading "Next Steps", the report says that funding to allow local health board co-ordinator posts should "continue for at least two years". Such work should be mainstreamed. I assume that that can be dealt with using the new funding. We need the whole team to be in place. I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement of a nurse consultant for the care commission, but I agree with Mary Scanlon that progress must be made on care homes. Irene Oldfather reminded us that inability to provide home care on a day-case basis can lead to unnecessary hospital admissions, which adds to the pressures. I welcome the screening programme that has been announced and the funding for it, although I would correct one thing that the cabinet secretary  said. Alan Johnson has announced the introduction of screening for all elective patients by March 2009 and for emergency patients as soon as possible over the next three years. He has announced £130 million of funding to achieve that. He has praised the Dutch programme to which Ross Finnie and Jamie Stone referred. The Dutch call it the "search and destroy" system. That programme—Sandra White referred to two other research programmes—will have to be considered carefully. Before any pilots are established, I hope that the monitoring or evaluation group will have a chance to comment on how they are being run. I have not covered hand hygiene to any great extent. The variation in compliance rates in the two audit periods is alarming. The range in compliance is 50 per cent to 94 per cent in the first audit period and increases to only 59 per cent to 94 per cent in the second audit period, so the 90 per cent target, which I welcome—it is also the World Health Organization's target—is entirely appropriate. It is a challenging target, and we will need a partnership between different groups to achieve it. As Margaret Curran and James Kelly indicated, it is important that patients be encouraged to say to doctors—who are the worst-performing group in the monitoring figures—that they must wash their hands when they move from one patient to another. The Scottish patient safety alliance should be asked to help in that regard. The audit is obviously important. We are making good progress, but there needs to be a full partnership between health care staff, patients and visitors. We also need to share experience with our colleagues in England, who are introducing substantial programmes, so that we do not develop different methods. The funding in England is huge—£270 million annually by 2011—so I wonder whether we will have enough funding to tackle the issue in the way that the cabinet secretary clearly wants to.

To ask the Scottish Executive what intermediate targets it has set for waiting times in the NHS on the way to the 2011 target of 18 weeks from referral to treatment. (S3O-2738)

I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment to continue Labour's work to reduce waiting times for patients. In doing so, the Scottish National Party's stated aim is not to extend the use of the private sector in the NHS. However, in December the Government gave a contract to PricewaterhouseCoopers to co-ordinate the survey of patient experience in the NHS. That work was previously done in the public sector. Is the cabinet secretary comfortable that 13 eminent academics from Scottish universities have challenged the contract on the grounds that there might be a conflict of interest, that no guarantee of impartiality can be built in and that the results can be open to commercial manipulation? Is that the same PricewaterhouseCoopers that NHS Lanarkshire employed in 2005 to assess its public consultation process and which concluded that the process was satisfactory, only for Nicola Sturgeon, as Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, to condemn it as seriously flawed? Will she undertake to ensure complete transparency in the work that PWC is doing at all stages of the contract?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government will support people who are trying to give up smoking. (S3F-605)

I invite the First Minister to join me in congratulating those who organised the day and took part in the celebrations. I know that the First Minister will be aware that every day there are 35 smoking-related deaths in Scotland, amounting to one in four of all deaths in Scotland. He will also be aware that the Scottish Government has cut the smoking cessation budget by almost 6 per cent in real terms over the next three years. How does the First Minister justify cutting spending on preventing Scotland's number one killer disease?

The problem that we face has arisen because of the historical situation. Until about 2000, when the Parliament really got going, a culture of paternalism, secrecy and disdain for the public, the patients and even the staff was evident in the process of producing major change. As Ross Finnie said, significant damage has been done to the public's confidence in our ability to achieve major change. The previous Government tried to respond to the situation. There was interim guidance on consultation in 2002. The landscape was decluttered with the creation of single territorial health boards—the number of boards was reduced from 42 to 14. Local authority representation on health boards was introduced, in order to give a degree of local accountability. Partnership forums were set up, so that staff were represented on the boards. Then there was the embodiment of reform in the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Act 2004, which led to the setting up of the Scottish health council. As the cabinet secretary said, we need to be clear about the specific roles of each of the organisations. If we reclutter the landscape with a vast variety of individuals, who will produce competing opinions, we will be no further forward in improving public confidence. The Scottish health council appeared only in 2005, and it gave a post hoc commentary on the consultation process in Lanarkshire and in Ayrshire and Arran. It made significant criticisms in both cases. Jackson Carlaw mentioned one particular criticism, which was that the boards narrowed the options before even starting the consultation process. In one instance, the status quo was removed from the possible options. Jackson Carlaw also pointed out that, in other instances, the boards produced options that were not credible and would have been dismissed out of hand in the first round of consultation. We need an independent body that considers the consultation process, and we need the Scottish health council. The question that is before us today is this: Do we need the independent scrutiny panels to examine the evidence? Before we can answer that, we have to decide at what point an independent scrutiny panel—whether it be an expert panel or any of the three possible options—would actually examine the evidence. If scrutiny were always post hoc—after the board  had chosen its preferred option—confidence in the board system would not be restored but would be further undermined. The evidence must be considered at the outset, which is also when the consultation process must begin. The board should say, "This is the problem about which we want to consult the public", and the board could then give options X, Y and Z, based on evidence A, B and C. The independent scrutiny panel would then consider the evidence that the board had produced, and possibly say, "Yes, that is a reasonable body of evidence for the changes." The Scottish health council would consider the proposed consultation process.

Yes—I am not criticising the Government's position. I am merely saying that it is not correct, as some members have assumed, that the independent scrutiny panel will come in later. All members in the debate have agreed that change is inevitable. I have already said that all options must be consulted on, not just a few. I believe that the problem, not the options, should be presented first. Members have referred to the fact that there should be transparency at every stage. Change has to be evidence based and sustainable. It must improve health, and I believe that it must do so significantly. That is where the balance of judgment comes in. Change must be driven not by provider needs but by the evidence that is presented and the scientific data that are available. It should take into account issues such as transport and inequalities in health, which some of the consultations have failed to pick up on. We need to recognise that some of the decisions that we will be faced with in the future will be balanced decisions and that the decision that is reached will depend on which experts have been asked to contribute. Mary Scanlon and Jamie Stone referred to the Andrew Calder consultation. In that case, an erudite and respected man came up with proposals but failed to take into account the fact that some people must travel down a pretty difficult road to get to Inverness to give birth. There is expert evidence and expert evidence. We need to know whether the independent scrutiny panel will replace the consultancy reviews that are undertaken by boards. A number of boards have appointed independent reviewers to check that the boards' evidence is robust. I presume that those people will not be necessary if we have an independent scrutiny panel.  Malcolm Chisholm and others referred to the need for a skills mix in the independent scrutiny panel, but who will decide on that? The process must be robust. The appointments cannot be made by the minister in a political way. I know that that is not the intention, but it must not happen. When would the panel be brought into being? The cabinet secretary has indicated that that would depend on whether the change was major and also said that what might be a major change in one area might not be major in another area. However, we must be clear about the criteria, because we cannot have independent scrutiny panels brought in because there is a public campaign or a lot of noise around an issue.

As the cabinet secretary herself said, the Scottish health council is working on the criteria that define major change. I am just saying that we need to be clear in respect of establishment of the independent scrutiny panel. We are all concerned to maintain public confidence. Whatever system we end up with must inspire public confidence. However, that does not mean that the outcomes will satisfy everyone: indeed, the Scottish health council's report on the situation in Lanarkshire said that it has no role in commenting on the desirability of the options and that the decisions that might be reached might not be the ones that the public think are the best options. Sustaining public confidence does not obviate the need for taking difficult decisions. The most important problem is the cluttering of the landscape. If we are to have a substantial number of local councillors involved in community health partnerships and boards, directly elected health boards that are democratically accountable to their constituents, and Parliament and the minister, we must handle the involvement of the independent scrutiny panel carefully if we are not to end up in significant difficulties. There could be conflict rather than conflict resolution. We need independent scrutiny of evidence. That must be in place in order to ensure public confidence. However, the timing of that scrutiny, the timing of the appointment of the panel, the timing of its intervention and the way in which it intervenes are all matters that must be clarified before a final decision is reached.

Does the member accept that an independent consultancy looked at the consultation process in at least two cases and in one case an independent individual—a pro-vice-chancellor of the University of York—looked at the evidence? Attempts were made by the health boards, albeit they were not successful.

Does the member accept that, following the 1999 Stobhill inquiry, interim guidance was issued in 2002 and a reform bill was passed that insisted on consultation? Does he agree that, although some consultations might have had flaws, that is partly because the Scottish health council was not established until 2005, by which time those consultations were under way?

The cabinet secretary has made some very important points. She mentioned the skill mix within the independent panels. According to the consultation document, panel members will be independently appointed, and it will be important that their remit is focused. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the panel's remit should be focused on the evidence? The Scottish health council is working on the consultation process, and the panels should not tackle the consultation process or we will get mixed messages.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it is confident that it will reach Labour's target of zero delayed discharges from hospitals by the end of March 2008 in each local authority and national health service board area. (S3O-2547)

I am sure that the minister will join me in congratulating the national health service on the excellent work that it has done over the past few years in reducing delayed discharges, which, by blocking beds, create major problems. Will she confirm that zero means zero only for those in hospital for more than six weeks? Will she give the Parliament an undertaking that the figure will remain at zero for the over-six-weeks delayed discharges and that the rise that has been seen by September and October each year will no longer occur? Finally, will she guarantee that in eliminating the longer-term, over-six-weeks delayed discharges, a larger number of short-term delayed discharges will not occur and that there will not be a rise in the number of beds blocked?

I will pursue the north-east question a little further, because the issue of resources is clearly important for the speed of transfer, given that the development of the state hospital will be completed by 2011. The cabinet secretary said that she will write with the detail, but can she tell us a little more at this stage? Has the consultation process begun in the north-east? I ask because in 1999 I was the reporter to the Health and Community Care Committee on the medium-secure unit at Stobhill. The cabinet secretary will remember that that was a bad set of consultations, which led to big changes in the NHS. That meant that there was a long lead time to the development of Rowanbank. I am concerned that the cabinet secretary's time plan will be difficult. I also have a technical question, in order to be clear about the cabinet secretary's answer to Margaret Curran. Are we saying that the minister does or does not have the final say in the transfer of restricted prisoners? If the Court of Session decides that the restriction of the prisoner is excessive, surely the prisoner must be transferred? Is the minister's power only to delay the transfer if a suitable medium-secure unit place is not available, or is she still saying that the minister has an absolute right to say that no transfer will take place, despite a decision of the Court of Session on appeal?

It is rare for there to be such unanimity across the chamber. It is clear that there is unanimity on the report of the UK organ donation task force. There is also a fair degree of unanimity on the problem that we face—the fact that the number of transplants in Scotland is so low and the fact that the level of organ donation in the UK is one third of that in Spain. Several members have made that point. Mike Rumbles alluded to the fact that, despite the Parliament's efforts, the number of donations has not gone up, and he sought an explanation for that. I was the reporter to the former Health and Community Care Committee when it first considered organ donation. One reason the number of donations has not increased is that, fortunately, the number of brain-stem deaths is being reduced because of our ability to tackle cerebral haemorrhage and because of a reduction in the number of road traffic deaths. There are good reasons for the reduction in the number of donations, but it has not been compensated for by  increases in the number of non-beating-heart donations, living relative donations and non-relative donations. The supply of donated organs is not sufficient, but demand is increasing. Kenneth Gibson referred to the fact that many more organs can now be transplanted. Demand is increasing not just as a result of innate need, but because the opportunities that technology provides are increasing. For example, when I began my professional career, individuals with cystic fibrosis had minimal prospects of surviving into adulthood. Now they do, but in many cases they will not survive for the length of time that I have enjoyed without the opportunity for transplant. Ian McKee, George Foulkes and others referred to the problem in ethnic minority groups, which is a serious issue that must be addressed in any publicity that we produce on registration and on management. Margaret Curran and many other members referred to the sensitivity that we need to show when we deal with the issue. For example, if we have an opt-out system, the register needs to be robust, as Jackson Carlaw said. Margaret Curran also referred to training, which is fundamental. It is therefore disappointing that, despite the recommendations of the Health and Community Care Committee report, many doctors are still inadequately trained and many other staff are not fully aware of the need to look at organ donation. We need to tackle that. Ross Finnie rightly talked about the need for a systematic approach. The issue has to be tackled on an organisational basis that manages every aspect and records where we are failing, where things are not going right and what happens when donation does not occur. There will need to be proper recording by the Government and by trusts and health boards. There will also have to be leadership training in this area if we are to move things along appropriately. Many members have referred to the fact that, in Scotland and in this Parliament, we have made some efforts. As the cabinet secretary indicated, the Scottish transplant co-ordinators are already centrally funded. She also suggested that, to improve performance, we should perhaps consider having a chief executive letter or a health efficiency access and treatment target. I think that that is correct. I also suggest that we do not yet need to move to financial incentives—that is too sensitive an area—but we need to remove the financial disincentive that trusts, hospitals and boards face when they undertake organ donation. That needs to be categorised and the money must be provided centrally as part of the new organisation.  The process of positive registration being referred to as a gift or a donation is important. Many countries that have the system that is known as presumed consent still retain opt-in and opt-out registers. The recognition and registration of the gift is important. If someone opts in, the need for the family to make the decision is removed because the legal statement of the deceased is clear and has force in law.

No, I want to complete this point. The point is that we still ask the family. That is another reason why the numbers are not going up as much as we would like them to. There are some families that do not accept the wishes of the deceased, which means that although the statement has legal force, organ donation does not occur. Advertising is important. Claire Baker paid tribute to the Fife Free Press . I join her in that. The Alloa and Hillfoots Advertiser is also running a campaign, as are other local papers. That is to be welcomed. Backed by a national campaign, that might help to improve the level of registration. Members have referred to circumstances in which registration for organ donation is appropriate. Already, people are given the opportunity to do so when they register with a GP. They should also be able to do so when they register to vote and, as David Whitton said, when they apply for passports and driving licences. Further, when people get their council tax bill, they should get a note that says, "Your council tax is frozen, but we would like you to register for organ donation." As Nanette Milne said, online registration is also important. She also pointed out that the fact that she took so long to register—even though she undoubtedly had a strong motivation to do so—shows that we have a problem with our ability to acquiesce to the wishes of the population with regard to organ donation. According to polls, 93 per cent of people back the concept of organ donation. The time has come to make a move. We need to be clear about the legislation on non-beating hearts, as Mary Scanlon said. We also need to ensure that we avoid any conflict of interest between the physicians and clinicians who are trying to get a patient back to health and the teams that are involved in the organ transplant process. There needs to be a clear awareness of the potential conflicts of interest. The final issue is the vexed one of presumed consent. I use that term only because it is used across 21 countries in Europe. Are they wrong and we are right? Have they had problems, major  difficulties and concerns? No. Is the evidence that presumed consent increases the number of donations clear? Yes. There have been parallel studies in Belgium; one area had an opt-in system and the other had a system of presumed consent. There were before-and-after studies on the introduction of presumed consent. As some members have mentioned, a meta-analysis—a compilation of research—has been done that demonstrates clearly that presumed consent increases the number of donations by about six per million. If presumed consent had the same effect in Scotland, we would not just double, but would increase by 150 per cent, the number of donations. The time has come for us to do what David Whitton suggested—we need to make organ donation easy for the families. That is crucial to the debate. It is vital that we respect families' views, but we need to make the process easy for them. If someone who has just been bereaved is asked, "What do you think the deceased would have wanted?", they will say, "I don't know," with the result that, as has been said, they will opt for the default position, which is not to donate. One of the clearest bits of evidence on the issue was provided by a research project that interviewed families a year after they had refused to give permission for donation. It found that 40 per cent of those families regretted their decision. Families are being put in the unenviable position of being asked whether they agree to organ donation when they should be being asked whether they object to it. That might not seem to be a large shift, but it is psychologically crucial to how families manage the situation.

The problem with a soft system is that with quite a number of people who have opted in, their families have nevertheless said no. We must respect families' wishes, so we need to change the culture, as a number of members have said. Ross Finnie used the word "authorisation", which is a good term, but it does not take us a great deal further. We all agree that the task force recommendations must be implemented in a powerful, organised and systematic way that ensures that chief executives focus on organ  donation and that we maximise the number of organs that are donated. We must encourage registration. George Foulkes said that every donor gives 56 years of life to others. The Parliament needs to send out the message that, in the correct circumstances, organ donation must become usual, and we must make it easy for our citizens to donate their organs.

To ask the Scottish Executive what practical steps it plans to take to implement the Scottish National Party manifesto promise to reduce the number of non-violent offenders committed to serve prison sentences of six months or less. (S3O-2434)

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the Bath Street time-out centre for drug-using, non-violent women offenders, who might otherwise be sentenced to short-term custody, has been successful? Will he review why alternative-to-custody measures, including drug treatment and testing orders and drug courts, have such a low take-up for women offenders? Has he  reviewed the evaluation of the community reparation order pilots, which involve a new alternative to custody for fine default? Will he consider ordering a new pilot that will address the problems in the original pilots? Will he invite the Sentencing Commission to examine the reasons for the massive increase in remand custody for men and women when alternatives such as bail supervision and tagging are now available?

Different groups of experts will provide different results—that statement is important in going forward. I have a couple of questions. First, will the cabinet secretary publish the Scottish health council's reports on the original Lanarkshire NHS Board and Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board consultations, and its views on the independent scrutiny panel's recent consultation? Secondly, will she invite the independent scrutiny panel to publish any evidence that it researched in coming to the view that it reached? In the statement in which it criticised the previous evidence, the panel made not a single reference. My third—

Given the 43 consultant vacancies in the NHS Lanarkshire area and the serious pressures on the NHS in Ayrshire and Arran, does the cabinet secretary feel that the latter board in particular can sustain spending £5.7 million of its £17 million increase on one service alone, given the many pressures that a health board faces, particularly at present as a result of this year's fairly low settlement?

As many members have reminded us, we have had 60 years of the national health service. During that time there has not been a single model of the health service—indeed, change has been one of the hallmarks of its development—but it has broadly moved from a command-and-control structure, through the internal market structure under the Conservatives, to the current model of collaboration that the current Government is seeking to continue and enhance. In 1999, when the Parliament came into being, I was fortunate enough to be asked to be the reporter on the Stobhill inquiry. I was astounded at the degree to which the health board had not consulted on the issue. It went further than that: there was a marked culture of secrecy and paternalism, and a deliberate attempt to obfuscate matters and delay public information in such a way that the local community and the doctors and nurses at Stobhill general hospital were not informed about the situation with the new medium secure unit until it was too late for them to have any influence. The report, which was adopted by the Health and Community Care Committee and the then Government, has led to huge changes over the past few years. One of my concerns is that we may not be allowing those changes to bed in adequately before we proceed. The one thing that all speakers have agreed on today—many have referred to it—is that local accountability is vital. Important changes have been made, including the reduction in the number of health boards and trusts. Whereas there were 42 trusts and boards, there are now 14 boards. Community health partnerships are new, but have enormous potential to increase the involvement of the  community and the participation of all stakeholders. That move, and others involving elected councillors, is a change that has only recently begun. In evidence to the Health Committee on the Health Board Elections (Scotland) Bill, Sir John Arbuthnott said that 43 elected members are represented on NHS board or as chairs or members of local community health partnerships. He believed that that level of representation could be lost with direct elections. I do not agree with that sentiment, but I believe fundamentally that we need to consider carefully before we establish a third democratic focus. Peter Peacock made an excellent point when he said that democracy of and in itself produces accountability in the ballot box but does not necessarily improve consultation. We have learned that to our cost on a number of occasions. Other structures have been put in place, such as the Scottish health council—it, too, is a relatively new body that is still finding its feet—to try to ensure that the consultative process works. The revised consultation to which Nanette Milne and others referred means that the guidance on consultation has been improved. The staff partnership forum and its representation on the board brings in an important element of representation. The cabinet secretary referred to the fact that boards now consult much earlier, much more frequently and much more openly. We all agree that there is still a degree of imperfection there that needs to be strongly addressed. Innovative measures such as open forums, citizens juries, community forums and the involvement of independent facilitators have all been tried out. We need to collect the data and ensure that all boards follow it. The independent scrutiny of the consultation process, not only by the Scottish health council but, in the case of Lanarkshire, by PricewaterhouseCoopers, was still not sufficient to produce an adequate consultation process. I believe that the combination of the scrutiny mechanisms, including NHS Quality Improvement Scotland and the joint improvement teams, will help to make boards meet national standards to a greater extent than was previously the case. We have pretty well got the national accountability upwards in place. The HEAT—health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—targets that replaced the performance assessment framework, combined with the national outcome indicators and the outcome agreements with boards, put the cabinet secretary in a strong position to hold the health boards to account but, as I said at the beginning of my speech, today we are concerned with local  scrutiny, which has been served in part by measures such as providing open agendas for health board meetings, making those meetings public and publishing minutes of them, and facilitating public participation in the annual accountability reviews, all of which allow open scrutiny and are most welcome. But are they enough? As members such as Jamie Stone have said, we all agree on the concept of local ownership and local involvement, but the issue is how best we achieve it. We must look at models elsewhere in the world and find out whether they have worked. Elsewhere in our world, in England, the NHS foundation trusts conduct elections to their boards of governors. One foundation trust had an opt-out system—in other words, someone had a vote unless they opted out of having it. The turnout was 18 per cent. As a result, a high proportion of the representatives were retirees—that is not unreasonable, given that we have an ageing population, many of whom use the health service—and professionals. It worries me that the groups whose ownership of the health service I want to see enhanced and which needs to be enhanced—the deprived communities—might not have a voice. We all agree that it is the members of those communities whose health needs to be improved and who need to have ownership of the process by which that is achieved. Some members have mentioned the possible clash between national and local priorities, but that does not concern me too much as there are processes for dealing with it. Governments have had to deal with local government for a long time. However, there are sometimes delivery problems. It will be interesting to find out whether the outcome agreements and the concordat with local authorities deliver the outcomes that the Government wants. Nanette Milne spoke about short-termism, which will be a danger in an elective system if single-issue candidates are elected on to boards. I regret to say that, in 30 years in the health service, it was my experience that the people who shouted loudest got the most. There is a serious danger that we will find that the people who are elected on to the boards are those who have shouted loudest and got organised. Another danger that has not been mentioned is the possibility of an increase, rather than a decrease, in the postcode lottery effect. How many times has the problem of a postcode lottery, whereby certain services are available in some areas but not in others, been mentioned in parliamentary debates? If we have increased democracy with regard to the boards, we will have to live with that—in fact, the problem will probably get worse.  My major concern is to do with the role of local authorities. In Sweden, the local authorities control the local health boards and there is a concordat and an agreement between the national Government and the local authorities. That model provides for democratic input, but in a way that is different from what the Government is proposing. The Swedish model seems to work quite well, but the New Zealand model has led to a significant drop in turnout as the process has proceeded. There is also an indication that the type of people who have been elected to boards is not truly reflective of the communities that they have been elected to represent. I will be interested to hear the minister's summing-up speech. The message from today's debate is that we all agree that we need to have local accountability and ownership of our health service by people in their localities, but that we do not agree on the best means of achieving that. I return to Margaret Curran's point: if we are to alter the governance arrangements of the health service in Scotland, we must do so in a manner that leads to accountability and improvement and which is settled and will last over time. If the Government chooses to proceed with its plans, I hope that it will do so on the basis of pilot schemes, because I genuinely believe that it will be difficult for us to be sure that having health boards on which, if Bill Butler's suggested model is adopted, 50 per cent of members plus one will be directly elected will truly deliver the consultation and ownership that we all seek and in which we all believe.

I commend the cabinet secretary for continuing the Labour policy of seeking a different settlement for general practitioners in Scotland such as we already had on access. I ask her to talk about the alternative proposals that she is putting to the general medical services committee of the BMA. Those do not seem to include any new money, yet they seem to take a rational approach in amending the quality and outcomes framework guidelines. I also ask her to confirm that the three elements in the primary proposal are: the £9.5 million of new money; the £6.5 million of recycled money; and the remainder of the £19 million, which is to do with the review body and a guarantee that she has offered.

To ask the Scottish Executive what meetings the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has had with voluntary organisations to discuss their role in achieving health equality. (S3O-2334)

I join the cabinet secretary in commending the work that is done by our voluntary organisations. I also thank her for responding to Labour's call for funding for healthy living centres. However, £2.5 million for one year, far from being the "funding lifeline" that her press release describes, is more like a shoogly peg. She has provided only half the funding for half the time that we called for. Four centres are already beyond the cabinet secretary's lifeline because they have closed. Does the cabinet secretary understand that the funding may not be enough for the 2,000 deaf or blind clients in my constituency who might lose the services of Fife healthy living and sensory awareness project, which has already announced that it will close on 31 March due to lack of money? When the healthy living centre alliance wrote to the cabinet secretary about the situation in October, it called for £10 million over two years, but she made her announcement only this week. Will she take this opportunity to apologise to those 2,000 deaf or blind clients in Fife? Will she apologise to the many centre workers who have already been made redundant and to those who have been made fearful by the redundancy notices that have been issued?

Will she apologise to the management boards, whose voluntary efforts have been undermined by her inability to make decisions on time? Will she return to Parliament with a longer-term—[ Interruption. ]

I am halfway through my last sentence.

Will the cabinet secretary return to Parliament before the summer recess to make an announcement about year 2 of transition funding for the healthy living centres, so that we do not go through this whole sorry mess next year?

I thank the minister for the detailed replies that she is giving on this topic. She responded positively to the debate that took place on motor neurone disease—another neurological condition—and said that she hoped that specialist support nurses for neurological conditions generally would be provided. Has she made any progress on that general issue?

I thank the minister for his statement. I think that the Shaw report is excellent. I have spent a considerable proportion of my psychiatric life in treating patients who have experienced abuse, including abuse that has taken place in a residential setting. It is disappointing that psychiatrists have treated such individuals as personality disordered, and have not accepted that really serious damage has been done to them. I want the minister to provide the Parliament with absolute clarity about funding. The previous Government provided £1.7 million, which the minister has mentioned already, for the creation of survivorScotland. I want to know whether the new money will be additional money and whether the existing 25 organisations that were supported by the previous Government will continue to be supported, because the fund was originally time limited. Will the new moneys, which will be for advice, counselling and treatment at a national level, be in addition to funding for those organisations? I see that the Minister for Community Safety, Fergus Ewing, is in the chamber. I ask the Minister for Children and Early Years to consult him on the specific provision of counselling, advice and support for the 70 per cent of offenders in women's prisons who have been abused—that includes childhood abuse—according to research by Dobash and Dobash.

I am pleased to take part in this budget debate. It is clear that the settlement is broadly in line with all our expectations of 10 months ago. It is also now obvious that the SNP Government appears to be less concerned with the poorest and most vulnerable in our society and more concerned with populist tax-cutting measures that disproportionately benefit the better-off.

No, I am just getting started—but thank you, Alex. This Tory-SNP budget is highly regressive. It cuts by nearly £1 billion the income that the Government might otherwise have over the spending cycle. The cut in business rates is clearly an important part of that, but the council tax freeze, instead of being directed at the most vulnerable, as Labour would have proposed, is set to benefit those in the most expensive properties much more than those in the least expensive properties. It will give absolutely no benefit to those who pay no council tax by reason of low income. The better-off in Scotland will undoubtedly cheer this budget, but will they—or, indeed, any Scots—be cheering when services that we have come to expect are cut and cut again? Christine Grahame has already spoken on the subject of health—not, I am glad to say, as the convener of the Health and Sport Committee but on her own behalf. Under Labour, Scotland used to spend considerably more per head on health than England. The SNP is narrowing the gap by more than the Barnett squeeze. It is diluting the advantage that we had, and we still have serious health problems. The first Wanless report made clear that the national health service required a doubling in health expenditure. Labour delivered on that in Scotland and the United Kingdom.

No, I am sorry. In his second report, Wanless said that the amount needed to keep progress going would be in the region of 4 per cent in real terms, which was about 6.5 per cent in cash terms. Labour at Westminster is delivering on that, whereas in Scotland we are getting only a 4.2 per cent cash increase. In the budget—which is the least transparent since the Parliament was formed—the health boards receive only 3.2 per cent, which is a cut in proportional terms. The Scottish Parliament information centre has advised us that the reduction is in the region of £265 million over three years. How are the boards going to meet the six  pressures identified by Audit Scotland, which are an ageing population, the European working time directive, equal pay, new drugs for cancer, out-of-hours costs, and restrictions on the use of capital for income, which has already been introduced and which I presume will not be reversed? Other issues have been identified. Given the uplift of only 0.5 per cent, there is no indication how, within the remainder of the budget, a saving of 2 per cent—the biggest efficiency gain that has been required of health boards since the Tory years when, in fact, there were cuts—will be made, given that 65 per cent of the costs are on staff, there are to be no compulsory redundancies and 10 per cent of the whole budget is spent on medicines. What have Nicola Sturgeon and John Swinney combined to do to help the boards achieve those savings? They have cut the budget for change and innovation—a cut that cannot be masked by the change of name in the budget. Audit Scotland made it clear that the up-front costs of service redesign are significant, yet there is a cut in the budget. Then there is the philosophical approach of the budget. The SNP has made huge play about the removal of ring fencing and the concordat outcome agreements with local authorities, which are part of its squeeze on local government. In health, however, where we already have health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment—HEAT—targets and multiple national outcome indicators, the SNP has increased ring fencing because it needs to deliver on a number of new initiatives. There is no new money for those initiatives; the money has been taken out of the health boards' spending. It is the opposite of the approach to local authorities. The health boards are being squeezed then given the money back ring fenced to address our common objectives of achieving lower waiting times, introducing human papilloma virus vaccination for young women, being prepared for pandemics and introducing new health improvement schemes. Those objectives should have been met by a significant increase in the overall health budget of 6 per cent, not 4 per cent. It is smoke and mirrors taken to a new level of obfuscation. I will not dwell on the much-vaunted new ways national waiting times initiative, except to warn Nicola Sturgeon, as I have done repeatedly, that the hugely complex computerised system is heading for problems. More important than its enormous budget costs and its extra bureaucracy is the fact that it will be a burden on patients and their general practitioners. I will return to that issue. The budget lacks clear detail—it is less detailed than previous budgets. However much it may mask it, the minority Government has not chosen  to seek a true consensus in the Parliament; it has stitched up a right-wing alliance with the Tories. I am surprised that the Greens, with their undoubted sense of social equality, have supported the SNP. Mrs MacDonald has also been slightly conned into supporting the Government. This is a regressive tax-budging budget; it is not a budget that meets the needs of Scotland.

I thank the Presiding Officer for letting me speak early in the debate and apologise to members that I may have to leave before it concludes. I congratulate George Foulkes on securing the debate. He has raised an issue with which I have been personally involved for a considerable time. In 2000, the Health and Community Care Committee asked me to act as its reporter on the subject of organ transplants, and I reported to that committee although I was not a member of it when its report went to the Parliament. When I considered the issue in detail, I found exactly the sort of arguments against presumed consent that Roseanna Cunningham and Mary Scanlon have put clearly tonight. It is certainly not an easy issue for a Government to tackle. Nevertheless, I believe that the time has come for us to do that. During the previous session and the latter period of the session before that, the subject was discussed in the context of what happened at Alder Hey children's hospital. There was, therefore, considerable concern and alarm about the whole issue of doctors taking organs inappropriately and without permission. However, that is quite different from a context in which respect for the families remains, which must be central to any donation system. Any system that advocated the state owning the dead body and, therefore, being able to dispose of the organs as it saw fit would be anathema to me. The only system that I would be prepared to support would be one in which a sensitive approach to the family was made by a trained co-ordinator seeking the family's agreement to the donation on the basis of presumed consent. It is easier for the family to say that they know that the deceased would not have wished their organs to be donated or that they have strong  views against organ donation, and both of those views should be respected. However, being asked to consider a complex positive decision at that point is something that many families find adds to the already distressing situation of their immediate loss. Research has clearly shown that, a year or so after the episode, the level of regret among families who have rejected the request for donation is extremely high, whereas very few of the families who have consented regret having made the decision to undertake donation. The evidence therefore shows that we need to help families to make an appropriate decision that they can live with later on. I accept entirely that that must be done in a very sensitive way. The evidence as to whether presumed consent is the sole answer to our transplant problem is clear: it is not. It is only part of the total solution. I regret the fact that the many recommendations in the report that I was involved in preparing for the Health and Community Care Committee are simply being repeated today in the task force's recommendations—some six years later. It is also regrettable that the number of transplants has not increased. We need to tackle the legal position regarding non-beating-heart donation. We also need to tackle—and have done, to a large extent—the issues of living donors and non-related swap donors. It is important that such issues are sorted out. However, the most important thing is that every intensive care unit in Scotland should have a co-ordinator attached to it. That should be our first step, irrespective of the forward steps that need to be taken in legislation. We should today set ourselves the goal of achieving that, as it would increase the number of transplants. We should continue to promote the debate and, in my view, we should move to a system of soft presumed consent with a very strong opt-out, of which every citizen should be made aware.

To ask the Scottish Executive what additional measures it proposes to extend or enhance existing community orders or introduce new forms of community orders to reduce short-term custody for non-violent offenders, especially women. (S3O-2027)

I thank the minister for that full reply. One of the pilots established under the Labour Government was the community reparation orders pilot, which has recently been evaluated. I am sure that the minister has read that evaluation. Is he comfortable with the fact that it shows that the purpose of the orders was poorly explained to the judiciary, numbers were low and  arrangements for implementation of the orders were poor? The whole pilot was poorly undertaken. Is the minister prepared to consider a further pilot that may learn lessons from the first before abandoning community reparation orders, which are welcomed by communities because they require very low-level offenders to make direct reparation to the communities against which they have offended?

Will the First Minister reassure members about access to general practitioners? The British Medical Association has advised us that the Government's intention is to adopt a within-24-hours model for access to GPs, which has been adopted in England, rather than a within-48-hours model for access to health professionals, which the Labour Government in Scotland favoured. Will the First Minister reassure us that he does not intend to go down the 24-hour access route?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether it is in order for the Minister for Public Health to say that ASH welcomed her announcement, given that, in a press release on 11 December, the chief executive of ASH Scotland said: "I am deeply disappointed that the funding for smoking cessation services in Scotland will not be increased over the next three years. An increase in funding was necessary to tackle Scotland's smoking habit, but instead in real terms the government has given us a decrease."  Is it reasonable to offer the minister an opportunity to correct what she said about ASH welcoming the announcement?

The debate has two levels: to look at the development of health in Scotland and to hold the Government to account on the particulars. Over the past few days, it has become clear that we face a Government that has introduced a regressive budget and which has chosen tax cuts over development of services. What are the consequences of that for health? The consequences are that the territorial boards face a £270 million reduction in their share of the money. Wanless reckoned that a 4 per cent increase in funding was needed to sustain growth in the health service at a reasonable level but, in real terms, the amount of cash that the territorial boards receive will increase by only 0.5 per cent. When the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth were asked about that at the Health and Sport Committee, they said, "Oh yes, but all the ring-fenced money will go back to the boards, which will make up the difference." That might be true, were it not for the fact that the Government has announced many new initiatives—which we welcome. We welcome the fact that it has continued Labour's commitment to the 18-week waiting-time target, which is costly to meet. Its agreement to provide the human papillomavirus vaccination programme for girls and to introduce colon cancer screening are also welcome, but they will also cost a lot of money.

I am sorry, but I will not. The cabinet secretary can respond through the summing-up speech. The provision of £85 million over four years to address alcohol issues is most welcome, as is the £40 million that will be allocated to tackling obesity. However, central services must still be maintained and that will be a problem, given the shifting of money to ring-fenced elements. Hang on—have we not been told that ring fencing is complete anathema to this Government? In health, it is introducing more ring fencing. I wonder where we are going. Let us examine the budgets that have been flatlined or cut. The change and innovation budget is fundamental to the redesign of services, but even though Audit Scotland has told us that the up-front costs of many redesign projects are  significant, that budget is being cut over the next three years. How will that produce a health improvement? The smoking ban was the flagship of the previous Administration, which put substantial moneys into tackling smoking but, under the SNP, the relevant budget will be flatlined for three years. According to the figures that I have today received from Action on Smoking and Health, that amounts to a real-terms reduction in funding of 8 per cent. What does that say about tackling one of the greatest problems we continue to face, which is smoking? It is a real problem. Ross Finnie referred to the community health partnerships in a thoughtful speech. The CHPs are absolutely fundamental. As the cabinet secretary said, they are still in the early stages, but she made not one single substantive mention of CHPs and yet they are fundamental to the shift from acute to community care.

I turn to Kerr. Again, the Kerr report was not mentioned. Why? The answer lies in the speeches that we heard from back-bench SNP members—and from Jackson Carlaw. Kerr is now dead. It is a dead duck. The SNP Government has rebadged it as centralisation, not modernisation, and has gone public with that view. The situation is unacceptable. I accept that we must continue to modernise, but why has the Government cut the change and innovation budget?

No. I find it extraordinary that the SNP is going to adopt the English system of 24-hour access to general practice.

If that is not the case, the cabinet secretary should tell me in her summing up. The British Medical Association has told us that we will adopt 24-hour access. Scottish Government under Labour said that it would go for 48-hour access to health professionals, and that has worked extremely well. Ian McKee rightly drew attention to the central problem—the general practice booking system, which has created major difficulties. That is what we need to focus on, particularly in deprived communities. I welcome a number of areas that the cabinet secretary addressed. Indeed, I welcome the rhetoric in "Better Health, Better Care", although I see no sign of delivery. We were not given the health indicators until after the budget document  was produced, which made the document difficult to analyse.

The cabinet secretary need not wave the document at me; I have read it. I turn to mental health. Many funds have been shifted to the local authorities. I will wait to see what outcome measure the local authorities will have to meet. The only outcome measure or indicator for mental health is the new mental well-being survey. What will it do to address severe and enduring mental illness? What will it do to address health inequalities and the significant problems of mental health, drugs and alcohol in deprived communities? What will it do to hold health boards responsible? I turn to consultation. We have had a preview of independent scrutiny in the two independent panels that reported recently. I read the 127-page report on Monklands when I was unwell in bed recently. It did not make me feel better; it made me feel considerably worse. The report criticised NHS Lanarkshire for using references that were 20 years old and for basing its references on international experience. I would have had no problem with that criticism if the independent scrutiny committee report's authors had gone on to produce newer references and evidence, but the report contains not one single piece of referenced evidence. If that is what independent scrutiny committees are going to produce in attacking health boards that have tried to do their best, we have a real problem. If the cabinet secretary is going to have such committees to protect her from having to make difficult decisions, we must have referenced evidence. That was not the case in Andrew Walker's report on NHS Lanarkshire, which I find extremely disappointing. I turn to the healthy living alliance and healthy living centres, which the cabinet secretary did not address either, although that needs to be done. Initially, the alliance was established with lottery funding, which is appropriate in the case of pilots in which we are testing a measure. However, in Northern Ireland, which has 19 healthy living centres, all 19 centres have been retained. At present, six such centres have been closed in Scotland and another 40 are under threat. Money is needed to sustain those centres, which are often to be found in deprived communities. The rhetoric is that we have a public health service that is free at the point of need and in which there is no competitive tendering. However, competitive tendering has just been introduced in West Lothian, where I worked for the past four years when I was out of Parliament. The process is based on outcomes of which I approve entirely. We need to move in that direction; services must  be related to outcomes. However, in West Lothian, the situation is now one in which competitive tendering has produced bids of £2 million, against a fund of only £935,000. As of this moment, the West Lothian Drug and Alcohol Service—the prime voluntary organisation in West Lothian—has given redundancy notices to half its staff. It has no idea where its funding will come from after April. Those are the realities that the minister has to grapple with and that is what being in Government is about. She has allowed competitive tendering to start and to develop; I ask her now to ensure that it stops in relation to drug and alcohol services. The Government's "Better Health, Better Care" document is very welcome. Its general approach and thrust, and its emphasis on health development and on partnership and mutuality are entirely appropriate. However, we will test the Government on the reality. The elements that we have seen so far are not great, not significant and not many—it has been only eight months—but already the cracks are beginning to appear. Government is about ensuring that rhetoric and reality match.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met NHS Fife and what issues were discussed. (S3O-2057)

I ask the cabinet secretary to join me in praising health boards and local authorities generally for the substantial progress that they have made over the past six years in tackling delayed discharges, and I welcome the Scottish National Party Government's "Better Health, Better Care" target to have zero delayed discharges by March 2008. However, is the cabinet secretary aware of the failure of the SNP and Liberal-led Fife Council to address the rise in the number of delayed discharges from Fife hospitals to a peak of more than 160? Does she know that 140 patients still await funding for community places? Is she aware that Fife NHS Board has already had to commit £4 million of extra funds to prevent acute hospitals in Fife from having major problems with admissions as a result of Fife Council's failure on delayed discharges? Does she wish to amend her statement to the Health and Sport Committee that the rise in the number of delayed discharges in the autumn of this year could be explained as normal seasonal variation? Will she undertake to talk to Fife Council and Fife NHS Board about that major problem?

I recommended a move to presumed consent to the Health and Community Care Committee in my report on the topic in 2000. The recommendation was not accepted by the committee because public opinion had not moved. However, does the First Minister agree that, if we now move to presumed consent, the wishes of the family must still be respected and the family must still be asked for their view? With that element of additional consent, presumed consent in an opt-out system becomes feasible.

Is the minister aware that Forth Valley is the only area in Scotland that does not have a DEXA scanner? Patients from my constituency have to travel to the Golden Jubilee national hospital for testing. Is she prepared to join me in an approach to Forth Valley NHS Board to invite it to use some of the new money that will be available to ensure that it will not be the only health board in Scotland that does not have such a service?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. If a member resolutely refuses to take interventions, should she be allowed to progress beyond the six minutes that are allocated to her?

Will Nicola Sturgeon give way?

rose—

My colleague Margaret Curran tried to ask a question about the £57 million—I will concentrate on that. We understand, and can follow, the progress towards that. I restate that the Labour Party believes that nobody should be unable to get medication on financial grounds and  that a revision of some sort is therefore appropriate. However, we are talking about priorities. As it is Christmas, I am tempted to ask the cabinet secretary where the money tree is, because we seem to be getting enormous largesse. At the end of the process, there will be free prescriptions—that is the manifesto promise of the SNP. However, the introduction of the minor ailments service has meant that anyone who is currently on free prescriptions is entitled to register with a pharmacist and have a prescription issued to them for minor illnesses. Although that may benefit those who are currently on free prescriptions, if it is going to be extended to all people on free prescriptions, it will apply to the whole population—and that will mean that people will ask for prescriptions for minor illnesses. When the member's bill on the abolition of prescription charges was being considered in the previous session of Parliament, the Scottish Parliament information centre estimated that the increased cost from introducing free prescriptions would be between £17 million and £51 million. As that did not take into account the cost of the minor ailments programme, how can the cabinet secretary say that it will cost only £12 million to abolish prescription charges four years from now? That is £4 million on top of the £45 million. We believe that the Government has grossly underestimated the additional cost of prescribing. That is what Margaret Curran was trying to get at. When the Government introduces the policy, it is going to cost much more.

Will the cabinet secretary guarantee that any new medicines that the Scottish medicines consortium approves will continue to be funded no matter what happens to the prescribing budget and the money that is applied to it?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether funding to universities will be reduced as a result of the proposed abolition of the graduate endowment and, if so, by how much. (S3O-1424)

I am intrigued to know how money can be spent twice, but I thank the cabinet secretary for her answer. We now know that the Government is cutting education maintenance allowance for 16 to 18-year-olds—a grant for children from poorer families who stay on at school. There are many pupils in the public gallery today who may be interested in that. How does that square with making a fairer Scotland? Will the cabinet secretary also confirm her previous position that bursaries to young students are not to be increased? Again, how does that fit with a fairer Scotland? Finally, will she confirm that a rise in the number of graduates from 10,000 to 11,000 would  have produced an increasing stream of funds for maintenance grants to students, amounting probably to some £20 million in the long term, which will now be replaced from general funds? That money would have been available for her to use to fund universities.

Those universities will instead suffer a real-terms cut. How do all those cuts and changes reflect the SNP's programme to produce a fairer and smarter Scotland? I cannot see how.

rose—

Will the minister give way?

rose—

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of her statement, which I welcome, and for her gracious remarks about the previous Administration. Clearly, this cannot be a party-political matter and must be non-partisan. I also welcome Alan Johnson's broadly similar statement at Westminster this morning. The disease knows no boundaries, so integrity of approach across the United Kingdom and across the world is vital. However, the time has now come to move beyond strategic planning to detailed and local planning. I know that exercise winter willow was extremely useful in that regard. I actually prepared 35 questions in anticipation of the cabinet secretary's statement—some of those have already been answered—so I ask the cabinet secretary for the opportunity to meet her and her officials. As she may remember, I have a particular interest in the matter as I wrote a report on pandemic flu in 2000, when Margaret Smith was convener of the Health and Community Care Committee. I think that that report put Scotland ahead of the game. First, what progress has been made on immunising older and vulnerable people against pneumococcal infection, given that more people  are likely to die from secondary infection? The cabinet secretary mentioned stockpiling of antibiotics, which I welcome, but we need to deliver pneumococcal immunisation as part of the on-going programme that the previous and current Administrations have developed. Secondly, I know that the Red Cross has been involved at United Kingdom strategic level, but what discussions has the Scottish Executive had with the Red Cross, WRVS, churches and other voluntary organisations? Will the cabinet secretary ensure that all local plans involve clear discussions with the voluntary organisations, which will have a major role to play in sustaining cohesion in our communities? Lastly, one of the recommendations in my report, which was endorsed by the Health and Community Care Committee, was for the creation of lists of retirees and for the involvement of medical students. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that, in the local plans, such lists are now created on a proper database? I know that such a proposal is in the plans—I have read most of them—but I want particular databases to be established now. Will she also talk to NHS Education Scotland to provide the appropriate training for retirees, which could be delivered online, to ensure that their role is clear and that we are well ahead of the game in preparing?

I heard everything that the cabinet secretary said, but the word "accountability" did not enter into it. One of the Labour Party's grave concerns is that, in freeing everything up and in the absence of ring fencing, accountability will go. What discussions has the cabinet secretary had with voluntary organisations as part of the concordat to introduce a council tax freeze? Will he give a guarantee today that no funding cuts will be made in the services that voluntary organisations provide to children and vulnerable families and that are purchased through local authorities? Will he ensure that he has reached a position on that before the end of December? If not, a rash of statutory redundancy notices might be issued throughout Scotland. Any mind meld or mapping—whatever it is called—that Jim Mather plans to undertake in January with voluntary organisations will come too late in terms of April 2008 funding. Redundancy notices have to give a 90-day notice period. Can he guarantee funding for those services?

Mr Wilson makes a cogent argument that arises from an interesting presentation that was given to Scotland's Futures Forum. In drugs, we have moved from the just say no programme to the know the score campaign. In relation to tobacco, we have succeeded in changing attitudes. The number of people in the population who smoke has reduced substantially. The Scottish schools adolescent lifestyle and substance use survey, which has been carried out every two years, with only one year's break, since 1982, shows that the number of boys who smoke has dropped from 30 per cent to 12 per cent. The number of girls who smoke has reduced slightly but, regrettably, it is still substantially higher than the figure for boys. The 2006 SALSUS figures show that there has been a substantial reduction in the number of 13 to 15-year-olds who start to drink. The number who drink excessively or heavily has also reduced, alternative there is concern about binge drinking, again particularly among girls. We do not publicise those results enough. When they were published, there was nothing in the press to say that Scottish youth is moving in the right direction and should be praised for that. Bill  Wilson's motion says more than that. We need to define programmes that build on the work that has been done to provide knowledge in every school. We need to ensure, first, that information is guaranteed to be provided, that the information is much more powerful, and that young people come back to us and say that the education that they get is meaningful and useful. Secondly, as Bill Wilson pointed out, we need young people to participate in driving forward a programme that emphasises that X per cent do not smoke and that more than half of those who smoke want to give up. The significant minority of young people who drink know about getting into trouble with the police, getting involved in arguments and fights, being taken home by the police and so on—there is a list of such things in the SALSUS report. We need to encourage young people to understand that that is not normal behaviour. We need to do more; we need to engage young people in more than just being taken home by the police. We need to bring those young people into educational programmes that are run by or involve their peers. In many cases, having a criminal justice system or a public security system that lifts young people, takes them home and presumes that their parents will care will not get us far. We need to develop things further. I hope that the forthcoming drug and alcohol strategy will have a renewed emphasis on children and families and on supporting those who have problems. I support the motion and welcome the opportunity that it has provided for tonight's debate.

With your indulgence, Presiding Officer, I want to ask two questions. Before I do so, I declare that my wife is involved in the field and is in child protection training. First, I return to an answer that the minister gave earlier. As I understand it, the 30 people on the temporary list are still entitled to work with children. That needs to be addressed. It is not good for them to be on the temporary list. If they are guilty, it is not good that they can work with children. If they are not guilty, they should be  taken off the list. I make that comment in passing. The minister might want to comment on it later. Secondly, I want to address the first part of the minister's statement, which was in three parts. He announced that there will be a draft code of practice on information sharing. Will that be a substitute for the draft children's services (Scotland) bill, which requires a single shared assessment with a key worker? It seems to me that a draft code of practice is not an adequate response, and it might be a fracture line that prevents all-party support. I hope that the minister agrees that we have already undertaken an audit and review and that we have a children's charter that says that information should be shared only as necessary. We have standard 4, with seven examples of how care should be shared under the framework for standards; all those measures are backed up, as the minister said, by quality indications and rigorous inspection. What will the minister's code of practice add? It will not place on agencies the duty to share information that the children's services (Scotland) bill would have laid on them.

On implementation, will a national licensing forum be called into existence? I understand that that has not happened so far.

The member makes an important point, but the early stages of alcohol-related brain damage result in repeated admissions, so the important point is not just the high number of admissions but the fact that people go round and  round. When I was working as a consultant in addictions, alcohol and drugs in August, I did a case study with someone who had ARBD and discovered that they had 11 separate records. The disintegration of the service, to which other members referred, is difficult.

The most recent "Scottish Schools Adolescent Lifestyle and Substance Use Survey National Report"—a survey of schoolchildren aged 13 and 15, which is conducted every two years—says that 20 per cent of 13-year-olds acquire their alcohol in off-licences, shops or supermarkets, and the figure rises to 44 per cent for 15-year-olds. Does Paul Martin agree that test purchasing, which is only just coming in, must be pursued rigorously and that people's licences should be affected as a result?

In this short debate, I will deal with the cabinet secretary's attempts to divert from and obfuscate the central problem. I will put on record the previous Executive's position. I will clarify the SNP Administration's incompetence in not presenting itself to the court and, finally, I will examine the alternatives to address the results of the decision. The original case led to the ombudsman making a judgment, which we know about. The cabinet secretary has accused the Labour Party of hypocrisy in what she said was its decision not to attend when the petition's appeal went to Lord Macphail. In fact, the previous Government responded not once but twice. In February, the Scottish Executive indicated that the outcome of the ombudsman's review was satisfactory and that it did not feel the need to become involved, at least until the response by the ombudsman was submitted. In March, having seen the ombudsman's response, ministers indicated that the Executive would not get involved at that time, but made it clear that it would watch progress. The original grounds of the petition ultimately were rejected, as the Government expected. However, on the third day of the hearing, as Ross Finnie has made clear, new grounds arose, and it was on the basis of those new grounds that Lord Macphail invited the Government to become involved. He said: "the Scottish Ministers had ... no notice" that the new arguments would be presented to the court, and: "It may be that if the Scottish Ministers had been given notice that such an argument would be deployed, they would have sought an opportunity to convey their views to the Court." He also said: "I observed that the Scottish Ministers had had no notice that that argument would be presented. It occurred to me that if they had been given notice in the petition that such an argument would be deployed, they might have decided to enter the process." It was on that basis that, on 10 July, he invited the Government to become involved. On 7  September, the Scottish Government—the cabinet secretary's Government—decided that it would not participate, with the conclusions that we have found.

We would not be in a court situation if there were not some difficulties in interpreting the law. However, the point is that Nicola Sturgeon accused the Labour Party of hypocrisy completely inappropriately, and she should apologise to Lewis Macdonald, who was the minister at the time, for the inferences that she has drawn to besmirch him and the previous Government. That was entirely inappropriate. The new arguments that were presented to the court were crucial, and on that basis Lord Macphail sought the Government's opinion as a "vital consideration" that might have been overlooked. He said that "in ... this case the Scottish Ministers were well qualified and entitled to present" their submissions, and continued: "I can only record my disappointment". That is mild language, but, coming from a judge, the meaning is much stronger. The cabinet secretary should apologise to Lewis Macdonald for the inferences that she has drawn. We are left with a number of questions. Why did the SNP fail to respond to the wholly new issue that was not in the original petition? Would the result have been different had it presented evidence? As I said on "Newsnight", we will never know the answer to that question. Indeed, we might not have been having the debate if the cabinet secretary had chosen to stand up and represent the public interest. The last question is: where do we go from here? The SNP should stop indulging in picking fights with Westminster and concentrate on the serious devolved issues with which Scots are concerned, of which free personal care is one. The minister has to review the decision without waiting for the Sutherland review, as the Liberal Democrat amendment suggests, and come back to Parliament with the necessary measures to ensure in particular that councils do not use the judgment to create waiting lists, as Fife Council is  hinting that it will do. That would be unacceptable, so you need to come out with specific guidance—

I am not sure if that is the case, but on this issue you are right, Presiding Officer. The Government needs to come out with clear guidance on the gap between assessment and care provision where care is available—that is the issue at stake. Care was available, and the family chose to use that care. Why was there a gap in a care home that Argyll and Bute Council was already using? It was purely to create a waiting list, which is unacceptable. Indeed, the MacGregor judgment of Lord Hardie indicated previously that that was unacceptable. I hope that the Government will deal with the issues and make an apology.

I refer members to my declaration of interests, particularly my membership of the British Medical Association, the Royal College of General Practitioners and Unite. First, I want to change the debate slightly and examine the bureaucratic aspects that the minister has denied could exist. I am really concerned about the fact that there are three ways in which a patient can initially be offered two appointments. The minister's previous statement changed the terms to say that patients had to be offered two appointments. I have no problems with a verbal offer or a patient-focused booking offer, but a written offer of two appointments will create a bureaucratic nightmare. Offering two appointments at once will cause real organisational difficulties. Has that idea been tried and tested? If so, were there any problems? Secondly, the clock—to which the Labour Party referred prior to the election—is something on which all members can agree. However, there is a difference between having a clock that stops and throwing the clock out of the window. In the minister's new system, no fewer than 13 different codes will take the patient off the waiting list. It is not that they will be on a waiting list that does not work too well; they will not be on a waiting list at all. There is no indication that patients will be consulted about that, although they will be informed. There is no indication that general practitioners will be—

What has the minister done to ensure that patients will be informed? What consultation has she had with general practitioners to ensure that they are comfortable with the proposed new system? What pilots have been run on the system? What information technology is in place already? We have had IT problems in the past. Will patients have a right to appeal against the hospital manager's decision to kick them off the waiting list? That is unheard of.

What we have not put on the record thus far is that Norway's first attempt to give a guaranteed waiting time resulted not only in an increase in the waiting list but a doubling in the number of violations or breaches of the guarantee, from 5,000 to 10,000, and therefore a doubling of the potential for litigation.

Did you say six minutes?

In that case, I will have to cut my speech. I am pleased to sum up in support of the Labour amendment to the Liberal motion. I refer members to my written declaration of interests, including membership of various colleges and associations and my current consultancy work for the Edinburgh drug action team. Certainly when I was a member in the first session, the Parliament was in agreement that we needed to improve the patient journey and I do not think that any member is against that now. Despite the attempts by some SNP back benchers to divide us, there is general agreement on that principle. I welcome the cabinet secretary's acknowledgement of the progress that has been made; the Labour Party accepts that there is always further progress to be made. I reiterate our commitment to the 18-week guarantee. It was in our manifesto and we will support the Government in taking it forward.

I will complete my point first. It is clear that the Liberal Democrats are not against the 18-week guarantee. What they are against and the reason why we support their motion is the bureaucracy involved in that guarantee. I will deal with the debate in four sections.

I will explain carefully to Nicola Sturgeon what Ross Finnie was saying. If one patient is given an appointment in the last week of their guarantee and another patient with a critical condition comes in and prevents the doctor from proceeding with that appointment, we go beyond the legal guarantee. I will come back to the matter again later. That is the explanation to which Ross Finnie and Jeremy Purvis referred. I will pass fairly quickly over our record, but I will reiterate points made by my fellow Labour members. In 1997, 26,000 patients were waiting for more than 26 weeks—36 are doing so today. In any terms, that is a significant achievement, which was achieved by removing many of the blockages. It was due not only to the doubling of spending, which Margaret Curran mentioned, from £900 a head to more than £2,000 a head, but to the improvement of the NHS system. James Kelly, Karen Gillon, Murdo Fraser and others said that the primary care sector has been developed. It has not been developed enough and more progress has to be made, but nevertheless it has relieved hospital admissions. For example, a report noted that chronic obstructive pulmonary disease services in Tayside have reduced the number of hospital admissions there. Helen Eadie referred graphically to the reduction in bed blockages. There were nearly 4,000 blocked beds when we took power in 1999. The figure is now down to just over 1,000 and there is further downward pressure. The removal of such blockages has been very important. Today's debate is not about a desire to change the patient journey or to remove the guarantees; it is about how we implement them. In 2004, we committed in "Fair to All, Personal to Each" to improve the patient journey and to remove the availability status code waiting lists. In order to do that, there must be a comprehensive set of services. That includes, as Conservative colleagues and others have said, a pragmatic approach to the use of the independent sector. There are 4,000 patients being treated, under contract, in the private sector. Will the SNP now eliminate the use of the independent sector? The 1,000 patients in Tayside who benefit from ear, nose and throat services, the 1,000 in Glasgow who benefit from orthopaedics and the 300 in Alex Salmond's area, Grampian, who benefit from heart  procedures will not welcome the SNP's refusal to act in a pragmatic way. There is a fourth element to add to the first three. It is necessary to improve the structure, have a waiting list support system in the Golden Jubilee hospital, which we renationalised, and to use the private sector pragmatically. A final guarantee is that, if all else fails, the patient can go abroad. Those are the guarantees. We do not need a legal guarantee on top of that. I will return to the matter if I have time. I turn specifically to the point of the amendment. We seriously invite the minister to reconsider the implementation proposals.

I cannot take an intervention, as I am in my last minute. Let me introduce members to the 82-page new ways project document. Its highly bureaucratic approach will result in many patients being removed from waiting lists altogether. That is the SNP's solution to the waiting list problem. Members will read of new codes such as WT 10/10, WT 10/30, WT 19/10 and WT 26/90, which are only a few of the codes that will be recorded on the removal of patients from the list for non-response; deciding that the offer that they have been made is not reasonable; and failing to attend twice—Ian McKee referred to that in relation to the poorest communities. The figure for non-attendance across the NHS in Scotland is currently 12 per cent. If a patient does not attend, they get taken off the list. If someone cancels twice, even for good reason—for example, because they are looking after a terminally ill relative—they get removed from the list. The hospital makes the decision; it is nothing to do with the GP, who is merely informed and not consulted. I urge the minister to reconsider the system for the sake of the vulnerable patients to whom Mary Scanlon and others referred: those who are homeless; those who are illiterate; those who have no phones—there are still some in that position; and those who are confused. Many groups will be seriously affected by the bureaucratic interpretation of a good proposal.

rose—

Oh!

Will the member take an intervention?

The member named me.

I thank the member for his courtesy. We entirely support the guarantee. The problem is with its legality. If it is backed by legal issues, it is a different matter. We introduced a series of guarantees whereby, if a patient was not treated in their local hospital, they went to the Golden Jubilee hospital, which we renationalised. If they did not get into the Golden Jubilee because there was a problem with particular circumstances, they could go to the private sector. The SNP Government will get rid of that approach. If it was not possible for the patient to go to the private sector, there was ultimately a right for them to go abroad. We introduced all those rights.

There is no need for a legal guarantee.

I wonder whether Nicola Sturgeon was listening to Ross Finnie's speech. As the Liberal Democrats make clear in their motion, we are concerned about two things. We are concerned not about the idea of removing the hidden waiting lists, as the SNP refers to availability status codes, but about dealing with the bureaucracy that will accompany the implementation of the concept, which will impose a massive burden on the health service. That will be compounded by the introduction of legal guarantees that will remove the clinical right to make decisions. Those are the two issues that we are debating today, not the principles that you outlined at the beginning of your speech, which we support.

To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of a doubling in funding for flood prevention in the last session of the Parliament, what level of funding will be provided for prevention measures in 2007-08 and 2008-09. (S3O-698)

I am sure that all members will join me in wishing Richard Lochhead good luck in his work in London, which is important to our farmers and rural communities. Regarding the floods in Milnathort, the report from Atkins for Perth and Kinross Council indicated that there were problems with Ove Arup and Partners Scotland's construction of the flood prevention measures. Part of the height of the construction was below that which was specified, which resulted in the floods being considerably more serious than might otherwise have been the case. Will the minister consider providing additional compensation for the households affected, particularly those who are not insured or whose insurance companies are not helping? Will he ensure that the necessary funds are made available to the council to rectify fully the faults in the original construction if Arup is not prepared to do so?

I join other members in congratulating Murdo Fraser on securing this debate. As is usual in members' business debates, there seems to be a great deal of unanimity around today's motion. As members have said, the debate is not about the arguments for and against the route of the new line or whether all of it or part of it should be buried because of economic, tourism and health issues—that is a matter for the reporters when they make a recommendation to the minister. The motion is about the process. Many members have asked whether the process is fair and reasonable and, most important, whether it will result in a decision that is appropriate. If the process is not correct, the decision might not be correct. I was not in the Parliament when the planning laws were changed, but whatever the planning procedures are, it is unreasonable for the sea route not to be considered as an option. I ask the minister to give an undertaking to consider the option of a sea route so that it can be appropriately considered by the reporter. The second flaw in the process is, as others have said, that the proceedings are not being fully recorded. It is an Alice in Wonderland situation that an objector can stand up and be told that they cannot make a statement because it has been made before. Unless they have attended all the other meetings up and down the country, they have no idea whether that is the case. That is bizarre and acts against the objectors. Scottish and Southern Energy and Scottish Hydro-Electric Transmission have a massive team of lawyers who record everything themselves, but they do not appear to be prepared to make that record available to the objectors. The situation is unfair and biased and needs to be addressed for this inquiry and for future inquiries.  We will not go into the health evidence today, but I want to draw a parallel between this issue and what happened in relation to smoking in the first session. During the first session, Kenneth Gibson and I worked with Action on Smoking and Health to try to bring in a bill to limit smoking in pubs and restaurants because the evidence of the harmful effects of passive smoking was growing. However, the evidence was not huge and it did not come from many countries. Because the evidence lacked a certain weight, the Executive wished to try other measures rather than accede to smoking legislation. During the past few years, the evidence of the harm of passive smoking has become abundantly clear and, to its credit, the Parliament has now, with a huge degree of unanimity, banned smoking in public places. With that in mind, I say that if I had been asked six years ago about the health issue in relation to pylons, I would have said that there is no evidence of harm—but such evidence is growing day by day. I am making a point about the process rather than about what the evidence says because the evidence has to be admitted, because it is growing. Some evidence—for example the Draper report and the report by the stakeholder advisory group on extremely low frequency electric and electromagnetic fields—has been admitted, but we do not know whether the same will apply to other research such as the bioinitiative working group report or the Lowenthal paper. The evidence is growing daily and the inquiry will not reach an appropriate result unless the appropriate evidence can be led at any point in the proceedings. It should not simply be dismissed. SHETL's proposal to reimburse its costs with £6.5 million or £7 million of public money—which we will have to pay for, one way or another—is a total nonsense in light of what the protestors have been able to obtain, and needs to be addressed in future planning concerns. Keith Brown referred to Stirlingshire's eastern villages. The fact that SHETL has already moved the proposed line closer to those villages and away from the new village that is to be built is another indication of commercial interest; after all, house prices in the new village would be affected by the presence of the line. If there are no health concerns, why has SHETL responded in such a way? Surely it should build on the original line. I suspect that there are other matters that still need to be brought out. My final point is that after the loss of the mining industry in the eastern villages and given all the health inequalities and the major economic and employment problems in the area, I think that it is a total disgrace that pylons should be dumped on these people as well.

I add to my colleague's remarks about being glad to be in my new position to lock horns with Nicola Sturgeon and Shona Robison. I am glad that the cabinet secretary has accepted the principles of Labour's proposals. As a doctor looking at the Government's overly complex attempt to micromanage the system from the centre, I believe that the substantial administrative burden that the cabinet secretary outlined today in her detailed proposals will require substantial additional resources and take up a lot of doctors', nurses' and allied professionals' time. I ask first for clarification: will the list still be managed and dealt with separately from the general waiting list? In other words, will it be called an unavailability status code list instead of an availability status code list? I will take a slightly different tack with my other question. The new system that Nicola Sturgeon proposes today, complicated as it is, will be further complicated if she persists in her pursuit of legally binding guarantees on top of all the new complexity. Is she aware that under the much-vaunted Norwegian model of legal guarantees, the number of people on waiting lists increased in two years from 210,000 to 260,000 and, more important, that the number of violations of the code and guarantee doubled from 5,000 to 10,000? I suggest that, if the cabinet secretary persists with this complexity and with the introduction of legal guarantees, lawyers will become more and more involved. Does she accept that the SNP's soundbite pledge on legal guarantees should be dropped?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to impose a freeze on council tax levels. (S3O-586)

As it is now clear that the cabinet secretary is not going to take the powers to deliver a council tax freeze, it has become another soundbite pledge that the SNP has dropped. Many support services for children and vulnerable families are provided by voluntary organisations, such as the HopScotch Children's Charity stepping stones project in my region. Will the cabinet secretary guarantee that he will provide central funding to make up for the inevitable shortfall that will result from the freeze? If not, is he prepared to preside over cuts in services to our most vulnerable children and families for the first time since the Thatcher era?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to ensure that all children living in families where there is parental drug or alcohol misuse are properly assessed and protected. (S3O-506)

My question is precisely about that. In 2005, the previous Administration issued the first consultation "getting it right for every child" and in December 2006 to March 2007 it issued for consultation the draft Children's Services (Scotland) Bill, to implement "getting it right for every child". That built on the "Hidden Harm" report and the "Getting Our Priorities Right" guidelines. In other words, there was a pattern of work that should have resulted in the Children's Services (Scotland) Bill being in the programme for government yesterday. The bill would revolutionise the provision of services for children, including, as the minister has just said, a multi-agency, integrated assessment, recording and planning framework. Why has the Government not included that bill in its programme for this year?

The answer to the member's question about whether research has been done in this area is yes. The estimated number of children who are associated with drug-using families is more than 50,000—some would say 60,000. The number of children who are associated with families in which alcohol is a problem is 70,000—some would say 100,000. Between 100,000 and 150,000 children are affected, which is the equivalent of three birth years.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am sorry to contradict Christine Grahame, but the Scottish schools adolescent lifestyle and substance use survey, which is a two-yearly study that looks at attitudes to drugs among secondary school children, has shown that, since 2001, the level of use of drugs by young people has stabilised and has begun to drop. I agree with Christine Grahame that we need to do more, but to say that drugs use continues to increase is to mislead.

The mandatory testing system that the Conservatives introduced at great expense into the prison service a considerable time ago has been counterproductive. Instead, we must engage those in prison by offering them drug testing and rewards for testing drug-free and by improving drug-free zones in prisons. Simply imposing further testing will be expensive, and there is no evidence that it will work. Perhaps the Conservatives should stick to their mantra of "Let us do only what works".

Both previous speakers have described the nature of this disease. The number of people who are affected is not large, which is welcome, but it is nevertheless a problem because it is difficult to devise services, develop research and provide comprehensive support quickly for such a small group of individuals. Health boards can lose the issue under the radar. The fact that the health boards involved support the care team's six co-ordinators only to the extent of £9,000-odd out of £300,000 is perhaps not surprising, but it is, frankly, unacceptable. In a sense, the current situation with MND mirrors the situation that I found at the beginning of my professional career with the generality of palliative care, which was not handled well in Scotland or, indeed, the United Kingdom in the pre-hospice era. However, extensive palliative care was developed in the 1970s and there was improved awareness and increased support. Scotland led the way in that regard and should do so again. The hospice movement was in deep financial trouble in Scotland in the 1980s, but Michael Forsyth, the Conservative Secretary of State for Scotland at the time, agreed to 50:50 funding. That meant that every £1 the public raised was matched by £1 from the public purse. Today, we have palliative care in Scotland that is the envy of the UK and Europe. I suggest to the minister that, for this small, select group of MND patients, we need to extend that 50:50 concept—not just for the  small number who require hospice care, but for the larger number who require extensive refurbishment of their homes, serious support for their carers and families, and equipment for sometimes short periods of time. We previously debated in the chamber free personal care, which is one of the best examples of what has been achieved during the past eight years with cross-party agreement in the Parliament. We need to ensure that free personal care is applied without delay to those who suffer from MND. We also need to ensure that the care-and-repair budget, which will be £10 million for the coming year, will be adequate to supply the refurbishment that is needed to support the families of MND sufferers. We need to ensure not only that each carer of a sufferer is given the assessment to which they are entitled by law, but that they are told that they are entitled to that assessment. Christina McKelvie made an important point: we forget the children of the families who are affected by MND at our peril. We need to support not only the carers, but the families. We need to go beyond carer assessment, to carer training. The association's resources cannot extend beyond providing advice and help. It cannot go in and give the practical assistance for the caring that every carer of every MND sufferer must supply. I expect significant developments in research, which will be important for Scotland, in the next week or two. I urge the minister to ensure, when she is in discussion with those who will achieve the funding, that the Government plays an active role and that it is seen to be committed to the sort of partnership that is a tradition in Scotland and which is good for Scotland. If we discuss this matter again during this parliamentary session, I hope that, by then, every health board will have committed itself to provide adequate funding and support for the care team co-ordinators and to extend proper support for MND sufferers.

I declare an interest as a consultant psychiatrist and a ceased interest in a nursing home, albeit one that is in England. I am pleased to be back speaking in a main debate, but I cannot claim maiden status for my speech, as I have already spoken in a members' business debate. I welcome Mary Scanlon, who lost none of her touch in her year out, and I congratulate Dave Thompson on his first speech and on his clear and stark references to his  constituency. Rural communities require a different solution and one size does not fit all. Without going into too-great detail, I will make a couple of comments about the history of free personal care. We took a different route from that of the other nations of the UK. The Parliament was pretty united on that route and that was entirely appropriate. The Conservative Government in the 1980s was wrong to change policy suddenly so that citizens who had based lifelong plans on existing policies were deprived of long-stay national health service units for the elderly, which were at that time the main place to which people who needed nursing care went. That Government provided no alternative and thereby created over 20 years the need to introduce free personal care, which was introduced following the Sutherland report. I supported free personal care, but not all members of my party did, as they felt—correctly—that the poorest people were already looked after. Those who are wealthiest have never bothered with a system or required support, so the situation did not affect them, either. However, I was concerned about the people whom I called wise virgins—hard-working people who had perhaps been encouraged to buy their council houses, who had some savings over the £18,000 capital allowance and who faced the distress of going into care that would require money and for which they had not planned. My other reason for supporting free personal care was that the system discriminated against people with dementia. People who had cancer or a degenerative physical disease might be looked after in hospitals, hospices—which were increasingly supported from the 1970s onwards—or at home. All that was supported by good-quality NHS nursing care. However, someone who suffered from dementia was liable to end up in private care or local authority care for which they would have to pay. Such discrimination was inappropriate. I agree that, as the cabinet secretary said, the Parliament can be proud of the policy. However, when we introduced it, we acknowledged that there was considerable debate about what the costs might be, which was uncertain. The question was whether the policy would be sustainable. Given that, the new Administration's commitment to ensure long-term sustainability is welcome. The previous Administration tried to achieve the same thing. We must acknowledge that, by 2030, the number of over-75s will have increased by 75 per cent. I hope that the proportion who are disabled and who require care will continue to reduce by between 0.3 and 1.1 per cent per annum but,  nevertheless, the number who will require free personal care will increase substantially, so I say to the cabinet secretary that sustainability is not about today or tomorrow, but about the long term. I am sure that the cabinet secretary recognises that. When the policy was introduced, the other problem was attendance allowance. We were slightly wrong-footed on that by not calling things by names that might have allowed us to retain the attendance allowance, so I for one welcome Sutherland's reconsideration of that. However, that ship has probably sailed and is unlikely to return to harbour. Having spent four years out of Parliament, I will adopt throughout the session the theme that the Government and the Parliament have good ideas that they wish to implement for the benefit of all Scots and which often attract wide cross-party agreement. Legislation that has good intentions is passed but, as Mary Scanlon suggested, guidance is often less good and more flawed. That is understandable when we are trying to implement the intricate changes that are needed as a result of much of our legislation, but it results in implementation by our local institutions of various sorts that is often patchy, bureaucratic and subject to misinterpretation. That applies not just to free personal care, but to a wide range of issues that I have experienced in the four years in which I have been out of Parliament. I will return to that theme in several debates over time. We need to look carefully at the implementation of the scheme. The Executive must review the matter constantly, and it is entirely appropriate that we have had the Audit Commission and the responsible committee examine it. However, I wonder why some measures have not been introduced timeously. For example, different local authorities have different eligibility criteria. Why, when we implement policies, do we invite each local authority to interpret the guidance in its own way? Why do we not ask one authority—not necessarily COSLA—to set up a working party to determine the specific eligibility criteria, which can then be adopted by all authorities? Alternatively, we could invite COSLA to enter into an agreement with us on the precise eligibility criteria. In 1999 I visited Aberdeenshire to examine the implementation of the care needs assessment package—single shared assessment. The package has still not been implemented throughout Scotland, despite marked efforts by the previous Executive to do that. Six or seven years on, Carenap is only just being implemented across the country. A single shared assessment system could produce a much more even approach to eligibility and to needs and priority assessment.  There are other issues that need to be addressed, and the various reports that have been published have been important in that regard. Keith Brown raised the issue of meals, and it is good that that has largely been dealt with. Assistance with medication, which was mentioned in the evaluation report, is another important issue that must be examined. Many elderly people have to take a multiplicity of medications; if they suffer from early dementia or have memory problems, it is difficult from them to manage that. Assistance with medication that does not involve nursing care is an important issue. I will end with some questions to the minister. Will the Executive continue to develop the important care and repair programme, to which £10 million was committed in 2007-08? Will it require local authorities to collect and analyse data on unmet need, especially for home care, respite care and day care? Will it promote carers' awareness of their important right to assessment? Will it try to ensure that the perverse incentives to authorities to delay introduction of free personal care are removed, as they were in England and Wales, leading to a much more rapid reduction in delayed discharges? Will it also do more to promote direct payments, which is important? Although the number of such payments has increased substantially, the level is still half that in England. Finally, will the cabinet secretary place the terms of reference of the new inquiry in the Scottish Parliament information centre as soon as possible, so that we can examine them in appropriate detail?

I thank Des McNulty for the opportunity afforded by his motion to speak on this subject and to do so as my maiden speech in this session, having just returned to the Parliament. All cancers are unpleasant when they are incurable, but mesothelioma is a particularly unpleasant condition. It is important to note that it is essentially an industrial disease and that, as Mary Scanlon said, by the middle of the next decade the number of people who suffer from it is likely to drop. It might be of comfort to the minister  to know that, if she were minded to approve the continued prescribing of the drug, she would not be committing to a growing cost, as is likely in so many areas of cancer today, but one that will be, if not time limited, likely to reduce over time. A current problem is that if drug companies produce drugs that are designed to improve the quality of life rather than to be curative, they risk not being approved by the authorities. That is unfortunate. Improvement of quality of life is of great importance to those who suffer this unpleasant condition, so I strongly support the general tenor of the previous parliamentary session and tonight's debate in suggesting that the drug's use can reasonably be supported. The costs are not excessive—they are reasonable. I support what has been proposed, but urge that there be clear and effective monitoring so that those who do not respond to treatment have it stopped and those who respond early to it and therefore do not need the full course of treatment do not have the full course. As a result, the drug's cost effectiveness would be improved. I do not believe that the NICE evidence took such factors into account adequately. I will finish my speech without taking up all my time—I hope that the Presiding Officer will note that when I am called to speak in the future. When I was Deputy Minister for Justice, I met the Clydebank Asbestos Group and endeavoured to support it in the court work on compensation. I am pleased that the issue was subsequently resolved in an appropriate way, although legislation was required. We are talking about people with an industrial disease that is caused by man, and we should support anything we can to improve their quality of life.

I hope that the member does not mind my interrupting his sort of maiden speech. He is right to say that the Parliament has done a huge amount of work in the past two sessions—it certainly did a lot in the session when he and I were not here—but does he agree that, now that we have, absolutely correctly, concentrated on the most serious end of the issue, we need to act in relation to those who are in the very earliest stages of this deviant behaviour and find a way of encouraging them to come in for treatment even before they have offended? Does the member agree that the appropriate committee should consider that issue and the possibility of establishing some sort of helpline and counselling support so that we can do some preventive work as well?

Will the member give way?

rose—

The member referred to links for Edinburgh and the Lothians before he developed his point about other transport issues. Am I correct in thinking that if EARL is cancelled, connections to Edinburgh airport from Stirling, Ochil and the rest of Fife will be lost? Does he join me in suggesting that the new members for Stirling, Ochil and Central Fife should think carefully before  voting down the EARL project? Their constituents need an airport connection.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is four years since I have been in this chamber, and I am concerned that already it appears that ministers are trailing their statements in the press before they make them. When I was last here, the Presiding Officer made it clear that that should not occur. I would be grateful if you could indicate whether it was appropriate for the Executive's policy on bridge tolls to be clearly stated in the press this morning.

Before the minister moves away from the SNP, would he like to comment on the fact that Ireland—which has been mentioned often by the SNP in economic debates—has not been mentioned today? Could that be because the Irish are in deficit and are making cuts and because the inflation rate in Ireland is three times the average rate in the European Union?

Will the member give way?

I have listened with great interest to the debate so far. Actually, I am not sure whether it should be dignified with the term "debate", because some of the interventions have been below the usual standard, although I see that Andrew Wilson has now left. There is no doubt that we are living in a global economy and that is evident in my constituency. The textile industry was the bedrock of Clackmannanshire and what has happened with firms such as Coats Viyella, whose 200-year association ended in 1999, demonstrates the kind of changes that we face. When I stood for election in 1999, I went round those textile plants for the first time. It was like returning to a previous century, as the working conditions were very poor. I even discovered that, in one plant in Alloa, the wages that were paid to workers were still below the minimum wage and were illegal at that time—low pay and tough conditions. Where previously we had thousands of workers in the textile industry, we now have very few. However, the workers whom we have represent a new Scotland. The cashmere industry in Kinross,  for example, has the biggest bank of dyes, material and thread anywhere in the world. There is a superb research and development department to support design. That industry is fighting in a world market, but it is fighting successfully. It manages the product from the goats in Asia through to the thread that is then used in the most modern designs. That shows how an industry can modernise itself. Other companies in my constituency have followed the same path. Tavish Scott referred to fish and food. Landcatch Natural Selection, a new company in Alloa that has a £15 million investment, was helped by the Executive's change in attitude when the investment was about to be made and there were some problems. Building on genetic research of the past 20 years at the University of Edinburgh and the subsequent knowledge base, Scotland will lead the world in the natural breeding of fish. In my constituency, we have applied that knowledge not only to fish, as we are the world leaders in chicken breeding and have made great advances in that area. We developed the same technology in relation to pigs, although that has been exported to America. We have to make sure that such companies are built, developed and retained in the United Kingdom and in Scotland in particular. Quest International, another company in my constituency, deals with flavours. It provides an interesting illustration of the changes that we face. There has been a reduction in the number of workers in that plant, but there has been an increase in the percentage of graduates employed, from 10 per cent to more than 30 per cent. That company employs a highly skilled, highly educated work force and that position is reflected in many of the newer companies in my constituency. That can occur only with the stability that the UK Government in Westminster has provided in partnership with the Scottish Government. It has provided the stability on inflation, interest rates and business taxes that we need. Stability can develop only if we create the educated work force that we are currently creating. We now have the highest number of young people going into higher and further education of any developed country in the world. That must produce benefits. When that is backed by the modern apprenticeship scheme, which offers over 20,000 modern apprenticeships—that will rise to over 30,000 modern apprentices under the next Government—we will create the work force we need. I very much welcome the educational maintenance allowance because it will help many people in my constituency as well. What are the alternatives that are being offered? How long have I got, Presiding Officer—another minute?

The SNP sends out highly mixed messages to our community. There is a poster in my constituency, which the Quest workers pass every day on their way to work, saying "People not profits". That is a ridiculous sound bite. If the poster had said "People and profits", that might have been worth while. People and profits are not alternatives; both are important. The SNP has to make up its mind whether it is pro-business or anti-business. It is entirely appropriate to make profits. The SNP's inconsistency on the matter is rich. In the 1999 elections, the SNP plumped for a 1p rise in tax worked out on the back of a cigarette packet—a penny for Scotland—and then dropped it just as quickly. How is that consistent and how can that party accuse us of inconsistency today? What is the SNP doing about that? The SNP wants fiscal autonomy, which would lead to cuts in public expenditure because of the substantial deficit in the Scottish economy and the fact that the public sector here gets 18 per cent more than the rest of the UK. That is a big hole; that party would have to explain to public sector workers how it planned to fill it. Turning to the Conservatives—

I do not have time, then, to deal with the Conservatives in the detail that I would like. However, I will ask them the question that is being asked by everyone out there. How do they square a reduction in taxation with maintenance of the public sector? People value our public sector, and if the Conservatives are going to destroy it, they do not deserve to win any more seats in the next election. I welcome what the Government is doing in developing the strategy for "A Smart, Successful Scotland". Its intermediary technology institutes will shift resources across to create a virtuous circle: ideas will flow from business into the universities, and then back out into developing new industry and new technology. The policy that the Labour party is following in coalition with the Liberals is the right one. I urge members to support the motion.

Before I begin, I must ask whether I need to make a further declaration following the one I made at stage 2.

Thank you. Passing this bill will be the end of a long process that has had the unparalleled involvement of civic Scotland. Together with the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, which was passed early in the parliamentary session, the bill demonstrates clearly the worth of our Parliament. The shift that the bill represents is absolutely massive. At the beginning of my working life, as a student, there was a system of institutionalisation and an authoritarian approach to patient care that contrasts markedly with the values and mores of the bill. I remember that when I was a student in the Murray royal infirmary in Perth in the 1960s, I was immediately handed a large bunch of keys, because all the wards were locked. How far have we moved in that time?  We owe a duty of thanks to the Millan committee for the major piece of work that it undertook. It produced a report of considerable vision that also ensures that the changes are evolutionary and do not destabilise our system. The absence of the Millan principles from the face of the bill was a lost opportunity to trumpet core beliefs that were and are worth stating as the essentials that underpin the bill and the principles on which interpretation by the courts must be based. The bill differs in a number of respects from the draft English mental health bill. Its tone reflects partnership and respect for the individual, but it does not forget public protection, which seems to be the paramount element of the draft English legislation. Of all the principles, for me, reciprocity is perhaps the most important. It will be a lasting testament to the first session of the Parliament. We may have argued over the precise words, but the intention of the whole Parliament—the minister no less than party spokespersons or other members—was clear. If the state has to deprive an individual of their liberty, the duty of care that it owes them is greater than usual—and the care that it provides must be the best. As the minister has acknowledged, the challenge is to drive forward the mental health framework. I acknowledge that substantial progress has already been made in shifting resources to the community. In particular, I welcome the role that the bill gives to advocacy, which I sought to introduce to the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill. I welcome the fact that the Executive has introduced it to the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill. We will need to keep a close eye on developments in that area; in particular, we will need to ensure that adequate training is provided. I thought that the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 should have made provision for advance statements, but they are recognised in the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill. It is appropriate that we do not give such statements legal force at this time, but I am sure that they will play a major part. Many members have wrestled with the issue of entrapment, which is the opposite of the principle of the least restrictive approach that underpins the bill. Progress has been made on that issue. The entire Parliament recognises that medium-secure units must be developed as soon as possible. At each stage of the bill, I said that the jury was out on community orders. I welcome the Executive's undertaking to monitor and research the orders and ask it to go further by asking Professor Jung, the chief scientist, to ensure that  there is a full, commissioned, random-controlled trial. I congratulate the Health and Community Care Committee on the extremely difficult work that it has undertaken. I also congratulate the Executive team and the bill team; I know how much effort the bill team had to put in. Criticisms have been made of the speed of the bill's passage, but I believe that the bill is excellent. Today we will pass a significant bill of which the Parliament can be proud.

I apologise. Does Margaret Smith agree that that area needs to be considered further?

The minister is correct to draw attention to those papers, which are very important. The minister has stated repeatedly his recognition of the fact that general practitioners undertake the vast preponderance of treatment of mental health conditions. The treatment of those conditions rarely proceeds to psychiatrists or clinical psychologists. I wonder whether the minister agrees that that situation gives rise to a number of problems that need to be addressed and that, although those problems go beyond the scope of the bill, they are fundamental to its implementation. One of the problems is that there is no compulsory requirement on general practitioners to undertake psychiatric training as part of their postgraduate training. That means that a significant number of GPs undertake treatment on the basis of their undergraduate course alone. That is unsatisfactory. A second problem is that, given the time constraints in general practice—the current consultation time is roughly seven or eight minutes per consultation—there are profound difficulties in undertaking treatments such as cognitive behavioural therapy. Adequate training for GPs will be vital to the implementation of the bill and to ensuring that psychological treatments play an appropriate part for the user. I also know that the minister is working on the implementation of the new general practitioner contract in Scotland. It will be vital to ensure that it makes it possible to implement in general practice the sort of quality  treatment that users are entitled to, and that sufficient time will be allowed. I hope that those remarks are helpful and that the minister will acknowledge the fact that the issue is broad and that considerable impetus from the Executive is necessary to maintain the work that has been done.

My intervention will take the form of a question; it will be briefer than my previous interventions. My slight concern is about the timetable for the bill's implementation, which is not particularly clear. I am not sure whether details of the Executive's proposed timetable were given to the Health and Community Care Committee, but I certainly have not read anything that states clearly when it is intended that the various sections of the bill should be implemented. Section 230 allows ministers to make provisions for transitional arrangements. Can the minister give us an idea of how the bill is likely to be implemented? I realise that he may be able to speak only in broad terms at the moment, but can he at least give us a clue as to how long the transitional arrangements might need to apply?

Of course, the situation is not new. Clinical psychologists have been in short supply for the past 10 or 15 years. A proposal has been made to extend the time for their training to about seven years. Does the member feel that that is appropriate when the length of medical degrees has been shortened to five years? In England, faster medical degrees of three years are being introduced for people with associated scientific specialties. A university is being set up to provide such degrees. In psychology, a person must obtain a first degree with a first or a 2:1, become an assistant psychologist and undertake some practice, then take a course to obtain a clinical psychology qualification. The proposal to extend the length of time for training will make the situation worse. If we are to address the matter properly, we must consider who provides alternative therapies best and which staff can provide them.

As the back bencher who was instrumental in working closely with the Executive on the provisions in the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, to which Maureen Macmillan referred, I think that what happened in that act's passage is a good example. The outcome was that the Mental Welfare Commission would appoint a second specialist independent doctor who was an expert in the field and who would  listen to the views of the carer and the doctor who proposed the treatment over which there was disagreement. The concept was based on partnership. The proposed advance statement system will allow a patient who might become incapacitated to make an advance statement, which will ensure as far as possible that the patient's wishes are followed. However, as Mary Scanlon said, there are significant difficulties with the proposal. Psychiatrists often have to move quickly to establish treatment that, although it might not be life saving, is close to it. We are not dealing with absolutes, but with many relative positions. We should consider and take on board the model in the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, although it has been introduced only recently, so I am not sure whether there is any case history on it. One great advantage of the parliamentary system is that the Executive, having given an undertaking to monitor advance statements carefully, will be able to return to the Parliament rapidly if the case history in relation to the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 or the working of the new advance statements prove that additional measures are required. The Executive is right to move cautiously and to try to take the medical professions and the users with us. I support the Executive, but I strongly urge it to monitor the system extremely carefully. The Executive should have an open mind about returning quickly to the issue if users' wishes are not being followed through reasonably. It is regrettable that some patients who have mental illness are unreasonable—just as some members are unreasonable from time to time. Advance statements are not always in patients' best interests; indeed, they might have serious consequences. A degree of openness about the issue is important.

The history of medium-secure units, as they are now called, goes back to the late 1970s, when the programme planning group for mental health, which I sat on, was discussing whether we should have such units, in parallel with what was being developed in England and Wales. Regrettably, the minister at that time was of the view that the difficulties that would arise in terms of staffing costs from the development of such units would be too great. As a result, Scotland has been left with a legacy of insufficient medium-secure units. Individuals have been kept in the state hospital for far longer than they should have been, and it is therefore important that we move forward on the issue. I commend the work that the Executive and the Health and Community Care Committee have done in achieving the compromises that are being discussed today. The original report that I wrote for the Health and Community Care Committee on the medium-secure unit at Stobhill illustrates the difficulties that there can be if health boards do not pre-emptively and openly discuss the situation with their communities. It is an absolute prerequisite that communities have adequate information and that it is explained to them that those units are indeed secure—that word is there not just by chance, but because those units are secure. Our society owes it to our communities to ensure that they are secure. Equally, however, it is a mark of a mature and humane society that we do not retain people in the state hospital unnecessarily. I very much commend the Health and Community Care Committee, the Executive and Mary Scanlon for the amendments.

Again, I have a brief question. I note the new section that is being inserted after section 79A instead of section 78. The minister has stated that interim orders may be repeated. One of the problems with compulsory detention orders under previous legislation was that they were used repeatedly. Will she assure me that the use of orders will be monitored and reviewed so that repeated interim orders are not used as a general method for extending orders?

Will the patient or the patient's representative have any right of appeal against the withholding of the information?

On a point of order.

Mine is a completely separate point of order—although Ms Baillie's might be on the same point.

Presiding Officer, the interruption in the public gallery that just occurred was unusual, in that it was not simply a verbal interruption involving the display of a banner—which is unacceptable in the chamber—but included the spreading of material on to the back two rows of the side of the chamber on which I am sitting. The material happened to be confetti, which was okay, but it might have been some other substance. I ask you to raise with the security office the need to ensure an adequate police presence in order that individuals involved in such activity can be properly restrained in good time, so that nothing more serious occurs to my fellow members.

The First Minister mentioned the Scottish police information co-ordination centre. Does he agree that, in monitoring tension in communities, the police should do all in their power to protect Sikh communities in Scotland who, because of their beards and turbans, are sometimes wrongly identified as terrorists by a misguided few? Further to that, will the First Minister discuss with law officers the need to ensure that, if any attacks occur on groups or individuals in the minority population, those attacks will be the subject of swift and strong justice? Finally, will he ask police constables to call together their ethnic advisory committees—which are now present in six out of eight forces—to be consulted at an early point in the monitoring of tensions in the community?

The greatest concern of most of the users organisations is the increase in the  number of compulsory orders between 1985 and 2001, which is estimated to be around 280 per cent. There is no clear evidence as to why that has occurred, but I suggest that the most likely cause is the increasing use of drugs in association with mental illness. They are not necessarily causally related, but are nevertheless interrelated. That is causing a major problem. It is important that we consider the bill in the round. The basic principle is that the least restrictive approach should be applied. The minister has referred to that. Amendments 342 and 344 in the minister's name go a long way to answering my concerns in that regard, because the minister now proposes to ensure that he consults people about regulations and that those regulations should be specified. That is helpful. However, we need to go further than that. As Margaret Smith said, it will be important to monitor the bill's progress. The community-based compulsory treatment order is a new area for us and we need to be sure that the new order works effectively and is not abused. I have fewer fears about its abuse because the tribunal will manage it and each individual will have to have a care plan. Those two facets will prevent the abuse of the community-based CTO. However, although I will vote for the Executive amendments 342 and 344 and not for amendments 74, 343 and 75, I ask the minister for an undertaking that adequate research will be done from the outset. As I said at stage 1, the verdict of the international research on community-based compulsory treatment orders—they are called various things in various countries, but other countries have the same sort of order—is at the moment not proven. There is considerable evidence that, if the resources applied in the community are adequate, the need for CTOs or some equivalent diminishes. The test for the Executive will be whether the number of CTOs is minimised by the effective input of resources into the community. I therefore ask that the CTOs be monitored effectively and for an undertaking that a research programme into CTOs should be commissioned from the outset. On that basis, I offer my support for amendments 342 and 344.

Will the minister accept another intervention on that point?

I wonder whether the minister can give us a slight further reassurance. The concern of the mover and supporter of the amendment is that there is a lack of clarity about the current wording. I understand the minister's legal concerns, but will he assure us that, in monitoring the operation of the act and promoting best practice, under paragraphs (a) and (b) of section 3, the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland will ensure that the principle of reciprocity is embodied in practice? Will he assure us that, in reporting to ministers, the Mental Welfare Commission will be required specifically to take that into account? Will he further assure us that, as we discussed in the very first amendments, the ministers will then take action where the principle of reciprocity is not being followed through by health boards?

I declare an interest, which I will do once only. As a psychiatrist and general practitioner, I am a member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the British Medical Association and the Scottish Association for Mental Health. In responding to amendments 34 and 106, the minister has twice referred to the performance assessment framework, which I think is excellent. However, as Mike Rumbles and others have asked, what will she do if the health board does not comply? The Executive must have some teeth to intervene in cases where mothers are repeatedly refused admission with their child because the health board repeatedly fails to prioritise the matter.

Will the environmental impact study be published, or is it available now? It was supposed to be available at the time of the submission of the bill. I have certainly not yet been able to get hold of a copy.

I thank members who have signed the motion and those who will participate in the debate. I shall talk about the infrastructure in Clackmannanshire, which is part of my constituency. Clackmannanshire is the smallest mainland authority that was created by the reorganisation of local government in 1996. With a population of fewer than 56,000, it is smaller than many of the borough authorities that disappeared in the 1970s. In 1999, when I was first elected, it was evident that a combination of the loss of traditional manufacturing and mining industries and a totally inadequate infrastructure rendered the prospect of economic recovery unlikely. Indeed, a list of the most deprived communities in the United Kingdom placed Clackmannanshire 15 th in the UK. At the election, I pledged that I would do everything in my power to reverse the decline. In 1999, we were faced with a partially completed A907 as the most glaring example of failure in co-ordinated planning. For the want of a couple of miles of road to connect the new Devon bridge to the mile of road that had been constructed at Manor Powis, commuters and business had to endure delays at many times of the day. That road had been partly built in 1995, but by 1999 it was collecting weeds and was known locally as "the road to nowhere". At the other end of the wee county, the old Kincardine bridge was producing hold-ups of one and a half to two and a half hours twice a day. When the Forth road bridge is closed, there are delays all day, and the cost to the Scottish economy is substantial.  In 1997, Clackmannanshire had an unemployment rate of more than 11 per cent. It had, and has, no trunk roads and no rail link. By 2001, it had lost much of its remaining textile industry, including its 200-year connection with Coates Paton. The last deep mine closed last year and all major brewing has ended. Major engineering works, such as Weir Engineering Services, have largely deserted Alloa and have moved their work to eastern Europe. I know that such a picture is repeated in many constituencies, but, without good infrastructure, Clackmannanshire cannot easily compete with its neighbours: Stirling, Falkirk, Fife and Perth and Kinross. Despite those handicaps, the local enterprise company, Ceteris, Clackmannanshire Council and Scottish Enterprise have tried to foster indigenous and modern businesses, such as ePoint Ltd, Omega Diagnostics, Landcatch Natural Selection, Stephen Clark Fabrications and Strategic Software Solutions Ltd. Unemployment is now down to 6.5 per cent, although male unemployment remains above 10 per cent. The seeds are there for regeneration, but without better infrastructure such regeneration is not merely hard but almost impossible. We need the Scottish Executive to take a holistic and cross-cutting view of development. In 1999, I set about getting the necessary funding for the A907 and, as Minister for Finance, Jack McConnell agreed to that funding. That road is now complete and is making a difference. I record my thanks to Stirling Council, Clackmannanshire Council and the Executive for the completion of that work. I ask the minister to give further consideration to the additional bypass work that is proposed around Tullibody and to review the status of the A907 with a view to granting it trunk road status, because it carries heavier traffic than the motorway from Stirling to Falkirk. The next issue is the rail link. A campaign to reopen the link from Stirling to Alloa, which was closed to most traffic after the Beeching reorganisation, began in the 1980s. The Strategic Rail Authority, the Scottish Executive, Clackmannanshire Council and Railtrack's successor have now put together a scheme, and a private bill has been presented to the Executive. The link to Kincardine should be open in 2005. However, I have a number of questions for the minister. Will he confirm the Executive's commitment to opening the rail link if the bill is passed? Will he confirm that the timetable for opening the link by 2005 will be adhered to? Will he examine the need to open an east-west link to Dunfermline and Fife, especially to the new port of Rosyth? Is the environmental impact study on the reopened rail link to be published? Finally, will the  minister meet the people in Clackmannan and Causewayhead whose safety and quality of life will be affected by the reopening? The third part of the required infrastructure is the new road crossing upstream of the current Kincardine bridge. It has been talked about in the area for almost a generation, but the debate has been complicated by the question whether a new Forth road crossing at Queensferry should be the first priority. However, in 1999, just before the election, Donald Dewar announced on a visit to Alloa that the new bridge would be built. That boosted morale in the area. I am pleased to say that successive ministers with responsibility for transport have helped steadily to advance the Executive's programme. Survey work on the river was undertaken in 2000 and construction of the new eastern relief road at Kincardine is about to begin this year. However, such a welcome step forward will not ease congestion in any way at the north end of Kincardine bridge until the new bridge is completed. Indeed, the congestion might be even worse, because northbound traffic to Fife will cross southbound traffic from Clackmannanshire at a set of traffic lights, which will make life difficult. Will the minister assure my constituents that, in the interval between the completion of the eastern relief road and the new bridge, there will be no significant worsening of traffic congestion? The next infrastructure step relates to getting the line of the new bridge right. The SNP council in Clackmannanshire has tried hard to whip up opposition to the line that has now been approved, but has failed to make a realistic case. Will the minister confirm the current 2005 tendering timetable? Furthermore, will he undertake to advance that timetable if objections are not numerous and the planning inquiry is short? In other words, will he be flexible in bringing forward the funding that is necessary for the bridge? Once the new bridge is opened, I understand that the old bridge will be closed. How long will the repairs on the old bridge take? How long will it be before my constituents and all those who access the wee county for work can expect to be free of traffic jams? The current single bridge has a capacity of 23,000 vehicles, but traffic is now more than 26,000 vehicles. I understand that the new single-carriageway bridge will carry 33,000 vehicles. However, under the current proposals, there will be significant problems at the southern end. The design is inadequate. To bring two roads from the old and new bridges together at a roundabout at Higgins neuk so close to both bridges is inadequate. A flyover system that leads to a dual carriageway connection to the motorways is needed almost now, and certainly will be needed  as traffic increases. I want to conclude by saying something about the new hospital, which complicates the issue. The favoured site that has been proposed at Larbert will add to the traffic. The site at Larbert is being proposed partly on the basis of speedy planning consent, but also because of accessibility. However, unless the bridge and roads are built sooner to coincide with the opening of the new hospital, it is certain that the lives of patients from Clackmannanshire will be put at risk. Delays will prevent them from reaching the new trauma centre inside the so-called golden hour—it is called a golden hour because many more lives are saved if hospital can be reached within the first hour. I ask for an undertaking from the minister that his officials will have an early meeting with Forth Valley NHS Board to discuss access to a new hospital at either the Royal Scottish national hospital site or at Pirnhall. My colleague Dr Jackson will examine that matter in more detail. Will the minister also undertake to ensure that his colleague, the Minister for Health and Community Care, is fully apprised of the severe difficulties of access to Larbert by public transport? Will the minister's officials and those in the health department examine any transport and access reports that the board might submit? In the next few days, I will present to the minister a petition that asks him seriously to consider naming the new bridge Clackmannanshire bridge or Clackmannan bridge. That is the wish of my constituents. Such a bold move would clearly show that the Executive is committed to reopening part of my constituency for business in the 21 st century.

The point that Johann Lamont made was important. It is not a question of housing alone; it is a question of many other disciplines. The minister mentioned the health boards, and their involvement is important. In relation to drug problems, the homeless addiction team is also important. I say to Robert Brown and to others who might support amendment 5 that if we broaden the approach too far at this stage, we will lose much of the current impetus. It is important that we stay focused. Amendment 5 would make the approach far too broad. We need to get the groups working together effectively. Only in that way will we solve what we know to be a complex problem, which is not about housing alone.

Does Pauline McNeill agree that prostitution takes place not only in the area that she represents? Glasgow  green is currently experiencing the phenomenon of daytime prostitution, which is causing considerable offence to young girls coming home from school, men collecting their children and others. Does she agree that such changes are some of the most worrying elements of the new situation?

On that subject, will the member comment on whether she feels that a fee of £20 for lodging such an objection is appropriate?

I must begin by declaring that I am a member of Amicus MSF, the British Medical Association, the Scottish Association for Mental Health, the Royal College of General Practitioners and the Royal College of Psychiatrists. I welcome the tenor and approach of the minister's statement, which builds on the changes that we have been making since 1997. The recognition of the need for service redesign is now made explicit, as is the imperative of integrated primary and secondary services. A clear definition of the role of community health partnerships, which embraces the best practice of the LHCCs, is particularly welcome. I want to ask the minister about the IT systems that are needed to underpin an integrated national health service. The NHS IT systems are ineffectual and dysfunctional. The general practice administration system for Scotland, which is the primary care system that is used by 85 per cent of GPs, has always been the poorest of the UK systems. What will the minister do to ensure that the IT proposals in the white paper will not be just another piece of rhetoric, such as we he have heard repeatedly from health service executives over the years? In addition, will the minister consider using the proposed new community hospital in my constituency, which is to provide integrated primary and intermediate care, as a model for the vertically integrated networks that are crucial to the delivery of care for diseases such as diabetes and respiratory disease? Finally—

Is the Scottish Executive clear that its contract renewals with voluntary organisations are not so close to the end of existing contracts that the staff of the organisations have to be given redundancy notices? Does the minister agree that the decision in April of SNP-led Clackmannanshire Council to postpone until last week a decision on the renewal of certain voluntary organisations' funding, causing redundancy notices to have to be issued, was unacceptable? What steps will the Scottish Executive take to ensure the agreement of local authorities that that sort of discontinuity of funding should be ended?

I join others in congratulating the minister and the committee on the way in which they have tackled the issues in the bill. The Justice 2 Committee's scrutiny of the new order for lifelong restriction and of the risk management agency has been particularly valuable. Those issues are hugely difficult and, as the MacLean committee showed, they are being  grappled with by many countries. I believe that the innovative approach that Scotland is adopting today will have a substantial effect not only on the most serious and violent offenders, to whom the order for lifelong restriction will apply, but on sexual offenders at all levels. I cannot stress too strongly the risk that is posed by current and potential sexual offenders. The recent internet case has shown all too clearly that probably tens of thousands of people are offending at the level of child pornography. The 1,800 people who are currently on the register are likely to grow in number to 10,000 before the numbers stabilise. Alongside the stabilisation of the valuable work at Peterhead prison, the bill makes an important contribution to the treatment of those who have been sentenced to four years or more. However, we will have to do much more. The next priority must be to integrate the assessment and management of the 600 offenders who receive shorter or even non-custodial sentences and who are not eligible to go to Peterhead prison. The police, prisons, criminal justice, social work and housing functions must be integrated even more closely if we are to be effective in protecting our children and our vulnerable citizens. We must also tackle adolescents who demonstrate inappropriate sexual behaviour. We must also seek to prevent offending behaviour from moving through the cycle from deviant thinking to fantasy to internet pornography to reality to repeat offending with self-justification. In the near future, we need to introduce the "Stop it Now!" programme, which is promoted in America for those who are in the pre-offending category. There are many excellent measures in the bill, but time is too short to praise them all. I welcome the modest advance in protecting children from being hit, but I regret the failure to ban the hitting of babies and toddlers under the age of two, which is a measure that had the support of the majority of parents. Too many parents still believe that it is all right to smack babies of under one year. At least those in the front line who support children day in, day out will be able to give three clear messages to parents: that it is illegal to hit a child on the head; that it is illegal to hit a child with an implement; and that it is illegal to shake a child. That is a substantial advance. However, Scotland's failure to join the growing number of European countries that have banned the hitting of children altogether is indeed a failure. Too many young men still grow up believing that physical violence is the most appropriate way to deal with disputes. It is wholly unacceptable that 17 per cent of young men continue to believe that hitting women is appropriate. A ban on the hitting  of children would begin to eliminate the use of violence as a mechanism in our society. We have much more to do, but the bill is an excellent start and I welcome it.

I understand exactly what Roseanna Cunningham is getting at, and I recognise the concerns. Individuals should be clear about what the sample is, when it is to be used and when they have a right to withdraw it. Under section 47(3), "the person consents in writing to the sample, data or information being so held and used", and is told at that time that they may elect to confine it to the particular offence. The guidance that will be issued will be clear and a signature will require to be given below a clear consent. Therefore, amendment 98 is unnecessary.

The debate has been interesting, and members have raised many points that I will not repeat. The removal of section 43 in its entirety, or the removal of section 43(3), would send out entirely the wrong message. I appreciate what Roseanna Cunningham and other members have said about the law and the courts. However, health visitors, child support workers, nursery nurses and others who are involved with young parents must give a very clear message that certain things are not allowed. Without that, I can tell Parliament that we will be sitting here next year—at least I hope that some of us will be sitting here—discussing the fact that another 14 children have suffered brain damage. I point out to Roseanna Cunningham that, for every 14 such cases that come to court every year, hundreds of cases involving minor damage never come near the judicial system. Without the total clarity in the law that will be provided by the very modest measure in the bill, there will continue to be a substantial number of cases of children suffering minor damage that will never come to court. As a junior doctor in a paediatric ward, I saw some really severe cases in this regard. However, as a general practitioner, I saw some of the minor damage that had been done to children—sometimes inadvertently—because parents lacked appreciation of the damage that they could cause. Parliament should send out a very clear message that we should not shake children, hit them on the head or beat them with implements. That will serve Scotland well.

I am listening carefully to the arguments as they are being put. Would Roseanna Cunningham like to define for members the reasonable shaking of an infant? If she can do that, the Parliament should listen to her, but if she cannot, what she is proposing is not reasonable.

The speeches by Bill Aitken and Phil Gallie indicate the confusion in the Conservative party. One says that the prison population would not increase, whereas the other says that it would and that it would be good for prisoners if it did. There is a serious point behind Bill Aitken's amendment 78, although I do not believe that the amendment should be supported. The loss of additional days added—ADA—means that a review of the sentencing system is needed. However, the amendment is wholly inappropriate in this context. If it were agreed to, the court's ability to send somebody back for an additional sentence—the element that had not been served—would also be removed. I would not have thought that the Conservative party wanted that. The amendment would remove the deterrent effect when someone knows that some of their sentence is still to be served if an offence is committed. It is totally wrong to say that the provisions on the release of prisoners show the negative effect of the ECHR, because there has been no problem whatever with the removal of ADA. To suggest that there has been a problem—as the press did when England removed ADA after we did—is totally false. I urge the rejection of amendment 78.

Lord James may ask me a question.

I am aware that ADA has been abolished because of the ECHR, but the ECHR has had no negative effect—of any sort—on the governance of our prisons.

I congratulate Brian Monteith on securing the debate and I thank him for his kind comments about my motion on the subject. Next week, we will talk about the accessibility issues in greater detail with the transport minister. All members welcome the fact that, after more than 30 years, the Forth Valley NHS Board, under the chairmanship of Ian Mullen, has at long last grasped the nettle and decided to have a single- site hospital. He will not find division in the chamber on that issue. It is 30 years since I was involved in the group that proposed a single site to Sir John Brotherston. That was before the motorway from Stirling to Edinburgh was built, which meant that Bellsdyke hospital could have been provided with the links that we wanted at that point. Constant delays have damaged the case in successive years, not least because the substantial, necessary developments at Falkirk and Stirling in the 1980s will largely be put to rest as a result of the new single-site hospital. That has been a waste of public money. We must consider the infrastructure. All the reports that have been produced show that we must put the infrastructure for the acute hospitals on the correct basis. The board has stated that part of that should involve the new Clackmannanshire community hospital and resource centre, which is vital because it will provide not only primary services, but intermediate care, diagnostic services, rehabilitation, out-patient services and, I hope, minor accident and emergency services. We do not need an acute services review; we need nothing less than a total review of the health service. That applies to every area in Scotland, not only to the Forth valley. I urge the Executive to use the Forth Valley NHS Board proposals as a model for examining the need for integrated care that, as far as possible, brings services closer to the patient and which leaves only acute in-patient short-term stays in hospital. Given that the board has problems with recruitment and retention that will only get worse in the interim, early decisions are necessary. It will be important for the minister, in considering the problem, to ensure that any temporary movement of services does not endanger my constituents, particularly those in Clackmannanshire. I will discuss accessibility in greater detail during next week's debate, but if the RSNH site is chosen, the board and the minister must balance the absence of a new Forth bridge crossing until 2007 and the probable subsequent closure of the old Kincardine bridge until 2008 with the planning disadvantages at Pirnhall. That will be a difficult decision for the minister. I return to a theme that I wanted to develop earlier in my short speech. A modernised, integrated national health service must be addressed nationally. A strategic view must be taken in making the decision on the new district general hospital. There are problems in Livingston because of its distance from a new hospital, problems with the change in services at Perth, and problems with Dunfermline's Queen Margaret  hospital's relationship to Kirkcaldy. Without a strategic Scottish view, we—not me, I am glad to say, but our successors—might in 20 years say once again that the health service does not meet the needs of modern Scotland. A strategic view must be taken. I hope that the minister will tackle that difficult problem.

Amendment 11 provides better wording than that which the Justice 2 Committee provided in its stage 2 amendment. Amendment 82 comes down to a question of balance and it is for the Parliament to choose which way the balance should go. However, I prefer the wording in the bill to the wording that amendment 83 would provide. I have difficulties with the word "continuing". Some risks are intermittent but nevertheless seriously endanger lives. Therefore, it should be possible for the court to take into account the fact that, in some circumstances, some serious offenders—given the stimulus of alcohol, for example, which is freely available in the community—will commit further serious offences. That is not a permanent risk; it is a risk associated with behaviour that would occur if an order were not imposed. I urge members to reject amendment 83.

For a minute, I thought that the Presiding Officer was about to call someone else to speak. I welcome this important budget, which provides for growth in our public services. In particular, I welcome the proposed increases in the health service budget. However, we need to recognise that such an investment will bring with it a number of challenges. The first challenge is, quite correctly, the need to invest in staff. Earlier today, we heard about the agreement on the minimum wage for the poorest paid within the health service. That is an entirely appropriate measure, which recognises the real contribution that has been made to the service by porters, cleaners, auxiliary nurses and others who have been badly paid in the past. The need for effective integrated team working is absolutely crucial. It is vital that we break down the boundaries between primary and secondary care if we are to have a modern service. However, I must tell the minister that, only the other day, I heard of a secretary in my constituency whose job was advertised only in the week on which she was due to leave, despite her having given three months' notice. Not only does that indicate the value that managers place on secretaries, but it shows that managers fail to appreciate how their actions can place patient care in jeopardy. In that case, the result was that one of my constituents did not receive the results of a 24-hour heart monitor for two months. I ask members to imagine what anxiety that must create. Alongside the challenge of using the money to make the additional necessary investment in our staff, there is the challenge of modernisation. Lord James dealt with justice, which I will return to in a minute. In relation to health, however, it is vital that, if the massive investment is to be utilised, it must go alongside innovation. I strongly commend the creation of the change and innovation centre, which I hope will be given the teeth and authority to tackle those health boards that fail to respond to best practice and innovation, that fail to meet the challenges set by of the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland and that fail to respond to the Audit Scotland reports that we repeatedly receive. Change and innovation are needed and must be monitored in relation to the performance  assessment framework. Let me give some concrete examples. Cardiac surgeons in Glasgow continue to insert pacemakers when that is done by physicians in most parts of the world. That costs my health board £25,000 an implant, when the same service could be provided for £15,000. That is like setting a light under £200,000 of my local health service's money. However, the local health board cannot get out of their contracts with the Glasgow surgeon. We have to cut those Gordian knots. We have nurse endoscopists in various parts of the country, including Fife, which led the way—Margaret Jamieson's constituency now has such nurses, too. The use of those nurses reduces endoscopy waiting lists to zero. In my health board area, where there are no nurse endoscopists, there are apparently hard-pressed gastroenterologists and the waiting lists are massive. I say to Mike Rumbles that the issue is as much about modernisation and the effective use of money as it is about increasing real resources. Health boards across the country are not achieving the optimum number of day cases and far too many people are still having in-patient procedures. That creates major problems. We allow restrictive practices to prevent change. We do not employ one nurse anaesthetist in Scotland and yet, in America, nurses account for 25 per cent of anaesthetists. Such restrictive practices challenge our budgets even when we are having very real funding increases. We should consider that issue closely. The change and innovation centre must consider the proposals that are coming through and deal with them quickly. For example, there is a proposal for day care knee arthroscopy, under a local anaesthetic. It has taken two years to consider that innovative practice, the use of which would substantially reduce the waiting lists in my area, which are the longest in Scotland. That is just one example of many that I could give. We need to ensure that innovations are at the top of health boards' agendas, given that often it is the health boards that are blocking the innovations.

In the brief time that I have left, I will turn to two other issues. Having been off the Finance Committee for a year and then returned, I am still disappointed that the Opposition parties are not coming up with fundamental proposals to change the budget. They suggest such projects as the A9 dualling, which would cost £500 million, but where was the proposal to amend the budget? David Davidson talked about the changes that the Conservatives would make. Why were those changes not proposed earlier? The Parliament gives members that opportunity. It is much more democratic than Westminster. However, over the past four years, Opposition members have singularly failed to make any significant proposals for changes to the budget, so they cannot complain about it. I will finish by talking about justice. The issue is not just about increasing money for the police; it is about the use to which the police are put. We have to alter the core functions of the police and remove from them escort duties, court custody work, serving of citations, lost property work—my God, are they still doing that?—and finding lost dogs. The Government's additional investment—in improved communication, among other things—will not just increase the number of police, but make those that we have much more visible and available in the community. I hope that that investment, combined with the work of Bonomy and McInnes—who should report this year—will reduce the number of police personnel abstractions, which make it difficult for the police forces to work. We need to take into account—I say this sincerely to the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services—the working time directive in relation to police duties. The way in which the police are required to attend court at the moment has a profound, negative effect on our system. We cannot allow the police to ignore the working time directive. They have to be brought into the proposals, which will cost us a lot of time and money. We need to examine that issue carefully.

Will Mr Rumbles give way?

It is on that point.

Does Mr Rumbles agree that life expectancy in Glasgow—which is not of course my area—is substantially lower than it is in his constituency, that unemployment is substantially higher there and that the extent of multiple deprivation there is massive? Does he agree that the Arbuthnott formula does not go far enough in tackling areas of multiple deprivation and that there have been real increases in funding in his constituency?

I ask the minister to comment on the fact that cullet is being used extensively for road fill rather than as recycled glass. United Glass Ltd in my constituency has found the local authorities to be very tardy in responding to its proposal, which would significantly increase the recycling of glass. Will the minister undertake to work with the glass industry to ensure that local authorities do more to promote the recycling of cullet for glass bottles? Will he meet representatives of United Glass and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to examine how his department can help match the French and Dutch in effective recycling?

I have listened to the speeches of SNP and Conservative Opposition members, which were extraordinary. Members speak as if the budget for local government were being cut, which is not the case. Clackmannanshire Council, which is receiving a funding increase of 9.2 per cent, described that as a severe cut. When can a real-terms increase of that size be described as a cut? That can happen only when the wish list of a local authority is totally out of control. Brian Monteith, Bruce Crawford and Sylvia Jackson discussed the situation in Stirling. Council tax in Clackmannanshire, where the council is SNP controlled, has risen exactly in parallel with council tax in Stirling, which has a Labour-majority council. This is not a matter of party politics. At the outset, I must make one serious point. One of the major problems with local government finance is its complexity. Even the brief report that we have received contains an alphabet soup. It refers to grant-aided expenditure, or GAE, AEF, total estimated expenditure, or TEE, and NDRI—the list goes on and on. MSPs and members of the Finance Committee—let alone lay people—have difficulty understanding that terminology. Over the next three years, the balance between the amount of money that central Government is investing and the amount that local government is expected to raise is changing slightly. However, 82 to 83 per cent of local government funding will still  come from central Government. That is not appropriate in the long term. I want briefly to discuss one of the three local authorities that fall within my constituency—Clackmannanshire Council. Clackmannanshire Council is the smallest mainland authority in Scotland, with a population of 54,000. It is one of the 15 most deprived local authorities in the United Kingdom. Within central region, it has a higher unemployment level than either of its neighbours—almost three times that of Stirling and one and a half times that of Falkirk. Although, along with the rest of Scotland, unemployment has fallen in Clackmannanshire from 11 per cent to 6.5 per cent, the male unemployment rate within that is still 11 per cent. Employment patterns are changing. Those changes relate not only to gender, but to types of employment. The breweries and mines have gone, and the textile industry has been reduced to a pitiful state, compared with the position 10 or 20 years ago. Many new jobs are part time. It is difficult to attract new industry to the area. Why? The authority has no trunk roads or rail connection. There are traffic jams at either end of the county, as people try to get out to work in the morning and to get in the evening. To add insult to injury, from 1996 onwards the authority was left with a partially completed 10m-single-carriage road. I am glad that, through funding that it has provided and through partnership with local government, the Labour-led coalition has started to change things. Even Bruce Crawford will recognise that the completion of the A907 has benefited the local population significantly. The Executive has worked with the Strategic Rail Authority and the local council to produce a private bill that will advance the rail agenda and allow a railway line to open in 2005-06. The new bridge across the Forth—which I hope will be called the Clackmannanshire bridge—will open us up for business. The infrastructure that the Executive is developing, through local government funding, is equally important. The £1.2 million that has been announced this week for school refurbishment is very important, although Clackmannanshire Council has delayed the benefits that public-private partnership could bring by endlessly reworking its proposed not-for-profit-trust system. The SNP first mentioned the system in 1997, but it has still provided no details of a workable solution. Such delay affects pupils adversely. I object strongly to the fact that the SNP is playing politics with their lives. My final point is not dissimilar to a point that Brian Monteith tried to make. The complexities of lottery, central Government, local council and  other forms of funding are creating problems. I will illustrate those with reference to the Scottish Further Education Funding Council. Because there is a need for urban regeneration in the centre of Alloa, we must move Clackmannan College from its current, run-down premises to a site next to the social inclusion partnership area. However, the funding for that comes through the Scottish Further Education Funding Council, whose remit does not allow consideration of the urban regeneration question. Further, because the scheme is not entirely to do with urban regeneration, the Government cannot or will not put any money in. Still further, because the scheme is not a council issue, the council cannot put money in either. The result is, the regeneration of Alloa is being held up because things are not being joined up. There is an absolute necessity, given the complexity of funding, that those issues are addressed. When he sums up, can the minister send a strong message that the voluntary organisations should receive three-year settlements, like the local authorities? There are voluntary organisations in my area that are still waiting for their settlement for next year and have had to send redundancy notices out again. That is unacceptable to staff.

He should get some glasses.

Will the member give way on that point?

I understand the analysis that Alasdair Morgan is putting forward, but will he tell us whether he would reduce council tax in areas such as mine in Clackmannanshire, or would he increase other taxes to ensure that public services are effective? He has produced an analysis that needs squaring; he cannot have it both ways.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making with the victims strategy. (S1O-6374)

Now that the Executive has made  such strong moves to support victims its main plank in changing the justice system, will the minister ensure that the support provided by police, fiscals, sheriff courts and High Court victim services will be fully integrated, along with the development of further victim-based reparation and mediation services?

rose—

The member mentioned that his party would abolish the graduate tax and that it is in favour of free personal care, but thinks that more money is required. How would his party produce the funds for those measures without increasing tax?

Does the minister agree that the careful introduction of NHS 24 to Scotland, which has been much slower than in England, has been done to ensure that it is integrated effectively with the out-of-hours service? Will he also indicate whether he intends to implement NHS 24 for accident and emergency as well? We know from a number of studies that the inappropriate use of accident and emergency is still quite high.

Does the minister agree that it was opportunistic and reprehensible of the SNP to leak the property consultant's report on the new acute hospital site at such a sensitive point in the consultation process?

Will the minister take into account Stirling Council's valuable work on proposing sites in any review that he undertakes of health board proposals?

The bill is welcome and practical. It will ensure greater protection for our environment and greater public health protection. It is clearly not an anti-dog bill. It recognises that dogs as pets and working animals for people such as the blind play an important role in our society. The affectionate support that dogs give to their owners can sometimes be crucial in maintaining the mental health of owners, in times of serious loss, for example. The bill recognises the particular needs of elderly people. As Keith Harding said, dogs produce many tonnes of excrement—perhaps 80 tonnes in Scotland—and it is obvious that that has significant environmental consequences. I congratulate Keith Harding on tackling the issue. When we look back in 10 years' time, we will see that the proposals have been one of a number of proposals that have changed things in Scotland significantly. Therefore, anyone who sneers at the bill does so at their peril. It is not only councillors with whom the matter is raised. I do roving street surgeries regularly in my constituency and apart from youth crime, this is the issue that comes up most. It affects our citizens markedly. I say, in particular to Mike Rumbles, that the bill is correct in its wide definition. The bill is not about defining areas in which dogs can or cannot perform; it is about the responsibility of owners. A wide definition is therefore entirely appropriate. I will concentrate on the medical consequences of a failure to manage dog excrement. Dog faeces are associated with a parcel of medical problems. In almost 30 years of practice, I was repeatedly faced with children who were diagnosed as having worms; a distressing and irritating condition that gives considerable anxiety to parents who do not know why their child is suffering from abdominal pain. The consequences of that relatively mild condition are nothing compared to what can happen with larval migration. Toxocariasis can  cause blindness, damage to the body organs, asthma and pneumonia. The incubation period is not a short one; it can often be quite long. The problem is therefore often not associated with dog excrement so the recording of this happening is, in my opinion, poor. Toxocariasis can cause blindness in some cases—the effects can be serious. There are also serious consequences for two other groups of people. One group is those who are disabled and use manual wheelchairs. They face considerable risk associated with dog excrement. The other group is pregnant women. The foetus may suffer severe consequences from infection from salmonella; campylobacter, which is now far more widespread in our society; leptospirosis canicola; and E coli 0157 which, as members know, can be fatal. The management of dog excrement is not trivial; it is an important issue of public health. The Local Government Committee has been very supportive of the principles of the bill—I joined it after it had considered the evidence—and stated clearly in its stage 1 report that the current legislation is inadequate. The provision of £100,000 for education is welcome and there is a proper and appropriate balance with enforcement. As the minister said, the balance struck in working with the Executive and the committee on the bill is an exemplar and a model for members' bills. I think that the bill has got it right. I believe that fixed penalty notices should be extended. It is welcome that we are using such notices in relation to this matter. We should trust well-trained officials within the local authorities. Their training, which has not been mentioned, is important and should satisfy Mike Rumbles's point. I hope that that matter will be taken care of. I welcome the bill and the Local Government Committee's report on it. I hope that there will be unanimous support for the principles of the Dog Fouling (Scotland) Bill.

Do Mr Reid and the SNP believe that Saddam Hussein would be allowing the inspectors unfettered access without the credible threat of force that is provided by the preparations that are being made? Saddam Hussein has already accused the inspectors of spying and he has already acquired weapons, against the terms of the embargo. Does Mr Reid believe that without a credible threat of force Saddam Hussein would allow the access that we all want?

Does Pauline McNeill agree that we must seek to identify, register and treat many people who have recently been identified in the criminal prosecution system for committing internet crime, but who are not being prosecuted, as the number of times that they have accessed the internet is insufficient? The numbers are horrific and people must be identified earlier. Does she agree that we probably need a "stop it now" campaign in Scotland to deal with people who have not yet been prosecuted for sex offending?

I declare my membership of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, of the Royal College of General Practitioners and of the BMA. I congratulate the minister on how he is tackling the new consultant contract. I will ask about the general practitioner contract. Given the different way in which GPs work in Scotland, particularly as local health care co-operatives have no purchasing power, what steps will he take to improve patient care via the GP contract?

Will the minister join me in congratulating the organising committee in Stirling that has just obtained next year's world medical and health games, which will attract 2,500 delegates and £2.6 million to the Stirling area? Will he ask the major events team to talk to the organisers to ensure that appropriate sponsorship is achieved and that the games can come to Scotland?

I begin by declaring my membership of the British Medical Association, the Scottish Association for Mental Health and the Royal College of General Practitioners. I am a fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists and an honorary professor of psychology at the University of Stirling. I congratulate ministers on their interpretation of the Millan report. That report, which ran to more than 500 pages, was the most profound analysis of mental disorder and examination of the treatment and management of people who suffer from such disorders. As other members have said, one in four of us will suffer from a mental health disorder at some time. The report builds on the historic trend away from institutional care. It seeks to balance respect and support for the afflicted citizen with public safety and the public interest. In its vision and balance, and most of all in its principles, the report represents the best attempt yet in any part of the United Kingdom to take a humane approach to a difficult area. We have come a long way, from the days of Bedlam and the corrupt mental hospitals of the 19 th century, through the damaging institutionalisation that marked most of the 20 th century, to the sophisticated and complex approach that the bill envisions, which is based primarily on care in the community. I will deal with three areas. The first is a specific stigmatising regulation that should be removed from the bill immediately. The second area concerns two of the 10 principles in Millan—reciprocity and the concept of the least restrictive approach. Thirdly, I will mention the implementation though structures and resources. The national anti-stigma campaign was launched in October. I want to draw Parliament's attention to an arcane and outmoded regulation that provides that any mentally ill patient shall be removed from their general practitioner's list after two years in a hospital. The same does not apply to people with a physical illness, in relation to whom a discretionary approach is taken. The only  other group to which the regulation applies is prisoners who are sentenced to more than two years. I hope that the minister will announce in her summing up her intent to remove that stigmatising regulation forthwith. The principle of reciprocity is at the core of the bill. In evidence, Professor Millan indicated his wish that it should be in the bill. I take it from the minister's initial comments that that will be the case. Reciprocity represents a covenant between the Parliament and citizens with severe mental disorder whose freedoms we seek to limit, either in their interests or in the interest of public safety. Where we have to curtail those freedoms, which the Parliament has so recently incorporated into Scots law, we will undertake to ensure that the best treatment is made available. The Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, together with the Mental Health (Scotland) Bill, will mark out this Parliament as a reforming one, giving the lie to those who denigrate the Parliament's worth day in, day out. I predict that the two acts will become an anchor in protecting our most vulnerable citizens from an overbearing state. The principle enshrined in both pieces of legislation is that the least restrictive approach to treatment should be taken. The two principles of reciprocity and least restriction will make the bill a great act. To implement the legislation, we need an equally powerful vision of the structure and the means. We need a vision of an integrated mental health team, in which the old boundaries are dissolved between hospital and community, between secondary and primary care and between statutory and voluntary. A truly integrated support system is needed and should be facilitated through the conjunction—unique in regions of the United Kingdom today—of mental health provision and primary care. That was envisioned in 1997 and created in 1999, but the adequacy of resources has been doubtful until now. In the debate on mental health on 14 November 2001, I said that 80 per cent of funding was applied to institutions and not to the community. That has moved. Forth Valley NHS Board and Greater Glasgow NHS Board now have 40 per cent of funds in the community. I hope that, in summing up, Mary Mulligan will assure us, before Malcolm Chisholm even announces the new performance assessment, that it will ensure that NHS boards in other areas—such as Lanarkshire, where 77 per cent of funds are still in institutions—shift their funds rapidly. If Mary Mulligan is prepared to give us that assurance, the vision in the bill, which is a shining beacon of enlightened care for those with mental  disorder, can, indeed, be made a reality. Without that assurance, we will continue to have problems. I support the principles of the bill.

We have had a lively debate. I would like to call it interesting, but I find the approach of the SNP members difficult. Donald Gorrie put it well when he said that a car is still a car whether it has three wheels or four. Extradition is still extradition. If a fugitive surrenders and the process is undertaken through the EAW, I do not see the difference—the SNP is straining at a gnat. SNP members have put the arguments—I cannot say that they put them well. Extradition is a reserved matter. Processes that enact extradition are reserved. In this case, I simply do not follow the SNP's arguments. However, we should welcome the fact that, on this occasion, the SNP has not opposed the Sewel motion. That is a heartening development. The SNP has crossed a threshold. In the context of the Scotland Act 1998, Sewel motions are an important way to get ahead with business rather than clog up the Parliament by dealing with a series of issues. Some 34 such motions have been passed, dealing with important legislation that it was appropriate for us to undertake in that way, either because of time or because we were seeking continuity throughout the United Kingdom. I am pleased that, for the first time, the Scottish National Party has recognised that Sewel motions provide an appropriate way to deal with matters. I hope that it will continue to do so. The bill is designed to set a flexible framework for extradition procedure in the future. The new Extradition Bill presents the end of a lengthy process. I understand Pauline McNeill's point, but  in this context, we are dealing with a reserved matter. Where the implementation of a framework decision relates to a devolved matter, it is appropriate for the Scottish Parliament to implement it through an act of the Scottish Parliament. Where the implementation of a decision relates to a reserved matter, comment can be made. Next week, I will attend the European justice and home affairs council as part of the United Kingdom delegation, to talk about issues that are of importance to Scotland. That is appropriate and that is how it should be done.

I agree with the first point: it is entirely appropriate that the Parliament should scrutinise issues if they relate to devolved matters and European framework decisions. The new Extradition Bill is the end of a lengthy process. In 1999, the European Union announced its intention to build an area of freedom, justice and security based on mutual recognition of fellow member states' judicial decisions and infrastructure. Part of the fruit of that approach is seen in the bill. In particular, the bill implements the framework decision on the European arrest warrant, adopted by the Council of the European Union on 13 June 2002. Shortly, we will consider a Sewel motion on the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill, which implements a range of other EU decisions on judicial co-operation across national boundaries. That is entirely appropriate. At the domestic level, the Government set out its proposals to reform the law on extradition in a consultation document, "The Law on Extradition: a review", in March 2001. Those proposals were given fresh impetus by the terrible attacks on the United States last September, and they were modified to reflect the adoption of the framework decision on the European arrest warrant. The Extradition Bill represents a significant step towards closer and more effective co-operation with our extradition partners, but I stress that it does not represent a move towards the introduction of a European justice system by the back door. It is fully based on the principles of mutual respect and co-operation between judicial systems. As crime becomes more transnational, we need to work together more closely. International borders are not barriers to increasingly sophisticated criminals, and it is vital that those borders do not become barriers to the  implementation of international criminal law. The bill will undoubtedly help to ensure that criminals can be tracked down and extradited on the basis of a speedy, open process that is consistent with the ECHR and duly overseen by the courts and, as is appropriate, by ministers. In that respect, the bill contains specific provisions that will ensure that the distinctive roles of Scottish ministers, of the Crown Office as a designated authority, and of the Scottish courts are safeguarded in relation to extradition.

That will not occur in the Scottish context, and that is part of the respect for Scotland's individual judiciary. There will not be an appeal to the House of Lords in Scotland. I hope that that answers Alasdair Morgan's point. The powers, including provisions relating to the courts and to the functions of the prosecutor, are in the correct form for Scotland. There is, as I have said, no appeal to the House of Lords on criminal matters, so English provisions in relation to such appeals are disapplied. Part 4 of the bill deals with powers to obtain search warrants and to seize and retain evidential material, again applying Scots law.

I have already taken interventions.

I am just about in the last minute of my speech.

I will not take Christine Grahame's intervention. In England, those functions are initiated by the police, and English law in that area depends on the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984. However, that act does not apply in Scotland, where case management is firmly under the control of the procurator fiscal. Accordingly, a number of clauses in part 4 of the bill that depend on the 1984 act do not apply to Scotland, and we consider that we can rely on existing common and statute law here. We recognise that the bill will modernise the UK's outdated and cumbersome statutory extradition framework and will put in place arrangements that will make the process more efficient, while respecting the human rights of those who are the subject of extradition requests.  Phil Gallie referred to a point made by Stewart Stevenson about the costs of the proposed arrangements. The current cost of an extradition is around £125,000 per case. By shortening the process to an expected 60 days without appeal, or 90 days with appeal, we confidently expect those costs to be reduced significantly, so that any additional cost burden to the Scottish Parliament would be outweighed by savings. Therefore, there are no financial implications. As I understand it, there are already provisions for legal aid in respect of extradition, so there is no need to introduce new measures. Therefore, a financial resolution is not required.

No. I am now well beyond my time limit. This time, the Deputy Presiding Officer will not allow me to accept an intervention. I urge the Parliament to support the motion and to reject the SNP amendment.

The evaluation of the first six months  of the pilot Glasgow drugs court was published on Monday 11 November. A further report is planned for early 2004, with a final report in 2005. A similar evaluation of the new drugs court in Fife will also be conducted.

The new time-out centre, which we hope will be ready by June 2003, will be a unit to which drugs courts can send women as part of the imposition of probation orders that include a condition of attendance. The hope is that the new time-out centre will divert from short-term sentences at Cornton Vale up to 530 receptions a year. The combination of day and residential facilities at the time-out centre will be highly beneficial to those who have drug problems.

There are two parts to that question, the first of which is why there is not a drugs court in Aberdeen. We are testing an urban court in Glasgow. The only other drugs court in Europe is in Dublin, but it has had difficulties and has not proved to be highly effective. The initial evaluation of the drugs court in Glasgow demonstrates its effectiveness, but the numbers that are going through it are very low and we have identified a number of problems that we intend to address. The Fife drugs court is in a rural setting and we intend to test that. We will complete both those tests before we move on to Aberdeen. Aberdeen has drug treatment and testing orders, but they took a year to be established in the city from the point at which we announced them. There are problems with capacity in Aberdeen, but it is clear that it is a possible venue for a third drugs court if the first two prove to be successful.

The question of halfway houses for women that was raised by Sylvia Jackson also applies to men, and we will consider such provision in relation to men in the future. The whole concept of residential care is a difficult one, because such care is expensive and the outcomes are not always what we hope they will be. It is important that we have an integrated programme and the main thrust of the Government's action this year has been to encourage all the groups to work together in an integrated way. As Mr Raffan knows, we have published a document on that and we intend to ensure that such integrated work is implemented.

I join other members in congratulating Johann Lamont on securing the debate. Its timing is excellent, as we had a debate on crime in general this morning. Yesterday, I spent a considerable amount of time on the first stages of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. The issue is high on the agenda. Johann Lamont's first point is absolutely valid, as there are real problems in some of our communities. I have visited Inverclyde, in Duncan McNeil's constituency. I have been to Kirkcaldy with Marilyn Livingstone and to Springburn with Paul Martin. I know that my colleague, Jim Wallace, went in my stead to Cardonald. I intend to visit the constituencies of Patricia Ferguson and Elaine Thomson, both of whom have invited me to look at the problems on the ground. Most of the points that members made today were valid. I want to join Johann Lamont in expressing support for the residents of Darnley in Paisley, who were victims of the vandalism that she described. We could speculate about the linkages, but as three arrests have been made, further comment would not be appropriate in the circumstances. There are two strands to the issue: the statutory bodies and the private industry. We need to look  at both. Regulating the private security industry is one way in which public confidence in the criminal justice system can be maintained and enhanced. However, it is by no means the only way forward. We must continue to take the steps that we have already initiated to try to make our communities generally feel safer. Although we have put a record amount of funding into the police and although we now have record police numbers—they are up by 200 on a year ago—we recognise that how policing is undertaken is also important. Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland is about to publish a thematic review that will consider visibility and the public's confidence in policing. I have not yet received the details of that review, but I suspect that it will show us that the numbers of police who are engaged in specialist and backroom activities, such as serving citations, court work and many of the things that were mentioned in this morning's debate, are such that they detract from the visibility that we all agree is necessary. We need to address that. We will work with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and with the police boards to try to improve that situation. The distribution of resources was raised this morning and ACPOS has been looking at that. Some forces are underfunded, and I think that people will not be that happy about that report, although it has been agreed with ACPOS. However, I do not want to anticipate the outcome except to say that there will be losers and winners, as there always are in redistribution. What else are we doing? In association with the justice department, Margaret Curran, who spoke in this morning's debate on poverty, is working on the neighbourhood warden schemes, to which Johann Lamont alluded. We are allocating £20 million to those schemes over the next two or three years. There is no doubt that that gives confidence to communities, as the initial responses from those communities have been excellent. We will look at how those schemes work and how much they cost. In Clackmannanshire, which is in my constituency, the nationalist council has chosen to introduce what it calls "community improvement zones". The council is spending almost £1 million in two wards to achieve the effect, so I slightly wonder about the cost-effectiveness of those zones. However, I welcome the initiative as it is attempting to deal with these problems. There are other areas that we can address and that we should improve. I am particularly keen to promote special policing, not as a substitute for the full-time police but as an adjunct that can reconnect police to their communities. If we look back to the 1920s, there were something like  13,000 or 14,000 special police and only a small number of full-timers. It is quite appropriate that we now have over 15,000 full-timers, but the number of specials is now down to 1,000. We are looking at that and will continue to look at whether special policing might help in terms of connecting policing to communities. Let me now turn to the private security industry, which has experienced massive growth over the past 20 years. The industry has expanded and adapted to fill increasing demands. As members have said, the industry is diverse and includes door stewards, alarm and monitoring companies, protection for sporting and other activities, and companies that transport cash and valuables and much else. The industry covers a huge range of activities. I am sure that the vast majority of those companies are honest and law-abiding. They do an important job and they do it well. They serve our communities effectively. However, there is undoubtedly also an unscrupulous element, which uses the industry as a cover for extortion or other illegal activities. Although that element may not be widespread in Scotland, that does not mean that we should ignore it. The police take all such allegations seriously and investigate them thoroughly. We have given a firm commitment to regulate the industry. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, that has been welcomed by the industry, which wants the cowboys to be eliminated. We should congratulate the industry on the progress that it has made over the years through self-regulation. When it comes down to discussing the detail, in an otherwise almost unanimous chamber we will debate how much and what form of regulation is best. Our nationalist colleagues may decide that they want a separate body for regulating the industry in Scotland. Others, represented by the Conservatives and Donald Gorrie, would prefer the regulation to be part of the UK set-up. The Executive is considering the matter, although it tends to favour the UK set-up, as Kenneth Gibson will not be surprised to hear. We are consulting on the issues. Members alluded to the fact that we issued a consultation document on the question of statutory regulation. The intention of that was to reassure the public, to exclude unsuitable people from gaining employment in the industry and to raise the standards in the industry, thereby enhancing its status and reputation among the general public, the police, local authorities and the commercial sector. I can tell members that we will regulate, although the timetable for that is a matter for discussion. I will raise with colleagues the suggestion that a committee bill might be appropriate. Donald Gorrie questioned whether  door stewarding should be regulated locally: consideration must be given to how we balance regulation. The debate reflects an excellent aspect of the Parliament: almost total unity in the belief that we should unite in ensuring more visibility for our police. However, we must have effective and intelligent policing. One matter that was not raised in this debate—although it was raised during the criminal justice debate this morning and I did not have the chance to respond—is the fact that part of our problem is the cross-correlation of information. The housing department knows something, the community council knows something, the neighbours know something and the police know something, but we do not draw all those things together. We must not use the Data Protection Act 1998 as a means of failing to share information; we must find ways to share information. I welcome the debate and I hope that, in my response, I have been able to indicate how seriously we take the matter.

This has been an interesting debate. In fact, I think that members have raised about 20 issues today, some of which could be the subject of individual debates in the chamber. However, I am disappointed that the Opposition parties have not accorded the Lord Advocate and the justice department any significant praise, although Bill Aitken went some way in that direction. Massive steps are being taken. The review of the Crown Office and the subsequent reforms represent the biggest set of changes that the prosecution system has experienced for some time. The pay negotiations are continuing and are at a sensitive stage. The Bonomy review should report in a few weeks, followed by the McInnes review. The Nicholson committee is doing important work on licensing legislation. The new judicial appointments system has been introduced. Those are just some of the initiatives that the justice department is dealing with in a highly effective way. All that work is being done against a background of a worldwide increase in violent crime, which is a challenge to our society. Many speakers, including Donald Gorrie, Richard Lochhead, Michael Matheson, Keith Raffan and several Labour members, have alluded to the drug problem, which comes on top of the existing alcohol problem. Alcohol has always been a problem in relation to crime and that needs to be addressed. The review of the licensing legislation is part of that, with a possibility of tests in relation to purchasing alcohol and the introduction of non-compulsory youth identity cards. There is a range of initiatives that try to deal with the alcohol problem more effectively. The drugs issue is fundamental to the major changes that have been occurring in our society. In that regard, Elaine Thomson has invited me to Aberdeen and I have agreed to go. Richard Lochhead does not appear to acknowledge that we have nearly doubled Grampian NHS Board's expenditure from £0.75 million to £1.3 million and  that we have introduced £2 million of new money for rehabilitation. That money was not fully spent in the first year by the local authorities, but it is in the system nevertheless. We have also put other moneys into the system through social inclusion partnerships and many other initiatives. Furthermore, because Grampian has a specific problem in relation to psychostimulants, we will run the pilot scheme on psychostimulant treatment there.

Nobody should have to commit crime in order to get drug treatment. I openly acknowledge that there are problems in some areas in that there are waiting lists for standard treatments that are based on a traditional medical model and that someone who injects heroin will get treatment more quickly than someone who only smokes heroin. However, the justice department is driving through DTTOs and drugs courts, which will enable treatment to be obtained more quickly. We are trying to integrate treatment programmes to ensure that they are effective. However, I do not deny that we have a long way to go. We must improve matters. In the brief time that I have, it is difficult to deal with all the issues. However, on police, the SNP's simple approach of calling for 1,000 more officers sounds wonderful and gets a headline—the press respond to it beautifully in an almost Pavlovian way—but the important point is what those police actually do. My colleagues, such as Paul Martin, addressed those issues. They acknowledged the fact that police officers do inappropriate tasks and that we need to improve the court system so that the police are less involved in it. They also acknowledged that we need to improve police efficiency and effectiveness. I do not have time to address all the other issues that have been raised, but the debate has been interesting. The other fundamental point that was raised—I think that only Duncan Hamilton and Pauline McNeill referred to it—is the total change that we are trying to bring about by redressing the balance between the victim and the offender. That is fundamental to the way in which we progress the justice system. I hope that the Parliament will support the Executive amendment and recognise—

I do not have time, I am afraid. I am already over time.

We are considering Sewel motions. We will publish a list in due course. We are examining the Queen's speech. The choice before the Parliament is stark. It is between following what the Executive is doing—a number of reviews, with incremental improvement and steady progress—or waiting for the big review that the SNP suggests. How long will that take? Would it be four or five years to have a royal commission? Let us continue with the Executive's effective programme. That is the way forward.

We are talking about the SNP, not the Justice 1 Committee.

I begin by thanking the Social Justice Committee for its work on the bill. I worked with the committee on stage 2, which was a pleasure. We considered the issues in great detail and we have done a good job in drawing together some of the committee's concerns. What is perhaps most important is that the regulations—which must flesh out some of the important aspects of the process—will be subject affirmative procedure and Parliament will have the opportunity to debate them. There is no disagreement in Parliament on the bill's intention, which is to have a humane system that ensures that those who can pay are made to pay and that those who cannot pay are protected from a system that was not good, not effective, was inappropriate and made people suffer inappropriately. That is what we are achieving; it is certainly the bill's intention. I hope that everyone accepts at least that intention as valid. Debt is increasing and we know that it is a problem—an increasing problem—for many people. There must be realistic ways of paying such debts and different solutions are required for this century. We believe that what we will do today in introducing both the debt arrangement scheme and free nationwide practical help for everyone who wants it will—together with our wider measures of, for example, supporting credit unions—produce significant change in the way we approach debt, in the way we support those who are unable to pay and in the way we protect them from fruitless enforcement. That fruitless enforcement was the most unpleasant aspect of the previous scheme. Although I acknowledge what Christine Grahame, Tommy Sheridan and others said about the fact that they do not believe that the scheme is different—

Of course, the bill incorporates  some of the language of previous acts, because it needs to tackle some of the same problems. However, as a whole—the bill should be taken as a whole—it will be different from the old system. The Social Justice Committee concluded that that was the case and, despite the comments and quotations that Tommy Sheridan has given us, so did Money Advice Scotland, the Scottish Consumer Council and many others. If only Christine Grahame, Tommy Sheridan and others would open their minds, consider the bill in the round and consider the way in which it will be interpreted, they would see that we have a humane and workable system—an alternative in which the whole Parliament believes. We have heard the points that were made in the debate and we have taken on board the points that were made at stage 1. As I have another 50 seconds left, I conclude by thanking the bill team for two reasons. To produce a bill is difficult in any case. However, because we passed the Abolition of Poindings and Warrants Sale Act 2001 before we got into the process of the bill, we have had some difficulties and the process has been compressed. That led to some of the difficulties in the subordinate legislation to which the Subordinate Legislation Committee referred. That is not the right way round for the Parliament to deal with legislation. In this case, it led to difficulties about the consultation process being able adequately to inform members for stage 2. That is one reason why the regulations will be particularly important. I support the bill.

Amendment 88 would import to  ordinary attachment the schedule 2 exemptions that apply to exceptional attachment orders. Section 11 provides for exemptions from attachment, but those provisions are varied to reflect the fact that attachments will not take place in premises that are not a home, which are primarily commercial premises or garages and lock-ups. The schedule 2 exemptions do not make sense in that context. Amendment 88 is flawed. It would not meet its aim, because schedule 2 defines the term "non-essential assets". That term is not used in section 11, so the two provisions are not linked. Mobile homes were not mentioned, so I will not deal with the issues that they raise. Amendment 88 should be withdrawn. I am grateful to Kenny Gibson for agreeing to do so.  Amendment 88, by agreement, withdrawn.

Amendments 12 and 13 are technical. The Civil Legal Aid (Scotland) Regulations 1996 will be superseded by the Civil Legal Aid (Scotland) Regulations 2002, which were made on 6 November and will come into force on 1 December. The amendments simply update the references in the bill. I move amendment 12.  Amendment 12 agreed to.  [Amendment 13 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson]—and agreed to.]

Section 47(1)(c) was amended at stage 2 in line with the committee's concern about the monetary threshold. Section 47 specifies matters about which the sheriff must be satisfied when deciding whether to grant an exceptional attachment order. Those include a requirement that there should be a reasonable prospect that the sum recovered from the auction of a debtor's assets should equal a reasonable estimate of the chargeable expenses and whichever is the lesser of 10 per cent of the debt due—including the interest thereon—and £100. Amendments 72, 74 and 75 would change section 74 again to provide for only the minimum threshold of £100 with no percentage calculation. Committee members have given the provisions a great deal of consideration. The working group felt that attachment should follow only if a significant proportion of the debt would be realised by it. However, I agree that we should avoid different treatment of creditors. Leaving out the percentage would certainly mean that the provisions would be simpler to apply. On balance, therefore, the Executive supports amendments 72, 74 and 75.  Amendment 72 agreed to.  [Amendments 74 and 75 moved—[Cathie Craigie]—and agreed to.]

Amendment 76 would have the effect of making it impossible for an exceptional attachment order to be executed if a child under 16 years of age was present in the house. Section 48 provides the protection that the order cannot be executed if there is no adult present. It is different to say that there must be no child present. Notice must be given in what it is intended would be the few difficult cases, so that the debtor may make arrangements to ensure that children are not present, if that is a problem. Of course, if amendment 76 were passed, the debtor might arrange to have a child in his house in order to defeat the execution of the order. That would lay the provision open to abuse. Accordingly, amendment 76 should be rejected.

On 9 October, the committee agreed at stage 2 to amendment 115, in the name of Kenny Gibson. That amendment clarified that creditors and officers would be liable under section 16 in relation to damage or destruction of attached articles. Amendment 125, agreed on 30 October, achieved the same change for section 49(2). Amendment 7 will produce the same effect for section 47(1)(a) and is needed to ensure consistent treatment throughout the bill. It completes the tidying-up exercise. I move amendment 7.  Amendment 7 agreed to.

Stage 2 amendment 139, in the name of Kenny Gibson, was agreed by the committee on 30 October. It provided that the sheriff principal, rather than the Court of Session, would determine appeals against the decision of a sheriff in granting an exceptional attachment order. It was intended to provide the debtor with easier and cheaper access to a right of appeal, on the basis that appeals to the Court of Session are likely to be more expensive, to take longer to be heard and perhaps to be more intimidating. The Executive supported that earlier amendment and, in recognition of the fact that the bill does not follow the common-law provision regarding appeals, amendment 8 is required to clarify the position. In keeping with the reasons for the earlier amendment, amendment 8 confirms that the appeal avenue will stop with the sheriff principal. I move amendment 8.  Amendment 8 agreed to.

Amendments 9, 10 and 11 are technical amendments. Stage 2 amendment 126, which was agreed to on 30 October, substituted existing references to "attachments" or "attachment" as appropriate in paragraphs 24(1) and 24(3) of schedule 7 to the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985. Amendment 11 is a consequential savings provision, which is necessary as a result of the Social Justice Committee's agreement to  amendment 126. Amendments 9 and 10 are technical amendments, which are necessary in connection with the bill's existing savings provision. Amendment 10 simply inserts a word that is required as a consequence of amendment 9. I move amendment 9.  Amendment 9 agreed to.  [Amendments 10 and 11 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson]—and agreed to.]

Amendments 91 and 92 respond to the requests of the Social Justice Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee. They recognise the overriding concern that Parliament should be given the opportunity to scrutinise the detail of the regulations. At stage 2, the Executive made a commitment to bring forward an amendment to allow the first set of regulations to be made under section 7 of the bill to be subject to the affirmative resolution procedure. Amendments 91 and 92 achieve that. Amendments 91 and 92 will give the Parliament a full opportunity to consider and debate the detail of the debt arrangement scheme with the benefit of the consultation responses. I move amendment 91.  Amendment 91 agreed to.  [Amendment 92 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson]—and agreed to.]

Amendments 84 and 86 amend the list of expenses that are chargeable against the debtor. The Social Justice Committee raised some practical questions about that at stage 2. Amendments 84 and 86 arise from those discussions and provide clarification about expenses that are chargeable. Schedule 1 to the bill sets out the expenses of attachment that can be recovered from the debtor. It includes provision for expenses to be chargeable in connection with both the execution of an attachment and the execution of an exceptional attachment order. However, one reading of paragraph 1(b) could suggest that the expenses of executing an exceptional attachment order at a dwelling-house may not be recovered.  That was not the intention. Amendment 84 clarifies that position. Amendment 86 likewise provides clarity in respect of any costs of storing assets that are attached under an exceptional attachment order. It is fair and right that a creditor should be able to recover expenses that are necessarily incurred by their enforcing a debt. Given the exceptional nature of the exceptional attachment order, the upshot will be that, in what are intended to be the few cases where people can pay their debts but are trying to avoid doing so, expenses will be chargeable. I move amendment 84.

There is a time frame between the removal of objects and the auction that must then be held, so Kenny Gibson is wrong, because there is a time frame with regard to storage.  Amendment 84 agreed to.  Amendment 85 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson]—and agreed to.  Amendment 86 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson].

Amendments 70 and 71 have contradictory purposes. Amendment 70 would make a home visit from a money adviser compulsory in all cases before the sheriff has decided whether to grant an exceptional attachment order. That is unwise, because it would prevent the sheriff from exercising discretion on an assessment in individual circumstances. As Kenny Gibson has acknowledged, amendment 71 is framed in the same terms as amendment 130, which he lodged at stage 2. At stage 2, the Executive acknowledged that amendment 130 had been lodged out of a desire to ensure that there was no unwarranted intrusion into a debtor's home. At that time, I explained that the existing provision meets the working group's recommendation that a visit by a money adviser might benefit a debtor who was too frightened to open their correspondence or who was incapable of doing so. It was thought that the adviser would be likely to achieve greater success by communicating in person. That recommendation is central to the aim of reaching out, through the genuine assistance of money advice, to the most vulnerable. I understand that many money advisers welcome the provision, because they regard it as an opportunity to reach people who are in need of their services. Others have expressed reservations about how they would go about presenting themselves to the debtor. I have  mentioned separately the arrangements and the investment that the Executive has made for central support for money advisers. The provision of training for money advisers by the central support organisation should help to address their concerns. It should also be borne in mind that section 46(5)(b) allows the sheriff to make "such other order as the sheriff thinks fit" before deciding whether to make an exceptional attachment order. That means that, if the circumstances of a particular case suggest that a different course is appropriate, the sheriff will be able to deal with the case accordingly. Amendments 70 and 71 should be rejected.

I have listened carefully to the points made in the debate, and I understand the intention behind them. I take exception, however, to Donald Gorrie's remarks that some of us who propose to vote against amendment 69 have no conscience. I find that wholly objectionable. I suggest that Donald Gorrie thinks very carefully before rebelling, because he is suggesting that his party and the Labour party—and, in this case, the  Conservative party too—are arguing that exceptional attachment orders are not intended to be exceptional. That is simply not the case. Everything that we have done in this bill has been intended to ensure that those who cannot pay should not be subject to exceptional attachment orders, and there is nothing to demonstrate that that they would be subject to them. Mr Sheridan's amendment is a sweeping, blanket amendment, which would simply exclude 400,000 Scots from the potential to undertake credit. It tells those people that they are not creditworthy, because they will not be in a position to pay back their debt. We think that that is the wrong message to send out.

I think that it is not the working families tax credit but the child tax credit to which David McLetchie refers. Nevertheless, there are upper limits in some benefit systems, which are now very high indeed. We therefore believe that a sweeping amendment such as amendment 69 is inappropriate. Indeed, we do not believe to be the case the assumption that people who have taken on debts and who are on income support do not wish to pay their debts, no matter what amount. That assumption is patronising. Amendment 69 would create unfairness between those who are on benefits and those who are just above the qualifying level. It would not deal with those who qualify for benefits but who do not take up their entitlement. It could have the unintended knock-on effect of making lenders wary of extending credit to people who receive the benefit specified. I know that Tommy Sheridan does not agree, but his amendment would create a culture in which more than 400,000 Scots would, in effect, be telling creditors that they were not part of the system or of the scheme. The last time that we discussed this proposal in committee, we discussed its potential anomalies and how it might be open to abuse. For example, a debtor would be exempted just because their 18-year-old child living at home received a jobseekers allowance or because they had a lodger who was on benefit, on whose rent they relied. Those anomalies might not be intended, but they would be consequences of amendment 69 being agreed to.  The better course is to retain the existing provisions in the bill. It is much better for individual circumstances to be assessed on a case-by-case basis so that particular circumstances are taken into account. The exceptional attachment orders will be exceptional. There is not a single member of the Executive who would have signed up to the bill if they had believed otherwise. That is the intention in the bill. I urge members to reject amendment 69.

Section 35(1) allows articles that are owned jointly by a debtor and a third party to be attached and sold in satisfaction of the debtor's debt. Section 35(2) allows the third party to make a claim, before the auction, to buy the debtor's interest in the article. By doing so, the third party becomes the sole owner of the article. Amendment 66 would remove that possibility because it would leave disposal to the discretion of the sheriff. That would involve a hearing in each case, which would place a burden on the courts that is not necessary if the third party can make a claim by dealing directly with the officer. The amendment would open up the possibility of the sheriff making a different disposal and the only other reasonable possibility would be for the item to be returned to the debtor on payment to the  third party. However, as the bill stands, the debtor could do that by buying the third party's share and redeeming the article. Accordingly, amendment 66 should be withdrawn.

Amendments 16 to 20 are technical amendments to clarify the meaning of sections 44 and 46(2)(b). During stage 1, it became clear that a number of people who had read the bill had found section 46(2)(b) unclear. Earlier amendments at stage 2 had sought to rectify that but, on further scrutiny, it seems that those amendments could have unintended consequences. The misunderstanding arose because it had been thought by some, mistakenly, that the provision meant that the attachment of articles kept in dwellinghouses could be undertaken on the authority of a summary warrant without the need to obtain an exceptional attachment order. That is not the intention and that is not what the bill does. Creditors in domestic cases will not be able to execute a summary warrant unless and until an exceptional attachment order is granted by the sheriff, as with any other creditor. However, if a reading of the text is still giving rise to misinterpretation or ambiguity, we should adjust the text for the avoidance of any doubt or misinterpretation. Accordingly, the Executive has lodged amendments 16 to 20 to ensure that the matter is free from doubt. I move amendment 16.  Amendment 16 agreed to.  [Amendments 17 and 18 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson]—and agreed to.]

Amendment 60 would extend the duration of the period after which an attachment may cease to have effect from six to 12 months. Section 23 provides that an attachment will cease to have effect if no further action is taken within six months of the attachment or 28 days of the removal of the attached article from the place at which it was attached, whichever is the earlier. The amendment is unnecessary because extensions to the period are allowed under section 23(2), under which the sheriff, on application by either the creditor or the officer, may make an extension beyond the usual six-month limit. The sheriff may do so when the delay has been caused through no fault of the creditor or when the debtor is likely to comply with an agreement between the creditor and debtor for repayment of the debt that is due by instalments. Further extensions are provided for anyway by section 28(4)(b) where an auction has been cancelled and a date is specified in an exceptional attachment order. Accordingly, amendment 60 should be withdrawn or rejected.

I am tempted just to read out the first sentence of my brief, which says that amendment 61 is unnecessary and that the bill already does what it seeks to provide, but I will explain the situation, because the member who has moved the amendment clearly does not understand that. Section 26(2) provides that the debtor must be notified of the details of an auction. Under section 26(2)(a), the notification must specify the date of auction and, under section 26(2)(c), the date for removal of assets. As section 20(6) makes clear, it is not possible for the date of removal to be fewer than seven days before the auction date. As a result, amendment 61 is unnecessary and should be rejected.

Section 30(1) provides for the proceeds of the auction to be applied in a particular order: first they go to meet the expenses of the enforcement procedure and then they go to the creditor to meet the debt, with any surplus paid to the debtor. When the sum due is not realised, ownership of any unsold articles will pass to the creditor, in which case their value will be credited against the debt due, under section 30(2). We believe that amendment 62 is unnecessary. When the expenses chargeable against the debtor cannot be recovered from the debtor, the creditor who instructed the attachment is always liable for them. Amendment 65 would both return to the debtor the attached assets, which had not been uplifted, and reduce the debt by their value. That would benefit the debtor twice and would not achieve a fair balance. Amendment 62 should be withdrawn or, failing that, rejected, and amendment 65 should not be moved.

This group of amendments—all of which deal with practical arrangements for valuing and removing articles attached under the procedures set out in the bill—falls into three smaller groups, each dealing with a particular aspect. I shall address each in turn. The first of those smaller groups, comprising amendments 53 and 59, extends the time period for a sheriff to consider the report of an attachment. That will allow a greater opportunity to deal with any dispute about the valuation of the assets. Amendment 114, agreed during stage 2, provided that a debtor could apply for an order that an attachment should cease to have effect, or that a sheriff could so decide of his or her own accord, if he or she considered it appropriate. It also changed the point at which the 14-day period for that would start. When we looked again at section 15(4), as amended, it became clear that timing difficulties arise from the amended provision. Two 14-day periods were foreseen—the first for submitting a report of attachment, and the second for the sheriff making a decision on whether the attachment is to cease to have effect. As the bill currently stands, those periods would run concurrently. That means that the sheriff might receive the report of the attachment on the last day that he is allowed to make an order that the attachment is to cease to have effect. That was not the intention. Amendments 53 and 59 therefore provide that the sheriff can make an order that the attachment should cease to have effect up to the day before the day on which the auction of the attached goods is to be held. That seems to us to be the most sensible approach. All the other amendments in the group respond to a concern raised by both Robert Brown and Kenny Gibson during stage 2 about the practical arrangements for attachment under an exceptional attachment order. They each lodged amendments that sought to insert into the procedure an additional step, on a separate day, for the valuation of assets. We debated that point at length and the Executive's concerns and opposition to the amendments were explained in detail. Some of the members' amendments were  withdrawn and others rejected, but members asked us to have further discussions with sheriff officers, who will be charged with carrying out the procedure in practice, to be sure that it would work smoothly. Those discussions have taken place, and the amendments are the result. They are a response to the concerns raised by Robert Brown and Kenny Gibson and to the discussion with the sheriff officers. The second smaller group of amendments—amendments 56, 79 and 80—deal with a potential difficulty when a particular asset, such as a piano, requires specialist handling. For obvious reasons, arrangements should be made for the carriage of any such assets to be undertaken by a specialist carrier.

Not necessarily, because there are houses in which there are pianos that are not particularly functional and which are not being used for any purpose, or where there are no children. Therefore the pianos would not be being used for an educational purpose. We did not include a blanket exemption for pianos—we did not put them on the list of exempt items, and we do not intend to do so. Amendment 79 provides that assets need not be removed immediately from a dwelling-house where it would be impractical to do so. In that event, amendment 80 provides that notice must be given to the debtor of when they will be removed. On any such occasion, it would also be necessary for section 16, which concerns unlawful acts after attachment, to be applied. Amendment 56 is a consequential amendment for that purpose. All the other amendments in the group—amendments 54, 55, 63, 64, 67, 68, 77, 78, 81, 82, 83, 85 and 87—are for the same purpose. The lead amendment of that smaller group is amendment 77, and the others are consequential. Amendment 77 confirms that assets that are being attached under an exceptional attachment order will be valued at the price that they would be likely to fetch on the open market. Open-market valuation of assets attached under an exceptional attachment order is already expressed elsewhere in the bill, with the practical arrangements to be covered in the rules of court. Amendment 77 confirms that an estimate of what assets would attract on the open market will be made. It will not—and we need to be absolutely clear about this—be done on a separate occasion, but at the same time as the assets are removed.  There simply is no need for entry to a house on two occasions. That would be intrusive and would also add to the costs. It is also unnecessary in view of the new procedures that are proposed elsewhere in the bill. Let me underline the key point: assets can be removed from a debtor's home only at the end of a lengthy process during which the debtor will have received ample warning of what could happen, along with numerous opportunities to seek a negotiated settlement. The process includes the requirement for creditors to attempt to negotiate a settlement with debtors; the requirement to explore other means of enforcement; the requirement to provide advice and information; the requirement to have the matter considered by the court in the specific circumstances; the opportunity for voluntary declaration; and the option for the court to order an adviser visit. We need to bear in mind the fact that what we are talking about here is only for the very few difficult cases where an exceptional—I repeat: exceptional—attachment order becomes necessary for the few who can but persistently refuse to pay. Other ways have been found to assist those who can pay to do so. The amendments in the group cover the Social Justice Committee's point and have been lodged in direct response to its request. I move amendment 53.  Amendment 53 agreed to.

Section 22 protects vehicles from attachment in some circumstances, for example, when the car is necessary for the owner to travel to work or to reach regular medical treatment in a rural area that is not serviced by public transport. The sheriff has discretion to decide when holding an auction would qualify as undue harshness, according to the debtor's circumstances. That section is based on a Scottish Law Commission recommendation.  When a vehicle's value is more than £1,000, section 22(3) allows the sheriff to order its sale. Section 22(5) means that if a vehicle cannot be sold in 14 days, the vehicle's attachment will cease to have effect. Amendment 58 would increase the time limit from 14 days to 28 days. That would decrease the debtor's protection, because if the vehicle is not sold within the time limit, the attachment ceases to have effect and the vehicle reverts to the debtor's possession. Amendment 58 should be rejected.

We welcome amendment 48, which would extend the list of items that would be exempt from the attachment. The reasons that Karen Whitefield gave are very clear. It seems sensible to include on the list gardening equipment that is reasonably required to keep debtors' gardens in good order. Amendment 49 raises an issue that was discussed with the Subordinate Legislation Committee on 25 June. The aim of section 11(2)(a) is to allow the list of items to be added to, deleted or varied according to circumstances, such as changes in the economic or social climate and technological developments. The list includes computer equipment, which would probably not have been included had the bill been in place 15 years ago. In practice it is unlikely that anything will be deleted from the list, but we do not know now whether or how quickly technological advance will lead to obsolescence. The only example that I could come up with—it is probably not a very good one—is a mangle, which is something that most people would probably not recognise today, unless they are of a certain age. I see nods from Christine Grahame and others. However, a mangle might be an antique by now and therefore of value, so we would want to remove it from the list. That might not be the best of examples, but it is the only one that I could come up with. In our view, it is preferable to retain a degree of flexibility. The important thing is that any change in the list would follow consultation. In response to Margo MacDonald's contribution, I accept that the timetable for the bill has been extremely tight. Everyone will be familiar with the reasons for that, which were beyond the Executive's control. I realise that that has placed a considerable burden on everyone involved and I welcome warmly the way in which colleagues have risen to the challenge. I regret the fact that the Executive memorandum to the Subordinate Legislation Committee could not be produced earlier, but I must stress that that is not intended to  mark a lack of respect for the committee's important role, particularly when it discusses measures that affect people's livelihoods. The committee will note that the Executive has responded positively to its principal concerns. We support amendment 48 and oppose amendment 49.

As I indicated when the Social Justice Committee discussed Kenny Gibson's amendment 110 at stage 2, on 9 October, we would have been well disposed towards workable amendments on the provision—indeed, we encouraged suggestions. Kenny Gibson's amendment 110 was rejected at stage 2 on the ground that it was insufficiently specific. In requiring the compilation of a centrally held list, Kenny Gibson's stage 3 amendment—amendment 50—would be an unnecessarily bureaucratic and costly solution. I indicated that, at stage 3, we would be willing to reconsider how to extend the section 12 provision to include holidays that were widely observed out of social convention, rather than specifically for religious observance. Amendment 3 seeks to achieve that by recognising local and national holidays. I recommend that amendment 50 not be moved or be rejected. I move amendment 3.

I want to reject amendment 50, which refers to "a day of religious or cultural celebration which ... is of relevance to the debtor." Although such days would be specified in a list, the proposal could lead to endless debate about what was an appropriate cultural celebration. Amendment 50 should be rejected, because it is inappropriate.  Amendment 3 agreed to.  [Amendment 50 moved—[Mr Kenneth Gibson].]

In executing an attachment, the officer may, after making inquiries, presume that all assets in the debtor's possession belong to the debtor, either solely or in common with a third party. That presumption will apply unless or until evidence has been shown to the contrary. Amendment 51 would provide that that presumption could not be relied upon if evidence to the contrary was produced within 24 days. That is unnecessary, because section 13 already makes it clear that the presumption applies unless there is evidence to the contrary. The purpose behind referring to a 24-day period of delay is therefore unclear. Under section 34, a third party already has a right to have his or her property released from attachment at any time before it is sold at auction. Sections 35 and 36 apply the same protection to assets that are owned in common by the debtor and a third party. Amendment 51 is in any event defective because it fails to specify who may present the evidence and fails to provide for the procedure by which the place of the ministers' choosing is to be determined. If amendment 51 is not withdrawn, I recommend that it be rejected.

Amendments 52 and 57 would mean that, when an officer needed to open, shut and lockfast places, he would have to be accompanied by a constable. That would apply in non-domestic cases. We believe that that is unnecessary, because an officer can ask the police for assistance if he or she deems that to be necessary. The bill does not need to make a specific provision to impose the requirement for a police presence in every case without the officer  assessing the need for such a presence in any individual situation. Such a provision would place an unnecessary burden on police resources for no good reason. We recommend that amendment 52 be withdrawn and that amendment 57, if moved, be rejected.

Amendments 14 and 15 are technical amendments. Members might recall that at stage 2 Robert Brown lodged amendments 40, 41 and 42 to allow not only debtors, but creditors to apply for variation of a debt payment programme. Executive amendments 40A and 97 were offered to achieve the same purpose, but with  additional clarity. Along with Robert Brown's amendment 42, those amendments were agreed by the committee on 9 October. As a consequence, amendments 14 and 15 are required to reflect the change in the text from debtor to include creditors as well. I move amendment 14.  Amendment 14 agreed to.  Amendment 15 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson]—and agreed to.  Amendments 43 and 44 not moved. Amendment 45 moved—[Mr Kenneth Gibson.]

Amendment 90 responds to concerns raised during stage 2 about the regulations' providing for public notice of applications. Robert Brown's amendment 43, which was passed during stage 2, deleted the enabling power in section 7, allowing the regulations to provide for public notice of applications. The committee felt strongly that means other than public notice should be found to allow creditors who might have been omitted in error from a proposed programme to know about applications so that they could seek to be included. In the light of the committee's serious concerns, the Executive undertook to consider the matter again, so we hope that amendment 90 meets that commitment. The regulations already provide for establishing and maintaining a register of debt payment programmes. Amendment 90 will add provision that will allow the register to include applications for the approval and variation of debt payment programmes as well as for approved debt payment programmes. This means that bona fide creditors will be able to gain access to the information that they need without any need for public notice of applications to appear in newspapers or the like. I advise members that analysis of consultation responses on this point suggested a preference for public notice in the form that the Social Justice Committee was concerned about—I know that it was a matter of great concern to the committee. The amendment will enable suitable arrangements to be made in regulations. We will make those as workable and user-friendly as possible for creditors, while protecting debtors' privacy as far as possible. I move amendment 90.  Amendment 90 agreed to.

Amendments 46 and 47 seek to ensure that attachment cannot be used to enforce a summary warrant. We debated this matter at stage 2. It is important to remember that the domestic debtor already enjoys exactly the same protections under the new procedure, regardless of the type of decree that is being enforced and of the type of creditor. I do not think that that has been fully appreciated. Amendments 46 would also require that, for an attachment to be competent, the creditor and debtor have the right to a hearing. Under the bill, both parties will already receive intimations to attend a hearing for an application for an exceptional attachment order. In the event that an order is granted—that is, only in those cases where the sheriff is persuaded that there are exceptional circumstances—the debtor has a subsequent right of appeal to the sheriff on a point of law. The real impact of the two amendments would be seriously to undermine the collection of moneys due to central Government and local government, which are the only creditors who can use summary  warrants. That would have a similar impact on all of us, as taxpayers. Amendments 46 and 47 should be rejected.

We believe that amendment 42 is unnecessary. It had been intended that the general power provided by section 7(1) would enable regulations to provide for an appeal mechanism. However, at stage 2, a provision was added to section 7 to provide specifically that the regulations may make provision for appeals against determinations of the Scottish ministers on applications for approval or variation of debt payment programmes. In addition, amendment 42 would provide that diligence be suspended pending the outcome of the appeal to the sheriff. However, that would have the effect of pre-judging the outcome of the appeal. I therefore recommend that Tommy Sheridan seek to withdraw amendment 42.

We discussed and rejected the content of amendments 35 and 38 during stage 2. Both concern what happens to creditors' rights in relation to heritable property when a debtor enters a debt payment scheme, but the bill already provides that all diligence and sequestration will be stopped. Subsections 4(2) and (3) prohibit creditors from commencing or executing any diligence for payment or seeking to sequestrate a person who participates in a scheme. As that includes inhibition, amendment 38 is unnecessary.  Amendment 35 would have wide-reaching implications for other areas of law, such as contract and property law. The restrictions that are referred to in the amendment would inevitably cause lenders to change their practices. The Executive has followed the approach of the Scottish Law Commission, which first recommended a debt arrangement scheme in 1985 in its "Report on Diligence and Debtor Protection". We consider that, although 16 years have passed since the Law Commission's report, many of its conclusions on matters of legal principle remain valid today. In our consultation document, we suggested that heritably secured debt should not be part of a debt arrangement scheme. It is worth noting that that is not, of course, part of the voluntary arrangements on which the bill is intended to build. Restraints on the calling up of standard securities could be considered appropriately only in a full review of heritable securities over the homes of all debtors, taking account of all the implications for property and contract law. We must consider any such exemptions both in light of the scheme as a whole and cumulatively. For example, for how long could a debt payment programme run? If it could run for, say, nine years, or if there were no time limit, a lender would be unable to recover potentially valuable property over decades. As we have said before, we would be worried about the effect that that could have on the economy and the availability of mortgages. We believe that amendments 35 should be withdrawn or, failing that, rejected, and that amendment 38 should not be moved.

The measures proposed in amendment 34 were debated at stage 2, so I do  not propose to go over all the ground again. However, it is worth reiterating that we want ready availability of well-informed, well-trained and well-supported money advisers. We have, as members have indicated, funded advice services to the tune of £3 million per annum. Tommy Sheridan asked earlier whether the money advice will be free. The money advice will be free; it will not be charged for. The terms of amendment 34 are unclear. There is no definition of what is meant by "independent". I know that Robert Brown says that that is self-evident, but his speech did not provide clarification; indeed, it obfuscated the issue. He implies with his amendment that a local authority adviser cannot be independent. His definition of "independent" is clearly at variance with what he understands the public's perception to be of what is meant by "independent". Amendment 34 does not define the phrase "readily accessible", either, although that might be thought to be understandable. We hope that advisers will be readily accessible. Moreover, the amendment does not indicate the extent of the duty that it imposes. The amendment is unnecessary, because we require local authorities to ensure choice—that deals with Donald Gorrie's comments. That choice is reflected by the division of almost 50:50 in the appointed money advisers. When somebody goes for money advice, they do not say, "Are you three quarters funded because you are from the local authority or one quarter funded because you are from the voluntary sector?" They say, "Do I have a choice of money adviser?" The answer is yes. The money has been allocated to make that division. The spectrum to which John McAllion rightly referred exists. If it did not exist, we would want to examine that. We believe that it exists and that choice is available. As we said at stage 2, the key issue is not so much choice of money advisers as whether the advice that is given is good quality. The standard that will be attained is of primary importance—Karen Whitefield referred to that. If standards are consistent, independence—whatever that means—in the sense of who provides the service is irrelevant. Quality standards and quality assurance also relate to independence in the sense of the adviser acting in the best interests of the person who consulted them—the debtor—and not in the interests of the local authority or the creditor.

As I tried to say, an adviser acts not on behalf of their employer, but on behalf of a debtor. The debtor's interests alone must have primacy. That is not the undertaking that Tricia Marwick wanted, but I understand that that will be interpreted to mean that any attempt by an employer to suggest that an adviser should not follow best practice will be looked on severely.

No. I covered the point. Further development and strengthening of standards and quality assurance will be dealt with by the Executive's proposals for enhanced central support for money advice. We have agreed to provide £500,000 of central support for the delivery of money advice training. That shows the Executive's commitment and determination that an adviser must act in the debtor's interests, no matter where that adviser is employed—I repeat that for the last time. We ask for amendment 34 to be withdrawn; failing that, it should be rejected.

At stage 2, Cathie Craigie and Robert Brown expressed concerns about the requirement to prescribe an upper monetary limit for the amount of debt and a lower limit for the number of creditors in relation to participation in a debt payment programme. Instead, they wanted section 7(2) to include a permissive power, so that the conditions for participation might provide for such limits, depending on the results of the consultation exercise. The analysis of the consultation responses on the upper limit produced a mixed result. There was no agreement on whether there should be such a limit or on what any limit should be. Therefore, it would seem right that the requirement for a prescribed upper monetary limit be reconsidered. The Executive promised to return to the issue at stage 3. By deleting the requirement, amendment 2 meets the Executive's commitment. There is no corresponding insertion of a permissive power in section 7(2), because that is not necessary. Section 7(1)(a), as further explained by section 7(2)(a) and section 7(2)(b), would enable that to be done. We should look closely at the balance of the differing views that have been expressed on the issue. In light of the discussions at stage 1, the Executive also sought additional information from CABx, through a survey on the levels of typical voluntary arrangements. We want to take account of that informal information. Therefore, amendment 32 would not be wise at this stage and I respectfully ask Tommy Sheridan not to move it. Of course, the regulations will now be subject to the affirmative resolution procedure. I move amendment 2.

Amendments 25 and 26 would make it a condition of participation in a debt payment programme that all debts will be paid in full. That may appear a laudable aim, but we have reservations about the unconditional terms of the amendments. We have discussed the issue before in connection with the possibilities of composition and the freezing of interest, to which Robert Brown alluded, and on which an amendment is coming up later—I will not pre-empt that discussion now. Suffice it to say that the amendments in this group would actually prevent creditors who are prepared to accept less than the total that is due to them from being able to accept it under a debt payment programme. They could, of course, accept it separately, on a voluntary basis, but it would be difficult for the scheme to recognise and incorporate that. Creditors will generally be asked to consent to the debtor's application to participate in a programme. Any creditor who is not satisfied with the proposed arrangements for repayment of a debt, whether in whole or in part, will not give that consent. Amendment 28 requires an applicant to attest that all creditors are included in the application, and, if they are not, to state why not. That is a matter of detail for the regulations, and there is power to cover that under paragraphs (a) and (b) of section 7(1). The Executive's consultation asked for views on whether the penalty for making a false declaration should be revocation. Respondents recognised that there may be instances where debtors genuinely are not conscious of the full level of their indebtedness and that, in those instances, there should be some discretion. Most respondents agreed that, where the declaration has deliberately been falsified, the penalty should be revocation. When drawing up the regulations, the Executive will be taking those views into account, as well as our similar discussion on this topic at stage 2, in relation to variation of the debt payment programme. Amendments 25, 26 and 28 should, therefore, be withdrawn or rejected.

At stage 2, Robert Brown lodged an amendment—amendment 32—that was designed to add flexibility to the information that the debtor must provide about his or her debts in an application for approval of a debt repayment programme. The Executive sympathised with the intention behind the amendment, but was concerned that it was too vague and could be open to abuse. We undertook to produce a more precisely worded alternative. Amendment 1 fulfils that commitment. I move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  [Amendment 28 moved—[Mrs Lyndsay McIntosh].]

Amendments 30 and 43 seek essentially to achieve the same thing and the Executive is opposed to both for the same reason. Section 2(4) already provides generally for creditors to give consent to a debtor's participation in a debt payment programme. Section 7(2)(g) allows the regulations to provide for circumstances in which that consent can be dispensed with. The question of the level of creditor support required was raised in the Executive's consultation. The independent analysis of responses shows a lack of agreement on what level of creditor support is needed for approval of a debt payment programme. Some considered that a straight majority of creditors was all that was necessary, but others disagreed and put forward other options. We think that it is right that we consider fully the responses and options before coming forward with detailed and, we hope, practical proposals in the regulations, which the Parliament will examine using the affirmative procedure. Amendment 30 is technically defective, because it does not specify the criteria by which a majority of creditors is to be determined. It does not state whether the number of creditors or the value of the debt would be the determining factor. If the decision were based on numerical considerations, one could have a situation in which the major creditor was not in the majority, even though they had 85 per cent or 90 per cent of the debt, because there were four or five smaller creditors. There is a significant technical problem with amendment 30. It also does not deal with circumstances in which withholding consent is unreasonable. I will not address amendment 44, as Tommy Sheridan has indicated that he will not move it. I ask for amendment 30 to be withdrawn and for amendment 43 not to be moved. Failing that, those amendments should be rejected.

As Mr Sheridan said, amendment 24, which reflects the amendment 66 that he moved at stage 2, would provide in the bill a requirement that a debt arrangement scheme would be cost free to debtors. The Executive confirmed at stage 2 that that was a matter of detail best dealt with in regulations, taking account of, as Mr Sheridan said, the views of respondents to the Executive's consultation. The consultation specifically sought views on how the debt arrangement scheme should be funded. The independent analysis of responses, to which I will refer in connection with amendments that we will debate, was published on 8 November 2002. All members have been provided with a copy of the analysis report. Unfortunately, the report was not available to the Executive or the Social Justice Committee during stage 2, because of the compressed process for the bill. That, in turn, was due to the time restrictions arising as a result of the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Act 2001. Anyway, that is the situation in which we find ourselves. The Executive sought views in the consultation on how the debt arrangement scheme should be funded, and the analysis reveals a variety of suggestions for funding the scheme. I do not propose to go into the different options today. The suggestion that there was an absolutely clear consensus is not valid. The Executive will give full consideration to the views that were expressed in the consultation when framing the regulations, which Parliament will be able to debate fully in due course. As members will know, the Executive gave a  commitment at stage 2 to lodge an amendment at stage 3 to change the procedure for scrutiny of the regulations on the debt arrangement scheme from negative to affirmative resolution procedure. I would like to apologise for the late lodging of Executive amendments 91 and 92, which are manuscript amendments. That was due to an oversight. Amendments 91 and 92 deal with the proposal to make the regulations on the debt arrangement scheme subject to affirmative resolution and allow the Parliament to debate fully the terms of any debt charge payment scheme that we introduce. We believe, however, that amendment 24 should be rejected.

The free text in the analysis shows that a substantial number of differing views were given and the Executive believes that it would be proper for us to take those views into account in framing regulations, which might or might not emerge in the way that Mr Sheridan suggests. This matter should be dealt with in the regulations, which the Scottish Parliament will have an opportunity to debate.

As my response to S1W-28522 indicated, the information and statistics division in Scotland, which is examining prescription data to identify the numbers of people who are being prescribed methadone, aimed to have the information available by the end of October. Unfortunately, the very large number of prescriptions and the time-consuming methodology required to obtain the number of individual patients have delayed completion of the work. I understand that the exercise will be completed by the end of this month, and I will write to the member with the relevant information as soon as possible.

I do not think that I have the time  to go into all the detail that Mary Scanlon has asked for. However, I will say that substitute prescribing is vital to the programme of stabilising addicts and moving them on. Indeed, we produced a report last year that focused on exactly that issue. Clearly, we need an integrated programme that does not consist simply of prescribing a substitute opiate in the form of methadone—which, by the way, is as addictive as heroin but no more so. We must also apply all the other methods of rehabilitation to allow individuals to move off methadone and back into a normal life. The stabilisation programme also protects our communities, because individual heroin addicts have an acquisitive crime rate of about £31,000 per annum. If those people are on methadone and are stabilised, communities are made safer because there is substantially less acquisitive crime. However, there must be an adequate dosage that is individually tailored to the patient. That presents a problem in some areas, where people apparently do not have enough training to know to give enough methadone. The Executive is committed to and is delivering on the programme, which will make a difference to our communities.

The Executive and the department that covers drug misuse is open to any evidence that is acquired from anywhere in the world about treating addicts and getting them off drugs. The indications from the Swiss programme are that it is successful and effective in reducing the level of acquisitive crime by addicts. The Dutch programme has not yet fully reported, we have not yet got the long-term follow-up on the Swiss programme, and the German programme is in the early stages of development. I will not close my mind to any evidence from anywhere that will help us to ensure that people get off drugs, but at present, neither the Executive nor the United Kingdom Government is minded to introduce direct prescribing of heroin.

On 2 October, the Minister for Health and Community Care launched a report by the  Executive's effective interventions unit that provides comprehensive information and advice on the provision of integrated care for drug misusers. The report is based on a review of research evidence and on consultation of health care professionals, service providers in the statutory and voluntary sectors and service users. Our objective is to encourage statutory and voluntary organisations that design, commission and provide services to deliver person-centred integrated care that takes account of the variety of social, economic and health problems that are often experienced by drug misusers.

We are determined that criminals should not be allowed to benefit from their ill-gotten gains. The recent passage of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, which we will begin to implement in December and will implement in other respects in February of next year, will produce resources that over time we will put back into communities and into treating problems in communities. I also acknowledge what Elaine Thomson said about the problem of prostitution and its association with drug taking, not only in Aberdeen but in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dundee and elsewhere. Some local initiatives, such as the Scottish Prostitutes Education Project in Edinburgh and Routes Out of Prostitution in Glasgow, are beginning to help with those problems. I hope very much that the drug action team in Aberdeen will work closely with other people—directly or through the joint future arrangements—to ensure that effective services are available for such high target groups. They need adequate support to effect good harm reduction.

I had the pleasure of meeting the Stranraer Against Drugs group some time ago. I was particularly pleased with the highly effective raid that was conducted recently by Dumfries and Galloway police. I know that the Stranraer Against Drugs group was present at the briefing. The raid was a very effective demonstration of enforcement. Alex Fergusson is right that we must also support family units. The First Minister recently announced for the support of family groups the use of £180,000 of money confiscated under the Proceeds of Crime (Scotland) Act 1995. We also held our first national family conference this year. We will develop support for groups in localities such as Stranraer. Although we are not issuing specific guidelines, we have produced a report on the subject.

The member raised two specific issues, one of which is residential rehabilitation. I have to say that such decision must be judgments of local drug action teams. Community groups often regard residential rehabilitation as the best way of proceeding, but it is not; rather, community-based rehabilitation and withdrawal systems are more effective. We should be cautious about wasting money on rehabilitation. The second matter that Brian Adam raised is the Grampian Addiction Problem Service. As with the first matter, decisions about which community groups to support are for the local drug action team. It is a matter for regret that Mrs Jess's organisation will go out of operation and I am not fully clear about why it has happened, although we have suggested to Mrs Jess other possible funding streams through the new opportunities fund. I believe that everybody has to be on board. People have different approaches and we need to respect those different approaches. It is a matter for some regret that she is pulling out of the area, but any discussions must be local.

Since 1981, Scotland's population has declined by an estimated 116,000, or 2 per cent. The main factor contributing to the decline over that period is a net migration out of Scotland of some 136,800 people. The figure is offset by a natural increase of 20,800. In more recent years the rate of net out-migration has fallen. As the birth rate has fallen, deaths have exceeded births and natural decrease has become a more important  component of population change than migration.

The answer to almost 98 per cent of Andrew Wilson's question is no. However, I say to him that, in the year 2000-01, there was an increase in the population. The estimates showed a net in-migration of 9,900. That figure was offset slightly by a natural decrease of 3,900. The figure demonstrates that the Executive's policies are working. It also demonstrates that the Executive has reversed a long trend and that Scotland, as part of the United Kingdom, is a very attractive place to be.

The problem of an aging population exists in all developed countries and it is one that we must address in a range of areas. We must consider the question of ageism because there are many skilled people out there who, having completed a first career, are able to go on to a second. I like to think that I am one of them.

The question of asylum seekers is a serious one. We received some 5,500 asylum-seeker migrants into Scotland in the past year. We  are doing our bit to accept people who genuinely need asylum. They can make a major contribution to our society.

It is slightly beyond my ministerial remit to answer, but the Executive is examining appropriate dispersal of civil service jobs. The question that Mrs Ewing asked, however, is broader: it is a question about rural communities. My colleague Ross Finnie has done much to support rural communities to make them vibrant and alive. That is crucial to a dynamic Scotland, which is part of a dynamic United Kingdom.

The sale and supply of fireworks are consumer protection matters and as such are reserved. The Department of Trade and Industry runs annual firework safety campaigns, to which the Executive gives its full support. Fire brigades undertake local work in schools and the wider community and the Scottish Executive supplements that by funding regular publicity on fire safety.

We will certainly look closely at the COSLA working group's report when it comes out. I take this opportunity to stress that it is important that the voluntary code should be followed and that fireworks should be sold only in  the three weeks before 5 November and for a few days afterwards. It is imperative that the voluntary code is followed in every regard—fireworks simply must not be sold to children. That is absolutely vital, this year perhaps more than any other year. We will look closely at the COSLA report and decide whether there are further measures that the Executive can take.

It is important that we study the COSLA working group report, which my colleague Dr Jackson mentioned, to see what additional powers are needed. If additional powers are needed and it is appropriate for us to take them, we will consider that carefully. Shona Robison is right to say that the issue is serious, as the cross-party signatures to her bill indicate. We will consider the matter carefully.

The issues that Robert Brown has raised are important. The numbers of people injured in the past three years have been 89, 66 and 82 respectively. Those injuries are often horrific. As a doctor, I have experience of young children who have been injured not because they have been sold fireworks but because fireworks have been used inappropriately or because an accident has occurred. It is horrendous to see the burns that can occur in such situations. It is important that the law is enforced and I know that the police are fully aware of the problem. Beyond that, it is much more important that safety measures are taken. This year of all years, I urge that private bonfire parties, if they are held, be held under the closest possible supervision.  Preferably, people should go to large, outdoor events where safety is properly monitored; that is a more appropriate way of celebrating the annual feast.

The response from members speaks for itself. It is absolutely imperative that all people who sell fireworks should adhere to the code. If members are aware of people who do not follow it, they should expose those people in the way that Margaret Jamieson has.

Will the member take an intervention?

I acknowledge what George Reid has done. Given that the issue is a public health matter, I wonder whether the public health consultants in the appropriate health board have looked at the health of the Blairingone community. It is the responsibility of those people, along with the groups that Mr Reid has mentioned, to examine such health issues.

Overall, the debate has been good. However, it is clear that if Parliament is to be  effective we must have processes by which it is accepted that the Executive's decisions are not always totally right or totally wrong, but are balanced decisions that are made on the evidence that is presented to us. It must also be accepted that when we consult, which we have done more than any other Government has, we have an opportunity to examine any fresh evidence. Of course, some of the fresh evidence came through the Justice 1 Committee, but some came from consultation responses to the Executive, particularly from Labour MSPs. Stewart Stevenson and Alex Salmond submitted evidence on Peterhead to the consultation, but otherwise only Labour members submitted evidence. It is clear that if decisions are balanced, we should be able to make different decisions on the basis of new evidence If members return to the speeches that were made during the debate on Peterhead—prior to the statement and the debate on the prisons estates review—by Jim Wallace and by me as a back bencher, they will see that we said exactly the same thing. We said that if it could not be guaranteed that the closure of the prison would not disrupt the Peterhead programmes, that would be an important consideration, because the programmes offer the best chance of treating serious sex offenders. During the consultation it became clear that building a new prison or shifting prisoners to a central-belt prison would disrupt programmes to an extent that would not be helpful. I want to deal with the issue of sex offenders. Michael Matheson and Stewart Stevenson raised the matter, but they have not read the Spencer report correctly. There are 650 convictions of sex offenders annually. About 5,000 offences are committed annually. There are about 300 long-term offenders. There are thought to be another 300 or so short-term offenders in the system. There are problems of identification, because the offence that is listed is the first or most serious offence on the charge sheet. That is not always a sex offence. That is why the Spencer report indicated that sex offenders may constitute 10 per cent of the total prison population. However, not all sex offenders are long-term offenders. The majority of sex offenders convicted annually are short-term offenders. Out of the 650 offenders who are convicted annually, only about 50 end up in Peterhead. Since I was appointed as a minister, my main concern has been to follow—

I will not give way. Neither Christine Grahame nor Stewart Stevenson allowed me to intervene to correct them. Had they  accepted an intervention from me earlier, I could have shortened my speech considerably. My concern in setting up the Spencer committee was to deal with short-term offenders, who form a substantial proportion of offenders. To do that, we must have effective programmes in place. We have established such programmes at Barlinnie, Polmont and elsewhere. We need to consider whether those should be brought together in a single-purpose prison in the central belt that will deal with short-term sex offenders. Throughcare and links to the community are of crucial importance. The rehabilitation of long-term prisoners at the end of their sentences can take place in the central belt.

No. I do not have time to deal with all the points that have been made. The Spencer report is now out to consultation. I hope that people will respond to it. We need to have a serious debate about short-term sex offenders, who may progress to more serious offending. The other theme of today's debate has been that prisons should be used only for those for whom it is appropriate and that there should be alternatives to custody. I look forward to seeing the committee's work on that issue, which will develop alongside ours. The alternatives to custody that the Executive has produced are greater in number and type than those produced by any previous Administration. Drugs courts and drug treatment and testing orders are but two examples of those. We have funded local authorities to carry out bail supervision. Arrest referral and diversion—measures to which Donald Gorrie referred—are in place. If they are used by the courts, they will be effective. Bill Aitken and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, among others, referred to fine default, which is a problem. We are considering implementing on a pilot basis the provisions of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 for dealing with fine default. We may want to re-examine that issue. At present, the daily population of prisons includes only 60 prisoners who have been imprisoned for fine default. That figure does not reflect the weight of work that has been done on the issue. There are 7,000 cases of fine default a year, involving around 5,000 people. By introducing tagging and by piloting time-out centres for women—we will consider that for men in due course—we are trying to provide alternatives to custody. That is reflected in the number of prisoners. The only group of convicted prisoners whose numbers have increased substantially is long-term adult prisoners. The number of short-term adult prisoners has been  stable since 1997. The number of short-term young offenders is down by 23 per cent. The number of long-term young offenders is down by 15 per cent. We are overwhelmed by problems with remand. Bill Aitken, among others, referred to the issue of drugs. Through the contract with Cranstoun Drug Services Scotland, we have produced throughcare that will take the number of people whose needs in relation to drugs are assessed from 200—the figure at the time of the establishment of the Parliament—to a target figure of 6,000. That is a sizeable attempt to assess the drugs problem with the individuals concerned and to develop programmes that are effective. The other issue that I want to address is that of private versus public provision. Certain members often attempt to demonise Kilmarnock prison. I welcome Stewart Stevenson's praise today of staff at Kilmarnock. Frankly, some of the remarks that members have made over the past few years on this issue have been outrageous. Occasionally members need to seek a balanced approach and not be partisan. When dealing with the argument of public versus private provision, it is inappropriate to demonise Kilmarnock prison. I want to respond to another comment by Stewart Stevenson. Last year or the year before, inspectorate reports identified 24 items of best practice in Scotland. Twelve of those came from Kilmarnock. Kilmarnock is not all bad, but it is not all good. I wish that members would not always say that everything about it is bad. We need to strike a balance in these matters. Let us re-examine the proposals. Originally we proposed the establishment of two or three private prisons. Our proposal was based on the fact that prisoner numbers are difficult to project. We are taking risks by saying—as Jim Wallace indicated in his statement—that we have decided to opt for only two prisons. One of those will be used initially for remand prisoners, who are not convicted and whose rights are largely removed on conviction. We have said that we will opt for a private build, public operate prison. No matter what is said about the French system, the experiment in Chile and the attempt in Goa, that has never been done before. Two years ago, the introduction of new working arrangements led to unofficial strikes. We have moved to a position where the trade union and the SPS were able jointly to welcome the minister's statement. They have signed a compact to work together in a genuine partnership to try to make the public prison sector work. In backing that, we have made the largest-ever investment in the public prison sector, to modernise the estate. I will conclude, because I know that I am well  over time. Thank you for your indulgence, Presiding Officer. I will come back to the members who spoke about Craiginches prison. We will continue to examine the problems there, about which I am genuinely concerned.

rose—

Will the member give way?

My intervention is in relation to what Michael Matheson just said.

I congratulate Michael Matheson on securing the time for this debate on a matter that is undoubtedly of considerable importance to the people in Polmont. That has been evident from all the speeches that have been made. I acknowledge the fact that Cathy Peattie, Dennis Canavan and Donald Gorrie have received representations on the matter. Indeed, I have discussed the issue with Cathy Peattie at some length a number of times, and correspondence has passed from my desk to that of the SPS. First let me give a little history. The clubs—there were some 11 of them—were set up in the 1950s and shortly thereafter, when all or most of the prison staff were required to live in the vicinity of the prison. At that time, the SPS owned substantial property in the area of the prison. Today, very few properties are owned—a few in  Edinburgh and a few in Cornton Vale—and there is no longer a requirement to live in the vicinity. The second change is that, of the 11 clubs, I think that three are left—although I am not sure of the exact figure. Certainly, few are left. There has been a process of divestment and clubs have gradually been closed or sold, or returned to operational use. There are only a few exceptions to that. In 1998, when the policy was being promoted that the clubs could be sold off and that the SPS could divest itself of direct interest in them, all the remaining clubs were asked to express an interest if they wished to purchase the club. I am advised by the SPS that no such request was received from Polmont, but today's debate has shown that members of the Polmont club take a different view. However, as far as I am aware, there has been no subsequent pressure by the club to try to go through with the sale. In the intervening period, the SPS—following the Executive's policy—has had to consider proper training for officers in the coming years. The SPS must ensure that the college at Polmont, or at an alternative site, is developed to promote training for new admissions to the service and for continuing professional development. I know the college at Polmont well; I have attended it many times. It has poor access, inadequate parking and dilapidated buildings, and it requires substantial refurbishment. The SPS is therefore totally correct, in its pursuit of correctional excellence, to consider this issue seriously before deciding how to proceed. An option for the SPS was to find a fresh site and, in due course, to build a new college. Another option was to retain the existing college and revise, extend and improve it to make it fit for the 21 st century—thus retaining some 70 jobs in the Polmont area and, appropriately, providing ready access, because it is in central Scotland. In August of this year, the latter option was chosen. The SPS is developing its plans accordingly. A consequence of that decision is, I understand, that the site of the current staff club will be required to ensure safe access to the new kitchens for lorries. At present, access to the site is not wholly satisfactory. As to whether the site could be retained in some way within the present college, I do not have sufficient knowledge to give an answer. However, I understand that that is not possible and that the development is important. The club is undoubtedly well run and—as we have heard from all members—is used extensively by members of the community and by clubs within that community, as well as by its 350 members and by its associate members. Clearly, the facility is highly regarded in the community. It seems to me that the outcome of discussions between the  SPS, the college, the community and Falkirk Council should be that a resource of some sort should be available in the area to meet the needs of the community. Whether that facility will still be linked to the SPS is another matter. I have learned from today's speeches that a substantial amount of money has been invested by the club. In meetings that have been held, the figure of £15,000 is all that has been mentioned. Today, a figure of between £40,000 and £50,000, and a figure of £45,000, have been put on the record. Investment has been made that, technically and legally, was made at the risk of the club, because that is the form of the lease. Nevertheless, we should consider carefully whether some form of recompense or negotiated settlement can be arrived at. Under the lease that has been in place since the 1980s, notice must be given in December for termination of the lease in January. As far as I know, no attempt has been made to renegotiate that lease. Legally, therefore, the SPS did not have to give notice to the club until December. I understand that two meetings have taken place between the club and the SPS at which there were discussions about alternative properties and alternative land. Again, those meetings were alluded to although I am not quite sure how accurate the figures were. Certainly, the figure of £300,000 is not correct. One figure referred to land and one to buildings. Those figures were being combined by my colleagues; perhaps that was not appropriate.

That confirms what I was saying. Those figures should not be combined; they are separate figures. It is important that there should be continuing dialogue between the club and the SPS. The SPS should consider carefully whether the site is an absolute requirement for the extension. If it is, the SPS must proceed because the college is important in terms of both employment and the future of the SPS. Alternative sites might be considered and there might be some way in which the local community, Falkirk Council and the SPS could come together. At present, the SPS pays the rates and charges a peppercorn rent to the club. The club is therefore in a position whereby the SPS is giving some subsidy to the local community, and whether that should be the role of the SPS is a matter for considerable debate.  I cannot say that the SPS should change its position.

I am happy to give that assurance and to indicate that I will hold further discussion with the SPS and convey personally the strong feelings that have been expressed by members of all parties. I am concerned that we should have a modern prison service in which there is trust and understanding—not in the form that was described by Stewart Stevenson, but genuine trust and understanding between the SPS and its staff. The signing of the agreement that is just coming into place between the trade union and the SPS is a basis on which we can proceed. We have to undo some of the past antagonism between the two sides. I hope that we can have further discussions in that area and that we can try to ensure that this worthwhile community effort is considered further in a satisfactory way. I hope that each side will at least understand where the other is coming from. I have given Lord James Douglas-Hamilton an undertaking that I will raise the matter with the SPS.  Meeting closed at 17:49.

It is for the Crown or those representing the accused to decide whether to lead fingerprint evidence in criminal trials. Questions of admissibility are for the court. The assessment of reliability is for the judge in summary proceedings and for the jury in proceedings on indictment.

The member may be aware of the fact that I responded to committee members and supported my colleague, the Deputy First Minister, on the same day that he appeared before the justice committees. I reiterate: it is not an exact science. In Scotland, 16 points are used for fingerprint identification. I cite the case of Gilbert McNamee, the Hyde park bomber, in which 14  expert opinions were obtained. A range of opinions on the fingerprints was produced, from "identical" to "insufficient evidence". If something is a science, that does not mean that it is an exact science. The Deputy First Minister clearly said: "what should be said about fingerprint evidence is that it is not an exact science".—[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee (Joint Meeting) , 17 September 2002; c 225.] I reiterate that. HM inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland has reviewed the situation with regard to fingerprints and has made recommendations on training, testing and quality assurance. Those have been adopted and have been followed through.

I do not propose to comment on particular current cases, or on errors that may or may not have occurred. There is currently a civil action against the Scottish ministers, and the Presiding Officer has indicated that we should not comment. I can say that I have confidence in the fingerprint division. There has been a re-examination of it and we have made certain changes in respect of quality assurance. At present, every fingerprint is examined by more than one fingerprint expert and is then quality assured by a third officer. These are not exact matters. Therefore, I support the Deputy First Minister's view on the issue.

I am absolutely not saying that. I point out to Lord James, as I have already said, that we in Scotland use a 16-point identification system. In India, for example, identification is based on a 10-point system. In other jurisdictions, different levels of proof are accepted for identification. I repeat: this is not an exact science. Different jurisdictions approach fingerprint identification in different ways. There has been no challenge to fingerprint evidence that was  accepted in the past, and we do not expect any challenge in cases where there has been a 16-point identification.

The member is correct. What would be the point of having experts debate evidence in court if it were never in dispute? There are disputes, particularly when there are fewer than 16 points of identification. Members should accept that this is not an exact science.

The Minister for Finance and Public Services made a full statement to Parliament on 12 September, in which he gave details of the spending review. The thrust of our future programme is to improve radically the quality of life in communities across Scotland. The  substantial resources that we have announced across the range of Executive portfolios will help to build safe, strong communities.

I thank the member for her question. As she knows, I have offered to visit her in her constituency and meet local representatives to discuss the issue of youth crime in that area, especially in relation to policing. Grampian police has already established some patrols on hotspots, one of which is in the Bridge of Don area. Local supermarkets have conducted campaigns on alcohol awareness and crime prevention, and I gather that off-licences are considering a voluntary agreement not to sell drink to the under-21s. Furthermore, there has been a joint event involving community education, health promotion and the fire brigade to raise awareness of underage drinking. In addition to all that, City of Aberdeen Council, along with many local authorities, is about to introduce a ban on drinking in public places, which should also help the situation. I should add that we provided additional money for community safety at the previous end-of-year spend. Councils received £94 million to use on quality-of-life issues, of which this is one. Furthermore, we have compounded the community safety budget to ensure that £12 million—£4 million in each of the next three years—is available to address the community safety agenda, which has been determined by community partnerships.

We need to join up activities that are carried out in prison to treat offending behaviour with community resources. Under the Cranstoun Drug Services Scotland initiative, we have put additional resources—some £10 million over three years—into all prisons in Scotland, including Craiginches. Although we cannot yet see  the effects of that programme, I expect to see some improvements. That said, I have accepted in the past that there are some specific problems with drug treatment in the Grampian area. We are examining the matter and I hope to make an announcement at a later stage.

I thank the Social Justice Committee for its report, which is excellent. Many concerns have been reinforced in speeches today and I will not be able to deal with them all now. It is extraordinary to stand here today—after standing here yesterday to speak about the Criminal Justice Bill with its 64 sections—because I felt more able to sum up yesterday than I do today. Today's contributions have been well considered and the speeches have been excellent. The points that have been raised need detailed consideration that cannot be given in the short summing-up that I must make today.  Before getting to the meat of the matter, I want to thank the subsidiary committees. There is a fundamental question about whether we should have a general equal opportunities statement in bills. As a Parliament, we need to decide whether we must resolve the matter. I have had a discussion with Kate Maclean, the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, but I have not come to a conclusion. The Executive and the Equal Opportunities Committee must resolve the problem because bills that do not contain such a statement will be seen as somehow inferior and not promoting equal opportunities in comparison with those that do. That is not the Executive's intention and it is not the intention of the Equal Opportunities Committee. We do not believe there is a contradiction in what we have said, but I will respond to Kate Maclean in detail in writing on that point. Robert Brown referred to the Subordinate Legislation Committee, which has also considered the matter carefully. Paragraph 23 of the Social Justice Committee's report refers to equal opportunities in more detail. Issues have been raised about regulations, their review and whether they should be subject to affirmative procedure. We must discuss that in some detail at stage 2—I will not make such matters less important by trying to address them today. I always look for opportunities to praise colleagues, even if they are in Opposition parties. I think David McLetchie's speech was—unlike other speeches—excellent [ Interruption. ] That will probably not earn me any brownie points. My greatest concern is that the SNP and the SSP chose not to participate in the working group on a replacement for poindings and warrant sales, whose remit was "To identify a workable and humane replacement diligence against moveable property to that of poinding and warrant sale and to make recommendations for implementing legislation to be brought forward during the Parliamentary session 2001/02."

Not at this point. To use Christine Grahame's analogy, the bus was departing on this complex issue. The SNP and The SSP tried to decide the route by which they would go, but Christine and Tommy got off at the first stop and said, "We want nothing more to do with it."

Not at the moment, but I promise to let the member speak.  The Opposition must be critical, but what I have not heard today is a suggested alternative to exceptional attachment orders, which will protect the poorest in our society. We all want to protect the poorest in our society.

I will finish my point and let at least two of the members speak. The point was made by a Conservative colleague and by Labour members. If we do not have some system of exceptional attachment, we will block those in our society who need credit from getting it from appropriate places. I am not in the business of protecting creditor organisations. Margaret Curran has already met the banks and—to respond to Trish Godman's point—she will meet them again. We need to have discussions with the banks, because there are problems in that respect. However, we must come up with a solution that is workable and that will protect the poorest in our society.

Let me see. I will not take Christine Grahame's intervention because I will come back to her point later. I will take Tommy Sheridan and then Kenny Gibson.

Mr Sheridan always takes quotes from one organisation and says that they represent the totality. It is total and utter rubbish. Mr Sheridan is misleading and failing to protect the very people whom he purports constantly to protect.

The problem is that Mr Gibson has failed to consider the bill in its totality. I will come to those points in a minute. I want to deal with John McAllion's point. He has made some powerful interventions, but he says that we did not consult. "Striking the Balance" received 800 consultation responses; every organisation was able to respond. I refute John McAllion's point that we did not have adequate consultation.

Mr McAllion had a chance to make his point. I cannot take any more interventions. All members seek a workable and humane system for those who cannot pay. We must have a system that protects the poorest in our society, but we must also have a system that ensures that those who can pay do so. That is the system that we have set up in the bill. If one considers the matter in the round, the debt advisory scheme is the crucial element. That is the element that—following the working group's approach—gives us a scheme that will take debt in Scotland into the 21 st century.

I accept that the comments that I made in my intervention on Christine Grahame earlier were not totally correct. I want to put that on the record.

Christine Grahame was talking about the provision for tools of trade, which applies principally to commercial cases. However, I accept that it could also apply in some domestic cases. The key issue is that in both cases where there has to be an attachment, there should in all circumstances be adequate protection of essential  items. The bill provides that. It also introduces a completely new system for dealing with domestic cases. It is inevitable that where the bill deals with a last resort sanction of attachment, there will be some similarities between its language and that of other legislation.

Christine Grahame selected some phrases from the bill in which the language is the same. SNP members have said clearly that they do not want any form of final attachment, so at stage 2 of the bill they must lodge amendments that will ensure the protection of the poorest people. Fergus Ewing, Robert Brown and others raised the important issue of creditor consent, which is a problem. We are consulting on the matter. We must ensure that creditors have the opportunity to consent during composition of debts. If they do not participate, no alternative measures will be available to them. The bill does not allow a creditor to attack a debtor on their own. That is fundamental. There is a need for composition of debts compile. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to the Consumer Credit Counselling Service, of which my good friend George Foulkes has agreed to be the patron in Scotland. The other day I had an interesting meeting with representatives of that organisation. In England the CCCS deals with 100,000 clients a year, whose debts it manages extremely well. The service has operated successfully for 10 years and has debt repayment schemes that run for 15 years, on average. However, most debts are wiped out after 4.7 years. Creditors make agreements that allow them to collect something, in the knowledge that they will not be able to collect the entire debt. Members have been asking all along whether such a scheme could work in practice here. The CCCS is a not-for-profit organisation that provides exactly the service that we require. Concerns have been expressed about the independence of money advisers. The Chinese wall system works, but we will ensure that it is effective. More than 50 per cent of money advisers are independent and 100 new advisers have been recruited. We will ensure that the service is properly funded and that people get the money advice that they need. Linda Fabiani and Kenny Gibson mentioned interest freezing. I will send Kenny Gibson a quotation to remind him of what he said originally on the matter. I apologise to members for failing to deal with all the points that have been made. Today the Parliament has done itself a great deal of good,  because this has been a measured debate. I want to end almost as I began—with a challenge to Tommy Sheridan and the SNP. They should admit that they made a mistake in resigning from the working group. They should have participated, but they went off in a huff. Let us leave that debate behind us. We will not expect an apology from Tommy Sheridan or the SNP.

I did.

I challenge Mr Sheridan and the SNP to devise workable alternatives to the EAO. If they do so, I am sure that they will be considered at stage 2. However, today I have not heard members propose such alternatives. Taken as a whole, the bill embodies the principles that the Parliament articulated in the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Act 2001. I urge the Parliament to support the motion.

Could I tell—

She has misled people.

The only thing that Christine Grahame failed to do was to say that the  quotations that she read out refer to commercial cases.

It is.

Well, I shall double check.

The Executive accepts that the bill is wide ranging, but it is quite extraordinary that the Conservatives say it lacks principles.

No. Let me get started. It is regrettable that Roseanna Cunningham suggested that the bill is a ragbag, which is effectively what she said. Nevertheless, the debate has been very good and in some speeches members have raised extremely helpful points. The bill is based on the principles of protecting the public and children; promoting victims' rights and effective sentencing; and maintaining a modern and efficient criminal justice system. They are fairly reasonable principles on which to proceed. I pay tribute to the Justice 2 Committee for the way in which it undertook a very challenging task. The bill has 70 sections and the committee was working within a very tight time frame. Indeed, I think the committee found the challenge quite difficult at times. However, the way in which it took evidence and constructed its report has been very helpful to the Executive and represents an example of a mature democracy. Committees are crucial if our unicameral Parliament is to operate effectively and it is important that the Executive listens to them. As we have no House of Lords, there is no second bite of the cherry. Interacting on such a level means that we need a reasonable debate about the issues instead of childish claims about U-turns. Decisions are often finely balanced, and it is entirely appropriate for the committee to produce evidence that persuades us that we should change our mind. We do not apologise for that. We will carefully consider a number of important points about high-risk offenders. We also feel that the defence's right to challenge is important: the defence has the right to challenge the decision to  move to a risk assessment. I therefore welcome paragraph 34 of the committee's report, which states that it "may be appropriate to have a relatively broad entry point to the risk assessment process ... However, the broad criteria at this stage make it all the more important that the risk assessment process is as robust as possible".  Another important question concerns the information on which assessments are based. We will provide examples before stage 2. As Michael Matheson said in his excellent summing up, we must be sure that the sources of information are reputable. Indeed, in his opening speech, Jim Wallace made it clear that we will not pay heed to hearsay or tittle-tattle. That said, it is crucial for a small number of people that we introduce the protection given by orders of lifelong restriction. I am glad that the SNP welcomes that approach.

That summarises the point excellently. Because we have a duty to protect the public, we intend to proceed on the balance of probabilities. Why did we not decide to do so earlier? The answer is that we legislate only after we go through the committee system and a consultation process. We do not apologise for taking that time. The MacLean committee report was very important in our consideration of this issue. As for victim statements, all members have welcomed sections 15 and 16. It is only correct that victims have a right to information about release. The Executive is trying to put victims much more at the heart of the process. Some members referred to the victim's right to refuse to make a statement. We should not underestimate the therapeutic value of that approach, because it allows the victim to control some element of the process. Rejecting that opportunity is nevertheless part of a healing process. Even if they agree to make a statement, they can still withdraw it at a number of points. I also agree with Brian Fitzpatrick that, when victims make out their statements, the compilation of information should be carefully guided and supported to ensure that, as far as possible, there is an agreed narrative. As there have been no challenges in that respect in England, the approach seems to work.  Our intention is to pilot a number of areas covered by the bill. We want to run pilot studies, to evaluate the resulting information and to come to conclusions that will allow us to progress. Sheriffs and judges are used to judging the information. It is important that we do not say to the victims, "You are going to determine the sentence." That would be wrong. However, we say that just as the person who is being convicted can make a plea in mitigation, so the victim can make a statement to the court that indicates how they feel about the crime that has been committed against them. I prefer to use the word hitting, rather than smacking. The word smacking does not appear in the bill. We are talking about hitting. I regret that I was not here for all of Mike Russell's comments; I gather I missed a bit. Nevertheless, his general approach is right: we cannot legislate alone on hitting—there has also to be effective promotion of positive parenting. If we do not do the second part, the first part will be worthless. Five European countries have a total ban on smacking or hitting and the world has not fallen in in those countries. There are a further four countries—Croatia, Cyprus, Norway and Latvia—that have also introduced a ban without a problem. We must ask ourselves how far we should go and how quickly. We have accepted that introducing an age-related ban on smacking causes difficulties that were brought out in evidence to the Justice 2 Committee. I emphasise the fact that 80 per cent plus of the public agree that we need to clarify the law—so the Tories are wrong. There has been a request for the law to be clarified and we have responded by meeting what the public want, which is a ban on hitting to the head, a ban on the use of implements and a ban on shaking. We have got it right in that respect. As a doctor, I saw children who were hit on the head and beaten with implements and the law failed to prosecute. It is not correct to say that children are properly protected. I say to Michael Russell that that is what it is about. It is not about interfering with parental rights; it is about protecting children. We will make no apology for that and we will progress in promoting active and positive parenting.

It is clear from the research that was published today, to which Jim Wallace referred, that the majority of parents in Scotland would ban smacking of one-year-olds or younger. The majority of the people who responded—positively or negatively—would also ban smacking at the age of two. We will continue to monitor  public attitudes. As they change, we will promote that as best we can. On the youth crime pilots, I emphasise the word pilots. We are not seeking to introduce the measure across the country. The legislation currently prevents us from undertaking a study whereby we can determine whether it is more effective for some people to go into the children's hearings system other than by the routes through which they can already be referred. When 16 and 17-year-olds are under supervision, they can already be retained in the system and sheriffs can refer to the hearings. We are introducing a third element: pilots in which there are adequate resources to test whether the measure is effective. The Tories have opposed the pilots, as they have opposed so much in the bill. "By virtue of the seriousness of their offences and their maturity, many young people should no doubt face the full vigour of prosecution and the sanctions which follow a guilty verdict. However, there are also among this group young offenders who are immature and for whom a programme of care and supervision" —the basic tenets of the hearings system— "under existing powers through the hearings system would be a more effective way of changing their behaviour and reducing the risk of future offending." That quotation is not of the coalition's white paper; it is of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton in 1995. Once again, we are seeing a complete change in the Tory party. Something that was promoted by the Conservatives—indeed, by their summing-up speaker today—is suddenly no longer valid. What is that about? At the risk of causing Christine Grahame difficulties, I praise the speech that she gave today. She was absolutely right to say that prison is a graduate school. Home Office research shows that it is in prison that young drug addicts form the networks that allow them to go on to become drug dealers. It would be better to shift people out of the custodial system. The committee is right to say that we must be clear about whom we intend to refer to the pilots. We will come back with that clarity, which we have failed to achieve so far. I know that a false impression was created by the initial documents, which talked about referring as many 16 and 17-year-olds as possible to the pilots. That impression is reflected in paragraph 164 of the committee's report, in which it says: "We are concerned that some of those supporting the pilot see it as a way of bringing all 16 and 17 year olds within the hearing system over time". The First Minister, the Deputy First Minister and I have repeated that the pilot will deal with petty offenders. We want people who are vulnerable, such as people with learning disabilities with  whom the family is still engaged, to become involved in that process. The children's hearings system provides supervision, which the courts do not, and the new youth crime court will provide an opportunity for intense supervision, which is not available in the adult system at present. I do not have time to deal with the many issues that have been raised. Suffice to say that, on police custody and security officers, the chief constable will retain the right to manage the situation. It is important that sheriffs feel comfortable with the arrangements, but we believe that we can introduce more cost-effective measures and that the bill gives us the opportunity to do so. On anti-social behaviour orders, we are responding to research on the initial orders. That research asked for interim orders in order to shortcut the process. As Scott Barrie said, the most effective implementation of ASBOs has taken place in Fife, where there has been good, effective mediation at the front end, followed by ASBOs. There are now some 38 ASBOs in place in Fife and they have proved to be highly effective. We are conducting further research and will strengthen the provisions on ASBOs. Johann Lamont referred to the need to protect people from anti-social neighbours. We will continue to consider the development of ASBOs, to determine whether further changes are required.

I am sorry—I am almost out of time.

I do not have time to refer to child pornography, although the provisions on that issue are an important part of the bill, nor do I have time to speak about wildlife crime, to which Alasdair Morgan referred. I assure Gil Paterson that we have not forgotten about domestic violence, which is another important issue. The Minister for Social Justice and the justice department are still considering that issue carefully. Both have discussed with Sheriff Principal Bowen the possibility of establishing domestic violence courts. We do not believe that such a move would require legislation, which is why the proposal is not in the bill. I commend the bill to the Parliament.

I was going to save my comment for my summing-up speech. The research paper that we produced in 1999 showed that 800 programmes in Scotland support parenting. Since then, we have introduced the sure start and starting well initiatives, and we are supporting the home start initiative. In the spending review, we increased substantially the money that goes into sure start. We are not offering legislation as an alternative to programmes—we are offering legislation and programmes. Mike Russell is right to say that one approach cannot succeed without the other—both approaches are needed.

rose—

Successive legislation has introduced tighter and more specific controls to tackle the carrying of knives. The police have the power to stop and search anyone on suspicion of carrying an offensive weapon and to arrest anyone who obstructs such a search. An attack with an offensive weapon is regarded under Scots law as a serious aggravation of assault and can lead to a sentence of life imprisonment on indictment in the High Court.

I do not agree with Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. However, I acknowledge the acts that tightened the laws on knives, some of which were his responsibility in the most recent Conservative Government. There are record numbers of police officers today and we have guaranteed that we will continue to maintain front-line policing. We are improving the technology that is available to police in order to improve their front-line capacity. In addition, HM Inspectorate of Constabulary is undertaking a review of the visibility of police, which we will follow up. We are keen that the police are involved in local communities. The various campaigns that they have run—which I can list for the member if he wants me to—on dealing with offensive weapons have been highly productive and have led to some of the increases in the number of convictions that we are experiencing at present.

I agree entirely with Duncan McNeil on that point. It seems to be the case, particularly in the west of Scotland, although it is also the case in other areas, that people believe that the carrying of knives is acceptable. For example Lothian and Borders Police have just carried out a search under operation avalanche. Of the 1,000 people who were searched, 102 were carrying offensive weapons. That is a frightening figure, but it is an indication that the police are doing a good job. In my area, the police are using metal detectors on clubbers in order to detect offensive weapons. We will continue to bear down on the carrying of offensive weapons, but the message must come  from this Parliament that it is not an acceptable part of our culture and it must change. The Executive will do its best to back that up.

Communities throughout Scotland are benefiting from all four pillars of our drugs strategy. The strategy is backed by about £130 million in new resources over three years. For example, our enforcement organisations are achieving excellent results in seizing the drugs that cause most harm. Treatment and rehabilitation of drug misusers helps them to reintegrate into their communities and reduces drug-related crime. Through our "know the score" communications strategy, we are giving young people and communities the opportunity to obtain factual information about the risks of drugs and about where help and advice can be obtained. This summer, the Scottish Executive and the Daily Record  launched the Scottish communities against drugs initiative—SCAD—which gave about £500,000 to 56 community groups across Scotland for anti-drug projects.

Drug treatment and testing orders have proved to be effective and we have published our evaluation of them, which has allowed us to roll out the programme. At the moment, three centres operate—in Glasgow, Fife and Aberdeen—and we have announced seven more sheriff courts in which the disposal will soon  be available. However, there are staffing issues and the evaluation showed us that, if the disposal is to be effective, we need to have appropriate staff levels. There are some constraints on us, but we will roll out the initiative as soon as we can.

I met the Aberdeenshire drug action team while the Parliament was in Aberdeen and we have had further discussions. There are particular problems in Aberdeen that need to be addressed. Contrary to rumour, I spent the summer meeting drug action teams throughout Scotland and have found that effective working partnerships are being established and capacity is being built. I will not deny that there are particular problems in the Grampian area that are related to cocaine and to getting quick treatment. We are aware of those problems and will address them.

I, too, congratulate Karen Gillon on securing the debate for the first meeting of the parliamentary year. It is appropriate and I feel privileged to be the minister who will answer. The Executive is concerned about attacks on all emergency services workers and I join members in totally condemning such attacks. We want those who are involved to be apprehended by the police and dealt with firmly by the appropriate body, whether by children's hearings or courts. I take the point that reports should go to children's hearings on such matters. The youth justice action points should encompass that area—I will return to that issue later. Members have mentioned the fact that the public have a key role. The public—not least parents—must recognise what is happening and help to address the problem. Where are parents when children are out creating mayhem? What is happening in that situation? Are the parents having the problems addressed that are being created by those young people? As members have said, it is often very young people who are creating the problems. Angus MacKay was Deputy Minister for Justice and was succeeded by Iain Gray. Angus MacKay referred to the attack in Braid Hills, which was particularly unpleasant. Other members have referred to a variety of attacks in their constituencies. We are all aware of what is going on. It is unacceptable, wherever it takes place. I will go to the east end of Glasgow to see the crew that were involved in the attack a few weeks ago. I will make it my business to publicise our condemnation and the Parliament's condemnation of the attacks. The situation is certainly not getting better. The issue of attacks on firefighters was recognised by Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, who formed a  working party to examine the issue of protection from assault for emergency workers in 1996. That has led to several changes, particularly in relation to the police but also in other services. Those changes include the recording of attacks on police, the introduction of better clothing for police and the introduction of CS spray, which is now universal across all forces. Perhaps a result of those changes is illustrated by the fact that the number of attacks on police has gone down. The figure of 8,600 attacks in 2001 was a decrease from 10,000 the year before. There is a slight rise in the figure this year, but that is nevertheless a fairly significant drop. That drop may or may not be associated with CS spray. Many steps have been taken as a result of the working party's report, but more needs to be done. Good practice on protection from assault, information about potential trouble spots and procedures for dealing with specific problems, such as contamination from hypodermic syringes and training techniques on means of dealing with aggression, are being introduced across many of the services to which members have referred. One of the steps that was taken, to which members have referred, concerned strengthened glass. Paragraph 3.3 of a circular that was issued in 1997 stated that all new appliances should be fitted with the appropriate safety glass and that, where possible, there should be retrofitting of other vehicles, although it was recognised that that would be expensive. It also stated that the equipment in the firefighting unit should be properly locked and lockable. However, this is about people rather than machines. If machines are damaged that is one thing, but damaging people is totally unacceptable and must be addressed. Margo MacDonald said that there is not a simple, one-off solution. We will not give up on public broadcasting, but we will consider it and focus it. We will assess its value and impact, and ensure that it is properly focused. We are bringing in youth schemes and evaluating schemes that already exist. We are using a proportion of our community fire safety budget to assist brigades to tackle related issues such as juvenile fire setting, which has been mentioned, the discouragement of hoax calls—which are unacceptable in all the public services—and to carry out other work with schools. I learned the other night, when I was out with my local police in Tullibody in my constituency, about the school watch scheme that operates round each school in our area because of arson attacks on schools. I am sure that other members could refer to that issue. I am sorry that Paul Martin has left the chamber. He referred to anti-social behaviour generally and the links to neighbourhood schemes. My feeling is  that we need to have a sense of the fact that the firefighting service and other emergency services are the community's services. They are owned by and belong to the community. If communities understand that, we will be able to transmit to young people that their behaviour is unacceptable. Restorative justice approaches are one way in which young people can be shown the consequences of their sometimes apparently harmless disorder, such as throwing stones. They think that that is fun but it is not fun; there are victims. We must help them to address that. Let us be sanguine about the matter; there are children who are particularly difficult to get to. The saddest aspect of the matter, to which many members have referred, is that it is not just the firefighters that are subject to attack. It is also the police, ambulance drivers, accident and emergency workers, social workers, bus drivers and railway drivers. All those groups are subject to attack. That is unacceptable. My son works in an accident and emergency department. He has described to me in graphic detail attacks that have been made on him and on the nurses with whom he works. He is abused almost daily in accident and emergency. That did not occur to nearly the same extent when I practised in accident and emergency. Last year, HM fire service inspectorate began the process of requiring brigades to submit details of the number and type of attacks. Until we know the extent of the problem, we cannot gauge how to respond and we cannot see whether, as members feel, the problem is developing or whether it has been with us for some time. I mentioned that the figures for attacks on police have fallen slightly. There were 176 attacks on ambulances in 2001 and 181 attacks in 2002. Those figures show a slight rise, but they are fairly stable. Ninety-six patients were removed from GPs' lists because of violence. We have heard about the figures for attacks on the Lothian and Borders fire brigade. We are collecting statistics for a purpose. When we get the statistics, we will decide how to address the issue in individual areas. There are policies and procedures for health and safety, risk assessments and operational technical notes for civil disturbances and minor disorders—to which Karen Gillon referred—and briefings with the aim of providing crews with information on operational risks, which include the potential for violent attacks. There are also community safety initiatives to bring young people on board by way of fire cadets and other measures. The debate has shown once again that the Parliament is serious in its intent. I will examine the work of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's working party, check whether its recommendations have been fully implemented and consider  whether further measures are necessary. In due course, I will report back to members on how we are making progress in dealing with this element of youth disorder. I commend members on the debate.  Meeting closed at 18:02.

I congratulate Christine Grahame on obtaining this members' business debate. We welcome the opportunity to discuss the future of Peebles sheriff court, which is clearly a matter of local concern. The debate provides an opportunity for those concerns to be aired and the facts of the matter to be discussed. Before I respond to some of the direct challenges from members, I will establish some facts about the matter that may help us to set the issue in context. It was some three years ago that the sheriff principal of Lothian and Borders undertook a consultation exercise on sheriff court provision in East Lothian and the Borders. His concern was the organisation and distribution of court business in the area. One option covered by that consultation was the closure of Peebles sheriff court and the transfer of business to Edinburgh.  However, in the light of the representations that he received, the sheriff principal concluded that the court should remain open. The potential limited savings from closure did not, in his view, outweigh the disadvantages. I believe that the projected savings were about £114,000 to £120,000. The Scottish Executive accepted the sheriff principal's recommendations. As members indicated, in a debate on 12 January 2000 my predecessor, Angus MacKay, made it clear that Scottish ministers would not close the court. Court business has continued to be dealt with in Peebles until recently. However, circumstances can and do change and when they do we sometimes have to reconsider previous decisions. In the case of Peebles sheriff court, a routine maintenance inspection in November 2001 revealed an infestation of dry rot in the building. On further examination, it was confirmed that that was sufficiently extensive to call into question the safety of parts of the building. The suggestion that the building was deliberately neglected was not worthy of the debate.

I know that Christine Grahame quoted someone else, but I think that the job of MSPs is to filter such remarks. I think that that particular remark is a slur on the court service and I rebut it. Given the threat to the health and safety of those using the courthouse, the Scottish Court Service had no choice but temporarily to close the court and transfer the business elsewhere. Having examined the available options for continuing to run the court in Peebles, the Scottish Court Service concluded that a transfer of the business to Selkirk sheriff court was the only viable alternative that allowed access to all necessary facilities. Thus, since December 2001, all Peebles business has been successfully dealt with at Selkirk. The Scottish Court Service commissioned a full investigation of the problem at Peebles to determine the extent and potential cost of remedial repairs. It also commissioned a feasibility study to examine the cost of bringing the courthouse to modern standards as far as the building allows that to happen. Murray Tosh suggested rightly that that interesting building—which, I gather, is B listed, although I accept the point about it having Crown immunity—is not amenable to the full extent of the modern standards that we seek. The issue is not just about disabled access, to which Christine Grahame rightly alluded, but about the separation of witnesses, appropriate custody arrangements and several other matters that are important to a modern custodial system.  The detailed examination of the building confirmed that considerable work would be needed to bring the court back into operation and that the cost of work to remove and eradicate the dry rot and prevent its recurrence would amount to some £400,000. However, that would not secure any improvement in court facilities, but would simply make the building workable again. The cost of a scheme for the full renovation and repair of the building, including better facilities for witnesses and other court users, some provision for disabled access and a limited custody suite, would amount to about £1 million. Given the nature of the building, which severely limits the options that are available, even that substantial investment would not deliver a modern courthouse. The courthouse would still lack a number of facilities that are considered essential nowadays for the safe and secure operation of court business. The simple reality is that Peebles sheriff courthouse—although it is a fine historic building—no longer meets the requirements of a modern court and cannot be adapted to that standard. That may be a matter for regret—I am sure that it is; Ian Jenkins indicated that the citizens of Peebles will regret that fact—but it is a fact that we must consider. The building will remain and will, I hope, be used for other purposes. Members have argued strongly for the continuation of court business at Peebles. I understand their concern that justice should continue to be delivered locally. However, although it may be convenient to call for more investment at any price, the Scottish Executive cannot ignore its responsibility to ensure that the funds that the Parliament makes available are used in ways that provide value for money. We have a duty to balance local interests with the more general interests of taxpayers. In light of the volume of business that the Peebles court conducts, it is very difficult—not to say impossible—to see how investment on the scale that is required to re-open it can be justified. As members know, the justice department has been given some money, which the Minister for Finance and Public Services announced yesterday. That money includes £3 million for modernising the courts. However, there are really serious problems at some of the courts—such as Stirling and Kirkcaldy, which are very busy courts—and in other parts of the estate that need to be addressed. The broader requirements of providing justice to all our citizens sometimes have to take precedence over the understandable desires of local citizens to maintain the tradition of justice being served in their immediate locality. I fully understand the situation that local members present. However, change is a fact of  life and an unwillingness to consider any change does not justify substantial public funds being spent to maintain the status quo. If the level of business at the court were significant, one would have to consider seriously the possibility of a modern court. A crucial fact to consider is that the courthouse operated significantly under capacity, even in its present condition, until it was closed in December. It sat one day per week for less than two hours on average. In 2000-01, it sat for a little over 100 hours in the full year. I estimate that, including capital charges, the costs of running the courthouse, if £1 million was spent to bring it close to, but not actually up to modern standards, would approach £200,000 for 100 hours of justice. That is a hugely expensive undertaking. The court heard only 10 summary trials and two jury trials in 2000-01. In 2001-02, Peebles sheriff court business took up some 80 hours of court time, with seven summary trials and no jury trials being heard. Even the amount of court time used has been reducing, which—as Ian Jenkins said—is to be welcomed.

I will write to Christine Grahame on that once I have clarified it. However, I have been advised that the amount of court time used was a little over 100 hours in 2000-01 and some 85 hours in 2001-02. Other court business is also well below the levels that are needed to justify the continued presence of a courthouse at Peebles. I have examined the distribution of courts. Dumfries and Galloway, which is a large area, has three courts. The Borders, respecting the tradition of the county boundaries, has four courts. They are there because of the history, but if we were starting from scratch, would we have four courts in the Borders? I confirm that we have no intention of developing a supercourt. That is correct. We intend to maintain Jedburgh sheriff court, the Duns extension from Jedburgh and the Selkirk sheriff court. Given the change in circumstances and the low level of business transacted at the court, it is only right that the question of how court services are delivered to the people of Peebles and Tweeddale should now be re-examined. As I said, the volume  of business at the court does not justify the investment that would be needed to bring the current courthouse back into operation. Neither would it support the provision of a new full courthouse in Peebles. Instead, we need to examine other options and to consult the local community, so that its views can be taken into account before a final decision is made. Accordingly, the Deputy First Minister has asked the Scottish Court Service to consult on three options for future provision: first, transferring the full business of the court from Peebles to Edinburgh sheriff court; secondly, transferring the full business of the court permanently to Selkirk sheriff court; and thirdly, providing for summary criminal business to be heard at Peebles, if suitable alternative accommodation can be leased for that purpose, with the remainder of the business being transferred to Selkirk or Edinburgh. If I interpreted what he was saying correctly, Kenny MacAskill appeared to suggest that the third option should be considered. The options recognise that the capacity exists in both Edinburgh and Selkirk sheriff courts to take over Peebles business. The temporary arrangements at Selkirk have worked successfully since they were introduced and could continue. Such an approach would have the advantage of retaining business within the Borders, rather than displacing it to Edinburgh—which was a concern when this issue was raised previously. On the other hand, ministers recognise the strong local feeling that sheriff court cases should continue to be heard in Peebles, if possible. As Christine Grahame pointed out, investigations have not yet revealed a suitable venue that would provide the space and security that is necessary to hold trials. However, if the local community can identify such a venue, the Scottish Court Service is willing to discuss with Scottish Borders Council, the police and other partners in the justice system whether that venue can be used as and when required by the court. The Minister for Justice has asked the Scottish Court Service to issue a consultation paper as soon as possible setting out the background to the problem, detailing what the court requires of an alternative venue in Peebles, and seeking the views of court users and the public more generally on the options available. I assure members that we will give very careful consideration to the views that are expressed. On the previous occasion that this issue was debated, Angus MacKay said: "At the same time, the principle of value for money has to be a factor in this part of the public service, as it is in any other. Sheriff Principal Nicholson has acted responsibly in undertaking a thorough review of the provision of courts in the Borders and East Lothian, which both come within his  sheriffdom. I strongly commend his approach"— [ Official Report , 12 January 2000; Vol 4, c 62.]

I do not know Peebles very well, although I have been to the Peebles Hotel Hydro on a number of occasions. I should not advertise in the Parliament, but I enjoyed my time there. I have, however, examined photographs of Peebles and know that the courthouse is situated at the bottom of the high street, next to a church, and that it has a very prominent view. The courthouse is an important building for Peebles. I cannot give the member any guaranteed undertakings, but I know that the Scottish Court Service will want to ensure that the building is marketed in a way that will allow it to be brought into effective use. As Murray Tosh indicated, we understand that the cost of dealing with the dry rot will be offset against the purchase price paid by any future user. However, Ian Jenkins is right—in effect, we are saying that the courthouse cannot be brought up to standard.  There are no plans to centralise court provision in the Borders. The recent speculation in the press is without foundation and tantamount to scaremongering. When people whinge all the time about the Borders, instead of talking about the good things that are happening down there, that undermines the confidence of people in the area. The Scottish Executive is committed to improving access to justice. Contrary to the impression that some members have given, the problem in Peebles does not lend itself to an easy solution. We need to take a realistic and hard-headed approach, and to show a willingness to seek innovative solutions that continue to provide cost-effective services to all court users. We will carry out the consultation to which I referred.

The Executive is delighted that the agreement that we reached with the information commissioner is resulting in an increase in referrals to Victim Support Scotland. The Executive has given a commitment to monitor funding, against the background of the steady increase in funding that VSS has received year on year.

Victim Support Scotland receives the largest section 10 grant awarded by the Scottish Executive. Last year core funding was increased by 5 per cent. Funding for local services was increased by 10 per cent, bringing total funding to £1.37 million. The training budget was  increased by 23 per cent. That illustrates the fact that we are working in partnership with Victim Support Scotland. I ask the Parliament to acknowledge the work that volunteers throughout Scotland do in this extremely important area.

I welcome the contributions from two thirds of the chamber. The common sense that members have displayed in their interventions and speeches demonstrates that this is an area in which a Sewel motion is entirely appropriate and should be used. The fact that the bill is in the House of Lords is irrelevant, because that is where it began. The intention is to complete by the end of July, but even if there were slippage—

No, I want to finish my point. The member should remember that although the Scottish Parliament is going into recess now, it is probable that the Westminster Parliament will not go into recess until the end of July. We return in September and Westminster returns in October. One point that the SNP has failed to address is that of consistency. I am glad to hear that SNP members would be happy to take drafting instructions from the Home Office, which was the implication. However, drafting instructions do not mean that there will not be amendments at a later stage at Westminster, which means that we could end up with an inconsistency between our law and the law there. If there was such an inconsistency, and if a single sex offender got through it, the SNP  would be responsible for it, not us. The SNP has failed to answer that point.

I cannot give an absolute guarantee. The SNP's assumption that the Northern Ireland Assembly and the UK Government are any less concerned about the situation than we are is an affront to those Assemblies. The SNP has failed to understand and answer the question of consistency and it has failed to address the situation. I challenge the SNP to vote in favour of the Sewel motion. The SNP should understand that if it does not, we will tell every community in Scotland that it is putting constitutional wrangling before the protection of the public, because that is the truth of the matter. For Michael Matheson to compare the Erskine bridge tolls with the protection of the public and issues relating to sex offenders is an affront that will not go unnoticed or unchallenged. I suggest to the SNP and its leadership that they stop addressing Sewel motions on the same basis every time and consider each Sewel motion individually. We could then have a rational discussion. The SNP should not oppose this Sewel motion and if it does, we will make it pay.

May I take it from the member's comments that, in an SNP-governed independent  Scotland, the movement of UK citizens would be prohibited?

On 30 January, the Scottish Parliament approved a Sewel motion on the Police Reform Bill. Today's supplementary motion concerns some additional specific provisions to close a loophole in the existing sex offender order system and to do so in a way that is consistent across the United Kingdom. The need for that consistency is why it makes sense in this case to deal with this legislation in the UK Parliament. To do otherwise would mean continuation for a period of the current position under which sex offender orders that are made in one part of the UK are not enforceable in another part of the UK, and a delay in changes to introduce greater flexibility to the application process. I do not believe that either of those results would be in the public interest. We have a duty to do all that we can to protect individuals, families and communities. Not to approve these provisions would be to take an unacceptable risk with people's lives. Members might remember the publicity surrounding a certain case earlier this year. In that case, an individual who was subject to a sex offender order in England moved to Scotland. That order did not apply in Scotland and the police here had to seek a new order. They did so quickly and effectively and with the minimum of fuss. However, suppose another offender, also subject to an order, were to come across the border unannounced. There would be nothing to stop that individual doing in Scotland what he has been banned from doing south of the border. That is the legal loophole that we want to close.

I am grateful to the member for raising that highly specious point that is the basis of the SNP's opposition to the motion. If we dealt with this matter with a separate bill, we would go through a consultation process and the committee stages, which would take an equal length of time to the time that is being taken by the UK legislation. More important, if our measure came into effect before the UK legislation and was not wholly consistent with it, there would be an  opportunity for sex offenders to move across the border and we would have to amend the act further. On both those grounds, this is, par excellence, a situation in which the Sewel motion should apply. The bill offers the quickest way to close the legal loophole in a way that covers the whole of the UK. That is the right way forward. I am pleased that agreement has been reached quickly between the Scottish Executive, the Home Office and the Northern Ireland Office. I point out to Mr Adam that it is important that consistency is achieved not only with England but with Northern Ireland, because, although there are 170 sexual offenders to whom the order applies in England, there could be a small number in Northern Ireland as well and we would have no idea about it. There is no doubt about the fact that dealing with the matter through a Sewel motion is the right way forward. As members will be aware, a sex offender is defined as someone who has been convicted of an offence to which part 1 of the Sex Offenders Act 1997 applies, or an equivalent offence abroad. Sex offender orders were introduced in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 and form an important tool in the management of the most dangerous sex offenders who are living in the community. If a sex offender has acted in a way that gives reasonable cause to believe that such an order is necessary to protect the public from serious harm from him, the police can apply for an order. The trigger behaviour concerned—such as a sex offender talking to children in public playgrounds—may not amount to an offence that could be prosecuted in its own right, but it must give the police cause for concern. At present, an application for an order in Scotland is made to a sheriff whose sheriffdom includes any place where it is alleged that the offender has acted in a way that gives reasonable cause to believe that an order is necessary. Under the present arrangements, once an order is in effect, a complaint must be made by the police or the offender to the court that originally granted the order for it to be varied or discharged. The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 created separate provisions for sex offender orders in England and Wales and in Scotland. Orders are also provided for separately in legislation for Northern Ireland. While the existing system works well for the majority of offenders who are subject to a sex offender order, it has become clear that some real problems can arise when the police have to deal with offenders who move from one part of the country to another or between the separate jurisdictions of the UK. The changes that are now being proposed across the UK will give the police, including the  Scottish police service, greater flexibility in how they apply for sex offender orders and how the orders are amended and discharged. The provisions also extend the jurisdiction of sex offender orders to the United Kingdom as a whole. As a result, the revised system could prohibit the doing of anything anywhere in the United Kingdom, instead of being limited to the jurisdiction in which the orders are created. While some of the prohibitions may relate to specific localities, others may be more general and relevant wherever the offender might be. Breach of any such prohibition, wherever that may occur in the United Kingdom, would be an offence that would be prosecutable in the place in which the breach occurs. We believe that the use of the Sewel system in this instance is entirely appropriate. It is the best way of achieving our common objectives from the point of view of both consistency and reasonable speed. I move, That the Parliament endorses the principle that sex offenders orders made in one jurisdiction within the United Kingdom should be recognised and enforceable throughout the UK with appropriate provisions in place concerning how the orders are applied for, amended and discharged, and agrees that the relevant provisions to achieve these ends should be considered by the UK Parliament in the Police Reform Bill.

The chief constable of Strathclyde Police has not indicated to the Executive that his force is in need of any such assistance. Although the execution of warrants is a matter for chief constables, we are always prepared to discuss ways of improving the administration of justice.

Let me put this in perspective for members. Some 70 per cent of cases are fixed penalties and most will be actioned in due course. At present, the courts may apply to the Department for Work and Pensions to make a deduction from the personal allowance of a single claimant. Decisions on whether a fine should be repaid in that way are for that department to decide. Regarding the fine, the courts are required to take into account the circumstances of the individual. The number of outstanding fines has been reduced by 33 per cent in the sheriff courts and by 41 per cent in the district courts, and the number of fixed penalties has been reduced by 50 per cent. Therefore, this is a diminishing problem.

The benefits of prescribing methadone are well established in the research literature. They include improvements to the general health of drug misusers, who no longer inject illegal drugs; stabilisation of chaotic lifestyles, with consequent improvements to social and family life; and reduced criminal activity.

In some areas, some clinicians have a tendency to prescribe lower doses than are necessary to eliminate the cravings of drug addicts. It is important that stabilisation of the individual is achieved first; beyond that, it is important that we move people on. That is why, in Aberdeen the other day, we announced another £10 million from the new opportunities fund to provide education and skills training to move people on—and off addiction, which is undoubtedly the next step.

The member is absolutely correct to say that rehabilitation is vital. Last night, I launched the Fife NHS addiction services in Kirkcaldy. What impressed me about those services is the degree to which they have integrated the methadone treatment to which Mr Adam referred and the rehabilitation to which Trish Godman referred. Only through partnership and by integrating the services will we achieve a return to normal life for addicts. Each service is crucial in playing its part.

The effective interventions unit in the health department, with which I work closely, is about to publish a study on the effectiveness of opiate services in Scotland. That study has been completed and will be published shortly. It comes on the back of a publication from Grampian—the region that the member represents—by the University of Aberdeen's health services research unit, which demonstrates the effectiveness of methadone as a stabilisation method. We are working on that.

We have no plans to review our current drugs strategy. We have provided significant new resources. Diverse local needs and priorities are increasingly being met through local partnership in Scotland's 22 drug action teams. Within the overall framework of the strategy, we constantly develop and implement new approaches to meet changing patterns of drug use and other problems. Examples of that include drugs courts, support for children of drug-misusing parents and our "Know the Score" communication strategy. Drugs courts are proving to be successful at the pilot stage, which is why we are considering their adoption as a model for youth courts.

The precise nature of the  provision in the north-east is a matter for the drug action teams in that area. The Executive is aware of the higher ratio of the use of crack cocaine to that of cocaine in Grampian and the high level of heroin injectors among young people in that area. As Mr Adam said, we have changed the basis of the funding formula so that it takes account of the number of drug misusers in an area. That is based on the research that we produced. As I announced in Aberdeen the other day, further funds are available through the New Opportunities Fund and will also be distributed on the basis of needs on the ground.

Elaine Thomson will be aware that, when I was in Aberdeen, I opened the drug treatment and testing order office. Its initial success has been very impressive, as is the work of the staff in the office. DTTOs are important and we are developing them. At present, there are two pilot drugs courts. One is in an urban setting in Glasgow and the other is in a less urban setting in Fife. We must evaluate fully those pilots before we roll out the scheme to other cities. Clearly, as Aberdeen is the third city and is doing well on DTTOs, it must be in the running.

Various figures have been bandied about.

I have not read the report in The Economist , but I know that it is recognised that as far as street crime or other such elements are concerned, a saving of between £3 and £6 or £7 can be made by putting money into treatment, depending on the model that is used. However, we need a balanced programme, which means that  enforcement is equally important. The Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency is proving to be highly effective in disrupting the supply of drugs and indeed is being considered as a model elsewhere in the UK. That said, we will continue to develop our treatment and rehabilitation programmes. In fact, as the member knows, we are in the middle of a major expansion of such programmes.

Since 1996, we have awarded nearly £10.3 million to 161 CCTV projects across Scotland. Last October, we announced details of a new community safety partnership award programme that supersedes both the CCTV and community challenge competitions. That initiative started on 1 April 2002. The new scheme will give all local authority-led community safety partnerships a share of £12 million over the next three years for local community safety partnership initiatives. It is for those partnerships to determine their own local priorities, which could of course include the installation and maintenance of CCTV systems.

Although CCTV undoubtedly plays its part, it is still only one aspect of the development of appropriate community safety measures. That should be done in partnership with local authorities and in turn with their partners in community safety partnerships. As a result, it should be up to them to decide precisely how the money is spent. In the member's area, the Lothian partnerships will receive a total of £583,000 in 2002-03. If they choose to use some of that money on CCTV installation and maintenance, that is up to them.

Fife as a whole, part of which the member represents, is receiving £202,000 this year—the community to which she referred may care to talk to the community safety partnership about that. Fife is impressive as one of the pilot areas. The CCTV systems have been hard-wired  into the police headquarters in Glenrothes. I looked at the system the other day and was impressed by the fact that that will mean an even greater ability to respond to CCTVs in Fife.

The member mentioned the success of CCTV. A study found that, out of 1,000 cases that were brought, only 95 were unsuccessful—CCTV systems are therefore highly successful. Christine Grahame's area has a grant of £92,000 to upgrade CCTVs. She should have discussions again with the local community safety partnership on how that money should best be spent.

I will make two points about that. First, the sum for Argyll and Bute is £84,000. I know that there is a problem in respect of rural communities. A number of community safety partnerships are choosing to use their funds on mobile cameras, which are not permanent and can play a part in rural areas. Nobody knows whether such cameras are in place or not and that creates uncertainty among the criminal fraternity. That is important. Measures can therefore be taken. Secondly, upgrading systems is again a matter for local areas. However, we have increased the total grant by 25 per cent from last year to this year.

It was set up in 1972.

The member is being slightly unfair. Paul Martin and Duncan McNeil will tell him that, in the first two constituencies that I visited after becoming a minister, I walked the streets, I had no civil servants with me and I was not cordoned by police. What Bill Aitken is saying is completely untrue. In the next few weeks, I will visit a further three constituencies, where the same arrangements will pertain.

On the whole, the debate has been useful. Members have made many valuable points. We must take a cool and considered look at the problem. It is important that we do not talk about soft or hard alternatives; we need to talk about what is effective in addressing the problems that we face. Roseanna Cunningham got it absolutely right when she talked about the problems of petty crime—graffiti, litter, eggs thrown against walls and balls kicked against windows—and the harassment and abuse that adults who remonstrate with offending youngsters experience. Such actions do not come through into the system as offending behaviour—that is one of the problems. They are not major offences, but youngsters who act in that way are committing offences against the society in which they live. They represent the sort of low-level problems that are sometimes not even logged by the police. If they are logged, they are not taken through the system. That is a problem. At the other end of the scale, there is another problem to which George Lyon and James Douglas-Hamilton referred, which is the issue of serious and persistent offenders. The number of people who commit 10 or more offences has risen by 40 per cent in the past 10 years. We do not know whether those are repeated offences or a series of one-off offences—the statistics are not good enough to give us that information. To our Conservative colleagues, I say that the increase has been only 5 per cent since 1995 and that the bulk of that increase came during the last major recession in the Tory years. It is a problem that we must all now face and have to deal with. However, we should not deal with it through the use of secure accommodation. I thought that Michael Matheson's speech was excellent; I could not disagree with most of what he said. Nonetheless, to double the amount of secure accommodation is not the answer. That would cost between £10 million and £15 million a year to run, when the outcomes from secure accommodation are, to be frank, not much better than those from young offenders prisons. There would still be high levels of recidivism. As Christine Grahame said, we must provide a range of accommodation and facilities—which must be mainly community based—such as the intensive supported fostering to which Liberal Democrat colleagues alluded and which is run by Barnardo's in my constituency. That initiative takes children who would have been placed in secure accommodation and keeps them in the community and in a family setting with massive support. Christine Grahame made a point about funding  streams and funding arrangements; we are considering those. Several units are already separating young men and women, and we are beginning to address that issue. We must re-examine carefully the secure accommodation system and consider what will work and what is appropriate. However, I do not think that the answer is to double the number of places in secure accommodation. I have very little time and it is difficult to cover all the issues. Several members raised the issue of confidence in the hearings system and in the police, which is being eroded because of the problem level of petty offending to which I referred. At the moment, "no action" is recorded in 70 per cent of cases that are referred to the children's hearings system. However, that does not mean that no action is taken; it means that there is diversion by the reporter into programmes or referral to social work services. Indeed, even before young people enter the children's hearings system, there are police restorative justice systems. We have established a programme to develop restorative and reparative justice systems and 16 local authorities are carrying out mediation and reparation programmes.

Kenny Gibson also mentioned the speed that is necessary in justice systems for young people. If they are to address their offending behaviour, they need to remember what their offending behaviour was. However, 60 per cent of those who are referred to the hearings system do not return to it; therefore, to say that it does not work is wrong. There is no doubt that we need to re-examine the system carefully, but we will have better information to allow us to do that. To our Conservative colleagues, I say that there is little that a court can do that the children's hearings system cannot do by way of disposals—the difference between the two is minimal. We do not have time to debate the question of 16 and 17-year-olds, but I will go on record on two issues. First, I do not want a system in which the procurator fiscal and the reporter do not have the opportunity to discuss a case and decide on an individual's vulnerability. The people I want to see in the pilot schemes are vulnerable people, petty offenders and people who have significant problems that could be dealt with better in a family setting, with their family being brought together. Secondly, although juvenile courts might be an  alternative I inform our Conservative colleagues that the juvenile courts system in England is a disaster. Even with fast tracking, it is an absolute disaster, and they look with considerable envy at the hearings system, even with its flaws. England looks with considerable envy at our children's hearings system, despite its flaws. To suggest that courts are going to be the solution is not the answer. I am out of time and I am sorry that I have not been able to address the points that were raised by other members. I conclude by saying that we must have effective programmes. There are lists of them; those that were brought to my attention by Paul Martin and Duncan McNeil when I visited their constituencies are excellent. We will examine what works and we will use programmes that work. We have given a commitment that by 2007—although that date might need to be reviewed—there will be programmes for every persistent offender. We will have evaluated those programmes and they will work. The Executive is committed to changing the situation. It has put considerable funds into that and will continue to do so. I urge members to support our amendment.

I accept that 14 young people in adult prisons is too many. However, those young  people are placed there for only a very short time, until they can be placed in secure accommodation; it is a holding situation. I accept that that is unacceptable, but in most instances it is for only a short time.

If runaways have committed serious offences, they should be put into secure accommodation. However, I am concerned by the member's suggestion that runaways should go into secure accommodation. That is not what it is for.

That is a lie.

The Lord Advocate will review the matter and ensure that serious cases are treated appropriately. Cases must be considered individually to determine whether they should be referred to a children's panel. For example, an individual with severe but temporary mental health problems might be sent to a panel. Is David McLetchie saying that such cases must go to the courts? Should not the family be involved, as happens in the children's hearings system? David McLetchie's point is spurious.

We are building on the progress that has already been made both in modernising the structural arrangements for the delivery of the service and in improving the range and quality of community disposals. That is supported by a 50 per cent cash increase in funding over the three years to 2003-04.

The SPS was trying to introduce a new measure in order to get the best quality social work for the prison system. When such new measures are introduced, it is important to remember that we must examine them closely. The evaluation of that new pilot is with my officials and I expect it to be published in the near future. It is important that we consider the evaluation carefully before we develop the proposal in any way. It is vital that social work in the community and in the prison service work to the same sort of standards. We are moving strongly in that direction.

It is important that the justice system is integrated and that it works to the same standards for young people and adults. The division between the two is sometimes false. It is important to apply even standards in our programmes to treat offending behaviour and in the evaluation of those programmes. I will take up discussions with my colleague and with the education department.

The matter is not about matching the prison service, but about matching resources appropriately in order to treat offending behaviour. Prison should be used only when public safety is an issue. It is important to treat offenders across the board. The problem is that a number of community disposals are being tried, because they need to be evaluated properly before they can be rolled out. However, many are being rolled out across the country. In the case of drug treatment and testing orders, the evaluation concluded that that disposal is highly successful. We will in due course draw together work on those disposals.

Mr Gallie has a point—[ Interruption. ]

As I said, Mr Gallie has a point—albeit a small one. The important issue is to draw everything together. It is true that there are distinct variations in how areas use community service orders, which might reflect the fact that the number of breaches in some areas is higher than in others. The problem is that community service orders were introduced during the pre-drug era, and many who are now subject to them are initially not fit enough to carry them out. We think that a better approach is to have a combination of orders that will be delivered mainly through probation orders. That said, we are examining the matter closely.

The Executive is of the view that imprisonment for fine default should be a last resort. We are actively promoting the use of supervised attendance orders by the courts as an alternative to fines and will consider carefully any recommendations on fine default that emerge from the current review of summary justice.

The answers to the first two parts of Bill Aitken's question are no and no. The custodial orders and their alternatives are working extremely well and are used highly effectively by many courts. Nonetheless, I refer to my answer to an earlier question, which was that we need to consider whether certain people are able to carry out community service orders. There are some problems with SAOs, and we will address those in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. I inform Bill Aitken that 85 per cent of fines that are imposed by the district courts are paid and that the courts have powers, with certain restrictions, to work with the Department of Work and Pensions to deduct fines from a person's allowances. That power already exists for the courts, but it is restricted to ensure that individuals do not suffer and can still meet their necessary personal expenditure.

I do not have the figures for today, but yesterday there were no women prisoners in Cornton Vale prison for fine default. That is to be welcomed by all members. However, the last annual report showed that there were some 500 to 600 fine receptions into Cornton Vale, although they were for very short periods. The disruption that is caused by such receptions is unacceptable. The report "A Better Way" has set the Executive the challenging target of halving that number over the next few years. Through a number of measures, we will seek to achieve that reasonable objective.

Does Mr Swinney acknowledge that more than a year ago the Executive put £25 million into a four-year programme to tackle youth crime through a programme of restorative and reparative justice and that therefore to suggest that we are responding to the issue immediately is sheer mischief-making?

Like other members, I congratulate Richard Lochhead on securing this debate. It is  appropriate that we should have it today, although we will probably need to return to the issue and have a broader debate on drugs and drug policy in the future. However, as usual with members' business debates, this debate has been very useful and many important points have been made. The fact that the Executive has committed £130 million in additional funding over three years is a testament to our determination to try to sort out the problems that have been mentioned and to ensure that treatment and rehabilitation are available. I am sanguine about the results that we are achieving. I realise that the problems are significant and that we will not be able to make major changes overnight. That said, we are making significant advances.

The Home Affairs Committee's report is interesting and we will need to examine it. As Margo MacDonald is aware, certain matters are reserved, but we will consider the implementation of any policy in a Scottish context. I want to examine the extent of the problem in the north-east and to try to put it in some perspective. Although 5,400 drug misusers were involved in the McKeganey research, Irene McGugan raised an interesting point when she said that, because Aberdeen has younger injecters, there is a growing problem in the area. The Executive recognises that that increase is a significant problem for Aberdeen. I should point out that the number of deaths is down slightly from 1999. Furthermore, the rate of deaths in this area—at 5.9 per 100,000—is less than Glasgow's rate of 11.5 per 100,000 and Argyll and Clyde's rate of 7.3 per 100,000. Nevertheless, as Shona Robison pointed out, Dundee has the second-highest level of drugs misuse. We should be very clear that the Executive has substantially increased the resources for Grampian, as it has done for every area. The £750,000 increase in funding for treatment, which has been ring fenced on the national health service side of the funding streams, means that there should be significant improvements.

Christine Grahame makes an important point. We need to examine the problem in an holistic way. If she had been a fly on the wall at the seminars and meetings that I have been attending over the past three months, she would know that I have hammered home time and again the fact that the agencies cannot exist in silos. If we do not join them up, we are bound to fail. However, all the resourcing streams that we are putting in are to be joined up through the drug action teams. Those teams are sometimes also called drug and alcohol action teams and in that respect they are already joined up in every area except, for specific reasons, in Glasgow and Edinburgh. In some areas, the DATs also deal with smoking and I strongly welcome that. The Home Affairs Committee heard evidence from a number of individuals that, if there is a gateway process, tobacco, alcohol and cannabis can all act as that gateway. We must join everything up; I believe that that is important. I work closely with my ministerial colleagues who have responsibility for health. The interventions unit covers alcohol, smoking and drugs. We have joined that up and we are making a major effort. DATs are central to delivery, but we know that the public do not see them—they are almost invisible, as our research has demonstrated. We are monitoring the DATs. We asked them to produce an annual business plan and we talked to them about the form of that plan, so that it is not bureaucratic. We give individual feedback to the DATs, to take account of the fact that, as Keith Raffan said, they are moving at differing speeds and levels of ability. We have put money into funding the co-ordinators who link in with the DATs, to give them a measure of stability so that they are not just talking shops, as they used to be. We are endeavouring and pushing hard to ensure that communities are involved in the DATs along with voluntary organisations and users.

I thank Brian Adam for that helpful intervention, which allows me to make a point that  I missed out. At the moment, the NHS gets funding for DATs essentially according to the Arbuthnott formula. I know how the north-east feels about the Arbuthnott formula, as I was a member of the Health and Community Care Committee when we debated the matter at length. There are arguments about Grampian, but I know that the area was not one of the winners from the Arbuthnott formula. However, the Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area is only minimally above Grampian in respect of funding and the funding in Dumfries and Galloway is only £219 per problem user, as opposed to £242 in Grampian. The other stream of funding is through grant-aided expenditure, which we know is also a crude instrument. We have undertaken to take prevalence data into account in any future allocation of resources.

I am afraid that I do not have time for another intervention. If Richard Lochhead would like to write to me on a specific issue, I will be happy to answer his questions. We are aware of the problem of allocating resources and we have given additional funding to some of the smaller units. At one unit in the Western Isles, the allocation is £1,345 per addict. However, there is a baseline and there is only in fact a small amount of funding. We recognise that waiting times are totally unacceptable at present, particularly in Aberdeen, Dundee and Edinburgh. I do not know whether we should go for targets, along the English line, of saying that everybody must be receiving treatment within four weeks. We are giving the health boards time to see whether the money that we have only recently put in achieves a reduction in waiting times. However, I assure members that I will be holding the DATs to account on the target waiting times, which are absolutely crucial. DTTOs are not a problem, because treatments are funded separately in relation to DTTOs and drugs courts. I do not have time to say all that I wanted to say, but I must add a few final comments. Family support is important and I recently attended the first national conference on that. Bereavement counselling, the involvement of grandparents and mechanisms to deal with benefit problems can all play a part. We have launched the stepping stones programme nationally and are rolling out other educational programmes, but we must listen to young people and find out whether those programmes are good. We have put a lot of money into sports and diversion from prosecution. I do not have time to go into that issue either, but it, too, is important. On the question of a drugs court in the north-east, we will evaluate the existing urban and rural  courts and see what works. The local team and the local health board must decide on a detoxification centre, but we will look at the issue nationally. I welcome the debate and the Presiding Officer's forbearance. I do not have enough time to tackle the issue in the depth that I would like to, but I am grateful for the extra time that I have been given. We have upgraded the committee that I chaired in the Executive to a full Cabinet committee. That gives me the freedom to act in ways that I might not otherwise have had as chairman.  I promise my absolute dedication to the problem—members will know about that dedication—and I will take on board the points that were raised, many of which were very interesting.  Meeting closed at 18:00.

Members have demonstrated remarkable unanimity in their approach, apart from one or two of the usual remarks from our colleagues on the far right. The debate arises from the prison estates review. Many members, including Roseanna Cunningham and Kenny MacAskill, referred to the rising prison population so I will address that issue briefly. There are two groups in the rising prison population. One is the group of people who are sentenced to more than four years' imprisonment, which has grown substantially in the past 20 years and which is predicted to continue to rise. I make no apology for that because those people have committed serious offences and they should go to jail for a serious length of time. Members are all agreed on that. The number of such offenders has risen from 2,300 to a mid-point figure of 3,400. The second group are those who serve fewer than three months, although they may be sentenced to up to six months. That group comprises around 80 per cent of those who are sentenced. Members seem to think, relatively unanimously, that it is not appropriate to send such people to prison, except in certain circumstances. I will address later the Tories' suggestion that those circumstances are persistent offending. Roseanna Cunningham raised the important question of why we imprison people. Do we imprison people as a punishment? If community orders are not a punishment, imprisonment might be appropriate. We maintain that community orders are a punishment. Do we imprison people as a deterrent? If so, given the figures on recidivism, the system is a disaster. The only reasons why we imprison people are public safety and—I add to Roseanna Cunningham's list—to treat and rehabilitate offenders. On rare occasions, it might be appropriate to do that in prison. Some members suggested that there are circumstances in which custody might be useful or appropriate for punishment and for early treatment. Karen Whitefield mentioned the  interesting idea of custody plus, which would involve an initial custodial sentence and then a reparative community service order. That is an interesting suggestion, because the treatment would be continued in the community. The fundamental challenge for our justice system is the fact that we live in an era in which drugs are the major background factor in crime. Seventy-five per cent of all those who appear in the courts are involved with drugs. I pay tribute to the work of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on drug misuse, of which Keith Raffan is the convener. Lyndsay McIntosh, Sylvia Jackson and other members from all parties have also been involved in that work. The drugs issue is fundamental to the change that we must make to the way in which we consider things. Unless we treat people who have drugs problems appropriately, we will not address the issue at all. We are trying to introduce measures. We will stick to our programme despite the understandable impatience that is expressed constantly by our SNP colleagues. We must evaluate what we are doing and ensure that it has good effects, good outcomes and the public's confidence—something that my nationalist colleagues have suggested.

I have very little time and a long way to go. I hope that I will not be stabbed in the back, as Donald Gorrie suggested. Arrest, referral and diversion will place an additional burden on the Crown Office, so increasing Crown Office funding will be important. We start the process even before we get into the courts, and we are diverting people—especially drug addicts—highly successfully. Of course, we need to address the remand problem, which is ridiculous. There is a daily population of 890 people on remand and there are 15,000 receptions a year—in and out, in and out. Bail information, bail supervision and bail hostels are being tried and we are rolling them out across the country. I hope that we are inspiring confidence in those measures, which will reduce the number of people who are on remand. Fine defaults stand at 7,000 a year but account for only 60 to 70 of the daily prison population. Eliminating fine defaulting would reduce the daily prison population by only 1 per cent, and that is a real problem. We will consider the unit fine system, just as we will consider any suggestion that is made in the Parliament—with the exception of bringing back the birch, which Phil Gallie suggested—to see whether the system would improve things and whether it works. Probation has been established for a long time,  and the introduction of a range of additional measures has substantially modernised it. Supervision orders are being rolled out across the country and are now available in almost every jurisdiction. We tested them and rolled them out. Community service orders have also been updated. Although the breach rate for CSOs is one in four, that is partly due to the drugs problem. They are being improved. Drug treatment and testing orders are now being rolled out across the country. They have been tested and the results were much better than when they were tried in England. The drugs courts are proving quite successful, although we will have to establish whether they provide added value. They are an intensive and expensive resource, and we will have to think carefully before we roll them out.

Thank you, Deputy Presiding Officer. Finally, tagging, or the implementation of RLOs, is also being extended throughout the country. I do not have time to address the issue of women offenders in depth, as I would like to. At some point we should have a debate on that issue and I will return to it. The time-out centre should be up and running early next year. It will be a national resource although, as it is based in Glasgow, initially it will mainly involve offenders from Glasgow. The question of youth crime has been raised, and I think that that also should be the subject of a separate debate. The children's hearing system already has enormous powers at its disposal and can involve parents in the process. It can refer a family to a parenting skills programme as a voluntary disposal. We are watching the parenting orders in England to see how successful they are. The first part of such an order requires the parent to attend counselling. The second part, which is more discretionary, requires them to attend to a range of issues. I want to make it absolutely clear that there is no question of jailing any parent who is trying to do their best. Frankly, that suggestion is not worthy of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, who is usually reasonable about such issues. Indeed, a collection of stupid remarks were made by Tory spokesmen. Mr McLetchie still has the lead with his remark that this is the only country in which a 17-year-old can assault his wife and then go before a children's hearing. That is utterly absurd. I inform Mr McLetchie that people who commit serious offences will go before the  courts—he knows that. His remark was utter nonsense. He is undermining—

No. He is trying to undermine—[ Interruption. ]

He is trying to undermine an attempt to gather evidence about whether something works. That is not worthy of him. There are pilots, but the majority of orders—supervision, probation, CSOs, tagging and diversion from prosecution—are universally available. Further, DTTOs will now be rolled out across every area. Parliament is sending two messages to us that are being received and which are regarded as appropriate. The first message is that we should roll out well-funded and properly evaluated programmes and ensure that they continue to be evaluated. The second message is that we need to engage the public in a realistic debate. Parliament should send a strong message that locking people up for three months or less does not do any good. We need to change the situation, but we need the support of the public to do so. We need sentencers to be confident about the alternatives to custody. The Executive is committed to those alternatives and is funding them. I am committed—and I know that Jim Wallace is—to changing the patterns of custody. However, we will do so only if the alternative options are serious and tough and the public has confidence in them. I urge members to support the motion.

The figure of 55,000 is the estimate of total drug users; 23,000 is the figure for injecting heroin addicts.

The member was right: I was struggling with her figures. She missed out the number of remand prisoners, although I understand that. Of those who are sentenced, 41 per cent are imprisoned because of fine defaults. However, at any one time, there are only 60 fine defaulters out of 6,600 prisoners in the daily population. That is the problem with incarceration.

It is encouraging to see that, between the 1996 and 2000 Scottish crime surveys, the percentage of participants who described crime as an "extremely serious" issue in Scotland fell significantly from 44 per cent to 28 per cent. Although the fear of crime is falling, there remains a need to target areas of criminal activity that impact most on the everyday life of our communities. Funding for the police service is now at record levels, as are police numbers. Recently, the police have agreed a set of new targets with a view to further reductions in crime. We have also introduced a £4 million annual award scheme for local-authority led community safety partnerships to address the community safety and crime issues that most affect those communities.

We have set new targets for detection of serious crime. The targets aim to increase by 4.1 per cent what are already record levels for detection of serious violent crime. Levels of detection are at their highest since 1939. The police are to be highly commended on that record. A number of members have brought the problem of youth crime to our attention. Pilot test schemes are being run in partnership with a number of agencies. Those pilots include the CHIPs—courts hearings interface project—scheme in Edinburgh and schemes in Dundee, Aberdeen, North Ayrshire and Lanarkshire. All those schemes, which to an extent aim to address issues of reparation and restorative justice, are beginning to make an impact on youth crime in those areas. Their impact is evidenced by a drop in the number of persistent offenders coming before children's hearings from 890 two years ago to 790 last year. I am aware that there is a long way to go. However, in respect of the pilots, we will test what works and follow through in all other areas.

The surveys, which began as small regional surveys, have been amalgamated into a Scottish crime survey, which has a proper scientific basis. There are individual instances in which old age pensioners are afraid, but the general level of fear has reduced. If I could quote one or two figures—

One or two? I will choose one. There has been a 32 per cent reduction in housebreaking. The target is set for a further 10 per cent reduction in housebreaking. The need for people to feel that they must sit behind closed doors is decreasing and I hope that that will continue.

I am sorry that Bill Aitken regards the reduction in crime that has occurred and the reduction in fear of crime as anodyne. The rise in the number of people carrying offensive weapons is the largest element in the increase in the figures. We will encourage the police to continue programmes such as Strathclyde police's spotlight initiative, in which offensive weapons are picked up. Those programmes lead to an increase in the number of charges that are brought and in the number of people who are convicted. We will continue with those programmes.

Anecdotal evidence exists of the sort of crime to which Johann Lamont referred. We will discuss with the Association of Chief Police  Officers in Scotland whether there is evidence of police throughout the country not picking up youth offenders. I must say that the number of individuals who are being picked up for youth crimes has increased. Over the past 10 years, the number of persistent offenders who have been picked up and referred to children's hearings has increased by 40 per cent. Until last year, although the general level of crime has gone down, the number of persistent offenders who were brought in front of children's hearings went up. I accept that there is a problem in some areas. Those problems will be addressed.

Bill Aitken was right, as the debate has been fairly consensual, with the exception of the Conservatives. Keith Harding said that the consultation was unnecessary, the paper was inappropriate and a waste of paper, and that we do not need legislation. However, Lord James said that we must legislate on some things. I did not quite understand where the Conservatives were coming from, but I accept Bill Aitken's offer of a not too exciting time this afternoon. Roseanna Cunningham, Michael Matheson, Donald Gorrie and others referred to one of the central aspects of the debate, which is the number of deaths in Scotland compared with in the rest of Europe. As they will be aware, the number of deaths came down from 111 in 1999-2000 to 78 in 2000-01 but, as Roseanna Cunningham clearly  pointed out, if we take the statistics over time, we have to examine why we have more deaths in Scotland. As Michael Matheson said, the fire service is not the cause of that. Many members have referred to a variety of issues, which I will run through. Smoke detectors are an issue. Members will know that we have embarked on a smoke detector campaign. The number of smoke detectors that are found to be inoperative in fires is staggering. We need to increase the hardwiring of smoke detectors to make sure that the issue is tackled effectively.

We will consider anything that will improve the prevention policy, to which many members have referred. Michael Matheson also referred to sprinklers. That issue is being examined. He is aware of what we are doing from the meetings that we have had. We have asked the fire sub-committee of the Building Standards Advisory Committee to carry out a needs-based assessment of residential sprinklers.

We need to examine the issue as a whole. It is complex and I do not have time to go into it today, but we must be careful with expenditure and its prioritisation. We need to identify how many lives would be saved by sprinklers and at what cost, because in spending money across the whole Executive, we may save more lives if we put our money into improving health rather than sprinklers. The cost per life has to be considered carefully. Duncan McNeil referred to chip pans, which is an important issue.

Yes, people should stop eating chips, but we should get them to stop cooking chips in open pans and to use proper deep fryers instead, because that would help. Johann Lamont says that scones are a problem. I am not sure about that, but clearly chip pans are an issue. Smoke detectors, sprinklers, chip pans and other factors in the built environment are important and we need to examine them. I say to Donald Gorrie that we are taking a number of initiatives. We are addressing issues to do with landlords and houses in multiple  occupation in a positive way. The furniture in social let premises now has to meet fire standards. We are ratcheting up the situation and addressing fire prevention.

There is no such thing as a free lunch. We would have to examine what that would do to social tenancies and social landlords. We will need to prioritise if we decide to bring in sprinklers, and that will have to be done in an effective way. Many members referred to community safety partnerships. I cannot tell Roseanna Cunningham which brigades are not involved in those partnerships, but I know that legislation requires all brigades to be involved and that most are. If they are not formally involved in partnerships, they are involved in various community safety groups. However, we have to ensure that all brigades are involved. Tommy Sheridan referred to hydrants. Work is going on in Strathclyde to make hydrants safer. That leads me to the issue of vandalism, which a number of members mentioned. It is important that we have good education in that respect. Scott Barrie referred to specific valuable initiatives by individual fire brigades. A lot of fire brigades are involved in initiatives with local groups in community safety partnerships. We need to encourage that. Colin Campbell, Roseanna Cunningham and Keith Harding mentioned risk management and other members mentioned the pathfinder trials. We think that risk management is the most appropriate approach to take, and we will tackle the problem of standard response times that Donald Gorrie referred to. At the moment, response times relate to property not to activities; as people are the most important factor, it seems more appropriate to relate response times to them. We will conclude the pathfinder trials as rapidly as possible, although I will find out the time scales. As for the design of windows, to which Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred, we need to address the question of escape. Written building standards already exist and are administered by the local authorities. We do not intend to examine that issue at the moment but, if Lord James has any specific comments on it, he can get in touch with us.

Modern window design does take that into account. However, we need to consider all the issues. Many members have mentioned the enormous contribution that is made by volunteer and retained firefighters and I was very interested in Richard Lochhead's intervention about recruitment issues. As Alasdair Morgan pointed out, the problem is that people are not staying in their communities but are commuting much more. We need to encourage businesses that have remained in communities to re-engage with them so that we can continue to develop both the retained firefighting system and the system of volunteer firemen that George Lyon referred to. That is very important not only for the fire service but for the special police, which have seen an enormous drop in numbers over the years. Individuals can—and are willing—to make a massive contribution. We simply have to introduce the mechanisms, and provide encouragement and training to ensure that people are involved as much as possible. Trish Godman, Alasdair Morgan, John Young and others referred to offshore firefighting. There has been, and will continue to be, discussions between brigades and the fire service inspectorate about that matter and we will need to address a number of key issues. I do not have the time to cover that important area, but I might get in touch with members about it later. On general funding, I should point out that we are substantially increasing the amount of capital funding. Members also raised the important issue of pensions. I accept that our current solution is only short term. The short-term working group will examine the immediate situation in Scotland. Meanwhile, the long-term issue of how pensions are funded is being addressed at a UK level. A number of my Labour colleagues raised the question of pay. Of course firefighters should be paid a fair wage for a fair day's work. However, in common with new Labour's approach to other matters, investment must be matched by modernisation, which means that we must ensure that practices are fully modernised in response to any significant wage increases. Both sides of the equation will have to be addressed. Call centres, which Fiona Hyslop referred to, form part of that modernisation agenda. Such centres help to improve the service's efficiency, and we have to consider carefully how much we merge them with other agencies. However, the present process of modernisation in call centres for both the fire service and the police is making efficiency savings and allowing us to improve matters considerably.  I point out to John Farquhar Munro that the brigades in Scotland are generally much better funded than their English colleagues. However, we will continue to consider that issue carefully. Despite the nationalists' attempts to revitalise the debate on PFI/PPP, I think that they have accepted that we intend to retain the service in the public sector. Our acceptance of the SNP amendment quite clearly demonstrates our commitment in that respect. However, if the nationalists are saying that they would consider no mechanisms for improving the efficiency of organisations and saving money for the public purse, they have a duty to tell us where they would find the money. With regard to producing and maintaining fire service vehicles, we will watch the London contract closely. It seems to be efficient and to save money, and there is a specific service for maintaining the vehicles. We will monitor that and continue to examine other areas in which parts of the service might be susceptible to PPP arrangements, but we will not consider that for the core service. That is why we are accepting the SNP amendment. There are other issues that I have not had time to address. In winding up, I commend to the chamber the motion, as amended by the SNP amendment. We believe that it is important to hold this debate. The points that members have made have been useful and I commend the motion, as amended, to the chamber.

Bill Aitken should speak for himself.

Will the member give way?

It is very kind of Richard Lochhead to give way to me, given that I refused to take an intervention from him. Capital expenditure in the fire service will increase from £15 million in 2001-02 to £19.6 million in 2002-03, and will rise to £22.6 million in 2003-04, but if the fire service can get the money to build new fire stations in better settings by selling existing premises, it should do so.

The Executive has initiated this debate to confirm our commitment to the fire service across Scotland and our support for its work. Fires and their consequences can have a devastating impact on individuals and communities. It is imperative that we do all that we can to prevent fires from occurring in the first place. However, when fires do happen, it is imperative that we have a well-equipped and trained fire and rescue service to respond efficiently and effectively. The fire service is one of the key emergency services. At the outset of the debate, I wish to pay tribute to the men and women who work in our fire service, often in difficult circumstances, to ensure the safety of us all. The role of the fire service has been evolving and developing over many years but, as we take the first steps into the 21 st century, the time is right to give the fire service in Scotland a new vision and direction. I see from a press release that the leaders of the Scottish National Party visited a fire station and have concluded that our vision is one of privatisation. I state categorically from the outset that there is no question of the Scottish fire service being privatised and so I am more than happy to accept the amendment in the name of Roseanna Cunningham. The references in the policy paper to the private finance initiative relate entirely to best value and issues of capital, not to the fire service itself. The policy paper builds on an earlier review of the fire service structure in Scotland that was completed in April 2000 by a steering group made up of Scottish Executive, local authority and fire service representatives. The group's report concluded that the existing structure of eight fire authorities and brigades worked well and should be retained. However, the report also highlighted areas where further work would be beneficial in ensuring that the fire service was even more accountable and responsive to the needs of the communities that it serves across Scotland. I believe that the publication of the policy paper will be seen as a landmark in the development of the fire service and its role. When the Deputy First Minister launched the paper at the Scottish Fire Service Training School in Gullane on 29 April, he  rightly described it as the most significant initiative in the development of fire service policy for many years. For the next few minutes, I will set out what lies behind the approach that we have adopted in the paper, our wish for an open and constructive dialogue on the recommendations and how, at the end of the consultation period, we intend to take the proposals forward. I emphasise that, from the outset, we have kept the stakeholder interests—the fire authorities, the fire brigades, the staff associations and the unions—in the picture on the policy paper's preparation. It was important that we allowed the stakeholder interests to see the first draft for comment towards the end of last year. Although we had not expected to satisfy all sides' interests, the draft paper was, in the main, well received and supported by the main players. We were also able to take on board most of the comments from the stakeholders. I hope that members have had an opportunity to read the policy paper. They will see that it acknowledges the enviable reputation that the fire service has as a can-do organisation and our desire to build on that reputation. We want to position the fire service for the challenges of the future and so that it can meet the six key drivers for change that we have identified.

I cannot comment on that discrepancy, but I will examine it. The combination of hoax calls and deliberately raised fires is a major problem for the fire service and we must consider it. There is a question over the collection of data on vandalism, including fires, in Strathclyde. I think that the figures are more correct this year, but we will consider further the discrepancy that Mr Gallie raises. I thank him for his intervention. The first and one of the most important drivers for change is the need for a much stronger fire prevention ethos with a big focus on developing community fire safety.

I will deal with domestic sprinklers in my closing speech, as I imagine that other members will raise that important safety issue. I see Mr Matheson nodding. The second key driver is the need to look at the current fire services acts, which date back to 1947 and 1959 respectively and are in need of review. The third driver is the need for a shared sense of direction among those who work in the fire service and those who are responsible for it. That leads to the fourth driver, which is the importance of partnership working internally between all the stakeholder interests and externally with the communities that the service serves. The relationship between central and local government and staff remains at the heart of our current thinking, but we need to enhance the role of the authorities and strengthen community safety planning.

I am conscious of time, but I will take one further intervention.

There are areas of community safety, for example, in which it may be that we should have partnerships with the private sector. An illustration of that is the one that my friend Sylvia Jackson just gave of a partnership with the construction industry in the implementation of voluntary fire prevention measures. That model of community partnership and private partnership working is entirely appropriate. The fifth driver—a powerful driver for change—is the Executive's commitment to a modernising agenda throughout the public services, which is combined with a requirement to deliver best value. I am, of course, aware that the Fire Brigades Union is meeting today to discuss its proposed pay claim. Over the years, the role of the fire service has changed. That will be no different for the Scottish fire service of the future. Changes taking place in the built and natural environment are the powerful sixth driver in determining our future strategy. The chapter of the Executive's programme for government covering the justice department sets out as its clear objective "A Scotland where people are safer and feel safer". The fire service has a key role to play in delivering that objective. A shared vision and a sense of direction are vital for the fire service. The policy  paper provides a new aim and vision for the Scottish fire service of the future. We want a service that makes a full contribution to building a safer society by working with others to reduce death and injury, as well as damage to property and the environment, that is a result of fire and other emergencies. We believe that that will be achieved by creating an organisation that works with communities to reduce the risk from fire; that assists promptly and effectively when fire and other emergencies occur; that has a well-equipped, skilful and highly motivated work force that can work safely and whose composition reflects the diverse communities that it serves; and that continuously improves its performance to deliver best value. Prevention is the key to reducing the tragedies and hardships that are caused by fire. Scotland has the sad distinction of having twice as many fire fatalities per head of population as England and Wales. Any long-term strategy must place greater emphasis on the need for the public to be well educated about the risk of fire and the importance of prevention. Preventing fires from starting requires the community and the fire service to work together to deliver a safer society. In the section of the paper that deals with prevention, we examine the importance of the community safety partnerships that are now well established throughout Scotland.

I do not have time to take a further intervention. If Richard Lochhead raises in debate the issue about which he would like to ask me, I will try to deal with it when I sum up. There are several excellent examples of Scottish brigades working in their communities with other organisations, particularly on fire safety. We are keen that all fire brigades should participate in their community safety partnerships to advance the multi-agency approach to community safety. Fire stations are often located in the heart of the community—particularly in rural areas—but that physical presence is not always fully utilised to the benefit of the community. Equally, we must never forget the important role that our rural and retained firefighters play in delivering a local and consistent service. I commend to members the recent survey of rural, retained and voluntary firefighters. The survey is an interesting document that is worth reading, as it illustrates those firefighters' absolute commitment to their communities. As I have made clear on some of the visits that I have made, I value that commitment enormously. The paper highlights some of the advantages for the community of opening up our fire stations for wider use.  Brigades work hard, often with other agencies, to assist young people to grow into responsible and active members of society. In the section of the policy paper that deals with prevention, we consider ways in which that approach can be developed. For example, we commend those brigades that operate fire cadet schemes. We also consider some of the issues to do with enforcing fire safety and highlight the fact that effective work on fire protection requires a strengthening of the powers of the fire service in relation to fire investigation. Recently, there has been considerable publicity about the development of domestic sprinklers. Experience in other countries suggests that residential sprinklers can make our homes much safer. Indeed, they are already fitted in numerous commercial buildings in this country. The paper considers some of the issues relating to the merits of domestic sprinklers. However, no matter how successful our prevention strategy eventually becomes, it is impossible to conceive of a time when we will not need the firefighting and rescue capabilities of the Scottish fire service. It is therefore important that the service is well equipped and well trained to undertake its task. In the section of the paper that deals with intervention, we consider the current arrangements for national standards of fire cover. We highlight the fact that the current approach is property based. The main weakness of that approach is that it does not take into account the presence of people and their activities. The public expect the fire service to respond quickly and to make their lives safer. To do that effectively, the fire service will have to become a risk manager. The policy paper explains the work that is being done to move us from the current standards of fire cover to an integrated risk management approach. A change in the basis for determining fire cover, from standards of response time and appliance availability to risk management, brings with it the need to provide public reassurance. The paper highlights the current pathfinder trials that are taking place in brigades as we move towards a risk management approach and consider how that might be developed. The paper also addresses the changing role of the fire service. The requirement for the fire service to respond to non-fire emergencies—particularly road accidents, chemical spillage and rescues from flooding, from buildings and from collapsed trenches—has increased dramatically. Who can forget 11 September, which shocked us all? It forced us to re-examine our capacity for dealing with major emergencies on a scale that was previously unimaginable.

I declined to take an intervention from Richard Lochhead.

I must be equitable. I hope that the member will get a chance to raise his point later in the debate or when I am summing up. Although 11 September highlighted the commitment and dedication of the emergency services, it also showed the potential strain on resources, resilience and readiness in responding to natural disasters and major incidents. In February, the Deputy First Minister announced that the Scottish Executive was to earmark £5 million from the capital modernisation fund to give the fire service the proper tools to do its job. New equipment is to be purchased to improve the service's capacity to deal with the unimaginable. It will also enable the service to deal more effectively with major incidents that occur more routinely, such as gas explosions, accidents involving heavy vehicles and aircraft, and rail accidents, which have been in our minds over the past week. The impact of those changes and the contribution of the fire service to making Scotland safer is recognised. However, there is no statutory requirement for brigades to provide special services and we therefore need to consider whether that work needs to be underpinned by new legislation. In delivering our vision for the Scottish fire service of the future, the work force will continue to be our key resource. The contribution that it makes will be essential to the delivery of a full and developing agenda. Much of the future strategy in this area will be developed on a UK basis through projects such as the integrated personnel development system. Only yesterday, I opened a seminar in St Andrew's House on the new training system and I welcomed the coming together of fire service interests throughout the UK on an issue of national importance on which Scotland, in many respects, is leading the way. We have begun to restructure our commitment and approach to fire service training. We have put in place a system for co-ordinating and developing a national strategy for training, which centres on analysis of needs and delivery outcomes and will seek to promote a proactive and co-ordinated delivery of fire service training to all staff. Modern delivery methods of training and rethinking existing local, national and UK practices will be used to ensure that value and quality are maintained. In the section of the policy paper on the work force, we also look at the importance of the fire service being inclusive of all members of our community. Before I speak about that, I will say a  word about the seminar that I attended yesterday. It is important that we operate on the basis of individuals' background experience when we receive them into the fire service. For example, someone who wants to transfer from the forces' fire service into the Scottish fire service has to go through the basic training, even if they have had 20 years' experience. We need to address such issues. Clearly people bring their personal capabilities and capacities to their work. The integrated personnel development system changes the system from one with a bureaucratic provision of training to one that focuses on the individual and their role for the future. At the moment, once staff in the fire service have been promoted, they go through a training procedure and experiential learning. Under the new system, staff will be trained before the promotion. Their capabilities will be acknowledged at an early stage and they will be given the opportunity to become involved in that sort of training. We value the health and safety of members of the work force, who risk their lives on our behalf as they protect the public. In recognition of the pressures that brigades are experiencing in meeting their pension costs, we have announced an additional £5 million to assist brigades this year. We are aware of the significant bulge in retirement that will take place over the next two years because of the change in shift patterns in 1974. We are addressing that issue—

I have already declined other members. Have I two and a half minutes left, Presiding Officer?

A working group that involves all the stakeholders is considering precisely that question. However, I add a cautionary note: those who have managed the retirement process best should not be perversely disincentivised by not being given money. I am sorry—that was a cumbersome way of saying that we must distribute the funds appropriately and I am not sure that either a per capita approach or an approach that is based on perceived need is the right one. For example, people must manage their sick leave, but levels of sick leave are much higher in some brigade areas than they are in others, which raises questions about how that sick leave is being  managed. The issue is complex. We will consider the report produced by the stakeholder working group. The pensions issue is also being considered at the UK level. Finally, the paper sets out the need for the Scottish fire service continually to improve its performance and to deliver best value. The public expect the fire service to be effective and efficient in its use of public funds. The paper identifies the ways in which those expectations might best be met through partnership and collaboration and touches on the concept of a new common fire service agency. Let me be clear that that concept is not about centralising services or detaching them in any way from local democratic involvement. It is more about improving the use of existing resources, through collaboration, the sharing of best practice and joint management. Our consultation paper is substantial, but we considered it important to ensure that the sweep of all current and future issues was included—I make no apology for its comprehensive nature. We want to have an open and constructive period of debate during the consultation process, which begins with this debate. The comments from members of all parties will make an important contribution to that process and we will listen carefully and take note of the points that are made during the debate. We intend to deliver on a number of recommendations by introducing new legislation for the fire service after the next election. These are exciting times for the fire service in Scotland. There are challenges ahead, as well as opportunities to create a modern, effective and efficient fire service that is rooted in and serves our communities. We look forward to working with all stakeholders in developing the proposals in the policy paper. I recognise that the fire service already has a good reputation. It has always been a dynamic service, changing to meet the public's needs. The future depends on building on what already exists, developing new ideas and ensuring that the fire service in Scotland continues to be a first-class, modern organisation. To that end, I commend our consultation policy paper to the Parliament as a demonstration of our commitment to ensuring that we have a fire service that is modern, effective and efficient and truly a Scottish fire service of the future. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to developing a fire service that is modern, effective and efficient and which will also have a specific duty to enhance community fire safety, as set out in the consultation paper The Scottish Fire Service of the Future .

I am aware of the member's deep interest in health matters. The Executive is aware of the petition on this subject that has been submitted to the Public Petitions Committee and of the committee's intention to raise the matter with Scottish ministers. We regard the health and safety of police officers as a matter of the highest importance. We will, therefore, give the Scottish Police Federation's request sympathetic consideration in responding to the committee. Any power of compulsion, however, would raise legal issues that would have to be addressed if such a proposal were to be implemented.

Members may be aware that I worked in the Scottish Prison Service as a deputy medical officer. I was assaulted on two occasions—once scratched, once bitten—by young women who were drug addicts. I therefore have great sympathy for the police officers who are in such a situation. Nonetheless, there is a problem in respect of article 8 of the European convention on human rights on the requirement to respect private and  family life. The Scottish Parliament has legislative competence to formulate a change in the law, but we would have to balance the public safety interests—which I believe are of great importance—with the individual's right to privacy in their family life. We will consider the issue carefully.

Brian Fitzpatrick raises several issues. First, he is right to say that the interests of the individuals and public safety can allow us to legislate in a different way. Secondly, the issue of public service—I have already mentioned prison staff—also concerns the fire brigade, as firefighters go into situations in which sharp objects and needles are present and can contaminate them. There is guidance for them on that, just as there is guidance for the police force. The partnership Executive is about to issue guidance for accident and emergency staff and we are assessing a scheme, which is already being run, whereby the police train accident and emergency staff in self-protection. I confirm the Executive's absolute commitment to the protection of all front-line staff and assure the member that we will adopt a zero-tolerance position towards people who use their illness or disease to threaten others with infection. That is intolerable and will not be treated lightly.

We will consider the matter carefully. I am not sure whether the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill will give us sufficient powers to get that information. However, we will look at the situation closely and, if we feel that it is appropriate to take legal action to ensure the protection of front-line staff, we will take such action.

The Scottish Executive is opposed to religious intolerance and prejudice in any form. We therefore welcome the general thrust of the report. Detailed consideration of the report's recommendations is a matter for the Church of Scotland's General Assembly, but we will study the report closely.

I understand the member's frustration that the working group appears to be impeding the progress of his bill. However, it is important that the group takes the issue forward step by step. As Mr Gorrie will know—being a member of the working group—we are examining evidence of cases where sectarianism or religious hatred has been referred to in the sentencing of individuals before the court. When we have taken that evidence and held discussions with several groups, we will decide how to proceed. Clearly, the member's proposal is one of several alternatives, should the working group decide that a change in the law is necessary. We have not yet reached that point in our discussions.

I thank Mr Fitzpatrick for making that point. I agree that it is important that groups such as the Church of Scotland seek to examine their own practice and history, as well as that of the wider culture, in order to begin to address negative attitudes. Courtesy of Mr Canavan, recently I met Mr Ian McLeod of Celtic Football Club and heard about some of the work that Celtic is doing. Celtic and Rangers have been considering sectarian issues in the clubs in a positive way. Such steps are to be welcomed in changing the culture and attitude.

It is crucial that we engage all the parties that Mr Canavan has mentioned. The working group will receive presentations involving several faiths. However, it would be impossible to have a committee composed of all the different religious groups in Scotland. We will take evidence from both old firm clubs, from Nil by Mouth—a programme funded by the millennium fund—and from various religious groups. We are working hard to engage everyone in the process, but I want to keep the cross-party group small and focused so that we can achieve results within a reasonable time.

Today marks a significant day in the development of a freedom of information regime in Scotland. It has been nearly two and a half years since the first consultation document, "An Open Scotland", was published. A lot of hard work has been done to get to where we are now. Throughout the process, I have been encouraged by the broad and positive response that we have received. I am pleased that the need for this important piece of legislation has been largely recognised. However, I cannot let the speech of the Tory spokesman go by without whispering, "Arms to Iraq, the Scott inquiry and BSE." The Tories presided over them all. [Interruption.]

If the people of Scotland needed a greater reminder of the paternalistic and authoritarian approach of the Conservative party, they had it today. People do not have rights under Conservative regimes—people have to beg for information. A participative approach to the development, consideration and scrutiny of policy and legislation was one of the key principles of the consultative steering group on the Scottish Parliament. We are appreciative of the large number of members of the public, voluntary groups and other organisations who made an important and valued input to the process by contributing to the Executive's consultations on "An Open Scotland" and the draft bill. Their views have helped to shape the bill and make it a balanced and representative piece of legislation. I, too, would like to take the opportunity to thank all those who have been involved in the development and passage of the bill. I did not enter the Scottish Parliament, after spending a lifetime in a professional career as a doctor, to  undermine the rights of those with disability. I would like to add yet another commitment to the pledges that Jim Wallace and I have made today in respect of disability rights: we will work with the relevant organisations to ensure that the codes of practice—Christine Grahame referred to them as being the next crucial step in the process—are drawn up and implemented in a way that ensures that the rights of all citizens are protected. The bill fulfils the Executive and coalition commitment to introduce an effective freedom of information regime. For the first time, the public will have a statutory right of access to information held by a wide range of Scottish public authorities. It goes a long way towards supporting greater openness right across the Scottish public sector. It encourages the proactive disclosure of information and it underlines the importance of open and responsive administration. Donald Gorrie's analogy of the Swedish king and the conversion might be a little extreme but, as he and others have suggested, it is important that we have a culture in which there is greater openness. I look forward to the appointment of the Scottish information commissioner, who will promote and enforce the legislation. We have ensured that the Scottish information commissioner is independent, with strong powers to order the disclosure of information. We believe that a culture of openness will develop across the Scottish public sector and we will do all in our power to support that. The commissioner will play an important role in delivering freedom of information in Scotland. The bill delivers a strong and robust legislative framework that will result in an effective freedom of information regime that is right for Scotland. I commend the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill to the Parliament.

Will Michael Matheson take an intervention?

I was shaking my head for two reasons. First, the freedom of information bills in the countries that Michael Matheson mentioned had much narrower remits, so those countries were able to introduce their legislation more quickly. Secondly, the major point is that if COSLA said in front of the Justice 1 Committee that it could implement the provisions of the legislation in a year, it should implement the provisions within a year. Amendment 37 provides a backstop. If COSLA can bring implementation in in a year, it should do so, but not all authorities will be able to do so. The commissioner must have time to draw up the publication schemes.

Amendment 31 provides for the exchange of information between the Scottish information commissioner, the new public services ombudsman and, in specified circumstances, the UK information commissioner. When the draft bill was published we indicated that we would introduce such provisions. We also said that we would do that in the policy memorandum that accompanied the bill. However, before finalising the provisions, we had to await the decision on whether the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Bill or the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill would complete its passage first. Amendment 33 amends the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Act 2002 to add the Scottish information commissioner to the list of persons who are liable to investigation under that legislation. It also introduces a schedule to the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill, which amends further the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Act 2002. Amendment 53 provides the content of the new schedule. The amendments are essentially technical, yet they propose important provisions, which would allow for appropriate exchange of information between the Scottish information commissioner, the new Scottish ombudsman and the UK information commissioner. I commend the amendments to members. I move amendment 31.  Amendment 31 agreed to.

Amendment 32 is, in essence, a technical amendment. On the basis of its subject matter, I suppose that it could be called a minor amendment. However, it is important. Our intention is that the right of access in the bill should be exercisable by all. However, under Scots law, the legal capacity of a person is deemed to be 16 years of age. We do not want the situation to arise whereby a public authority could ignore or refuse to respond to an application from a young person, who might be asking for information for a school project, on the basis that the applicant had not yet reached the age of legal capacity. Amendment 32 seeks to redress that anomaly by deeming that anyone under the age of 16 can have any rights under the bill if they are 12 years old, or if they have a general understanding of what it means to exercise that right. I commend the amendment. I move amendment 32.  Amendment 32 agreed to.

Amendments 34 and 35 are technical amendments. They will correct a drafting error that was found at stage 2. Section 69 of the bill currently sets out that sections 9(4) and 12 provide for Scottish ministers to make orders. However, sections 9(4) and 12 provide for Scottish ministers to make regulations. Amendments 34 and 35 will correct those references in section 69. I move amendment 34.  Amendment 34 agreed to.  Amendment 35 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson]—and agreed to.

We appreciate the motive behind amendment 72 but consider it unnecessary and, to an extent, inappropriate. Section 46 already provides the commissioner with broad general powers to report annually on the exercise of the functions that are conferred on him or her, and from time to time to submit other reports with respect to those functions, as the commissioner thinks fit. The commissioner would be able to report on the matters that are referred to in the amendment if the commissioner regarded that as appropriate—that is for the commissioner to decide. From the experience with other information commissioners, we can anticipate that the Scottish information commissioner will comment on a broad range of matters. For that reason, we regard the amendment as unnecessary. It would be inappropriate to impose on the commissioner a formal duty to review and assess whether an authority's resources are adequate for it to maintain its archives and to discharge its functions under the act. The commissioner's role is to promote and enforce the act. I would not want extraneous functions to be imposed that could detract from the commissioner's carrying out freedom of information functions. That said, we can expect the commissioner to report on a broad range of matters. At an earlier stage, we listened when Michael Matheson raised an issue similar to the point that Donald Gorrie is making about the importance of local authorities' maintaining archives. That is a separate issue, to which the Parliament may wish to return. If the commissioner has concerns about how authorities are coping with their duties under the FOI regime, I have no doubt that he or she will make those known. The Parliament will be able to seek a view from the commissioner if it has concerns about the issue that Donald Gorrie raises or about any other issue. The key point is that amendment 72 would require the commissioner to act as an auditor, which is very different from his or her function in other respects. On the basis of the explanation and reassurance that I have given, and given the opportunity for future debate on the issue of archives, I ask Donald Gorrie to withdraw amendment 72.

Amendment 5 seeks to disallow any claim to the commercial exemption if the information has been passed between two or more public authorities. That is simply absurd. Commercially sensitive information does not cease to be commercially sensitive because it has been passed between public authorities. For the most part, the exemption is content based, which means that the information can be withheld only if its disclosure would cause substantial prejudice and if disclosure would be contrary to the public interest. It is the information that is sensitive; it has nothing to do with the holder. Under amendment 5, if sensitive commercial information regarding inward investment opportunities was passed from the local enterprise company to the local authority, it could not be withheld, which could jeopardise the creation of jobs. Also under amendment 5, if sensitive commercial information regarding a rescue package for a business that was under threat of closure was passed from Scottish Enterprise to the Scottish Executive, it could not be withheld and that could jeopardise the preservation of jobs and the financial position of employees. Amendment 5 is nonsense and I urge that it be rejected.

Amendment 25 is a technical amendment, which seeks to put beyond doubt that all documents that are created by a court or staff during a court case are covered by the exception. That would include documents created for the purposes of the proceedings, as well as documents created in the course of the proceedings but not necessarily for the purposes of those proceedings. That would include incidental notes made by judges and staff, which would be exempt from disclosure, unless to disclose them would be in the public interest. That has always been the policy intention. I recommend that this technical amendment be agreed to. I move amendment 25.  Amendment 25 agreed to.

There has been some speculation in the press about amendment 24, and I have welcomed the opportunity to debate its provisions on the radio on at least two occasions. In explaining the purpose behind the provision, I want to dispel the myths that appear to have been created. The issue was first raised at stage 2 when Universities Scotland made us aware of its concern that the bill did not include sufficient  safeguards against the premature disclosure of incomplete research that has not yet realised any commercial value. In fact, members of the Justice 1 Committee proposed amendments to address that concern, but they were withdrawn to allow the Executive to introduce amendment 24. I assure members that amendment 24 does not create a broad loophole that would be open to abuse. The draftsmen deliberately settled on the specific wording, "a programme of research", to distinguish genuine academic research from other similar processes involving simple data collection or the analysis of such data. For example, a lot of advice to ministers includes facts and figures collected by civil servants. Amendment 24 would not cover that information or prevent it from being revealed. We must not forget that the commissioner is unlikely to be sympathetic to an authority that argues that information represents research in progress when it does not in fact do so. It has been suggested that amendment 24 is unnecessary because the bill already includes safeguards against the disclosure of commercially sensitive information. However, as I have indicated, the amendment is not intended to catch commercially sensitive information. It provides the universities and other authorities that undertake research with a safeguard against disclosing speculative research for which the commercial value has not yet emerged. If Scottish universities were required to disclose such research before any commercial value was apparent, it is easy to predict that those bodies would be unable to compete effectively with institutions in other countries for research contracts. At present, Scotland does particularly well on research contracts, and I am sure that members of the Parliament would oppose anything that might damage that. I consider amendment 24 to be both tightly defined and necessary, and I ask the Parliament to support it. I move amendment 24.

I will try quickly to address those points. First, on the last point, a programme of research includes a one-off piece of finite research. It does not mean a programme as Mike Rumbles and I understand it; it is a programme as lawyers understand it, which is quite different. That is important. Secondly, we must remember that the exemption will be subject to the public interest test and the prejudice test, and that its use can be scrutinised by the information commissioner, so there are safeguards to make absolutely sure that no one uses the exemption in an inappropriate way. If that starts to happen, clearly we will have to re-examine the matter, but we feel that the amendment has been drawn tightly enough to ensure that it will address the area that we wish it to address, which is the difficult area to which Michael Matheson alluded. If the research is in the fully commercial area, then the commercial interest measures will apply, but the area that we are addressing is that in which the research is not yet registered for intellectual property rights. We are talking about research that is probably at an early stage and which is quite speculative. A lot of the research by people such as Sir David Lane in Dundee on genetics and its spin-offs falls into that category. If the information had to be revealed at an early stage, that could be damaging to the subsequent development of biotechnology companies, because it would allow competitors to get in. We believe that we have drawn the amendment tightly enough, but we will look to the information commissioner to have regard to the Parliament's wish that the measures should not be protective in the way that Robin Harper alluded to. It must be absolutely clear that the exemption should not be used in that way.

As Lord James rightly said, amendment 15 reverses an amendment that was agreed to by the Justice 1 Committee at stage 2. We fully appreciate the priority that the committee gave to disability issues. We absolutely agree—as I indicated in an intervention during the debate on an earlier section—that it is vital that the FOI regime that the bill will establish is equally accessible to all. The Executive's amendments 15, 16 and 19 should not be regarded as a backward step—they are certainly not intended as such. The provision of information is the principle at the heart of the bill. Amendment 15 will ensure that information is provided in the format sought by a disabled applicant, except in the most extreme and unlikely circumstances. The rights of the applicant are afforded top priority throughout the bill—that has been acknowledged and welcomed throughout the bill's development. It has been suggested that our amendments would give disabled people a lesser right to information. That is simply not the case. Disabled applicants will, in practice, receive information in the format in which they need it. However, it is not right that the circumstances of the authority should be afforded no consideration whatever. It is entirely correct that the reasonableness test should be applied and that all circumstances should be taken into account. Otherwise, an authority would have no room even to suggest that the information be provided in another format that might be equally acceptable to  the applicant and easier for the authority to provide. I understand that there are concerns about amendment 15, but I assure members again that the amendment should not be regarded as a backward step. It is important to acknowledge the significant difference between the legal duties imposed in legislation and what will happen when the FOI regime is up and running. What will happen in practice is what is important. I assure members that amendment 15 will ensure that, as a matter of practice, disabled applicants are provided with information in the format that they prefer, except in exceptional and extreme circumstances. The bill begins from the principle that information should be made available; that will remain the starting point under amendment 15. As the official code of practice on the application of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 makes clear, an authority will have to have very good reason for not making a reasonable adjustment.

I ask for some latitude, because the issue is core to the bill.

The issue comes down not just to the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 and its code of practice, but to the information commissioner. If an applicant is any way dissatisfied with the response that they receive from the provider of information, they can ask the commissioner to instruct the provider to provide the information in the form that they seek. The commissioner will also be able to suggest alternatives if they are available and if they are suitable and satisfactory to the applicant in terms of their disability. Under amendment 57, that cannot be suggested—the matter is left to the disabled person and no reference is made to equally acceptable alternatives. As I said, a distinction must be drawn between the legal duties in the bill and how the regime operates in practice. We will engage with the range of bodies that Michael Matheson and others have referred to and that have been involved in discussions on the amendments. We will ensure that the guidance delivers what we all want as parliamentarians, which is to ensure the equal right of access for all disabled people and an  equal ability to obtain the benefit of the bill. Members should agree to amendment 19 because it clarifies the situation, and reject amendment 57. If members seek further points of reassurance, my colleague Jim Wallace will respond later. Although he is not summing up formally, we believe that it is important to put such points on the record.

Amendment 14 replaces an amendment that Michael Matheson lodged at stage 2. That amendment sought to ensure that any discretion that might be given to the commissioner could also be "exercisable in response to an application made by a Scottish public authority." During the stage 2 debate on that amendment, we argued that, under section 10 as it was originally drafted, any discretion granted to the  commissioner could be exercised in response to such an application and on any other grounds that the commissioner deemed appropriate. The Executive is keen to ensure clarity and to avoid any potential misconstruing of the effect of section 10(5)(b) in future. We have therefore lodged amendment 14 to replace Michael Matheson's text with a form of words that reflects what was intended and makes it clear that any discretion given or granted to the commissioner could be exercised at the request of the authority and where no such request is made. I move amendment 14.

This debate has been helpful. I hope that we have reassured people about our intention, which Brian Fitzpatrick put clearly, that the bill should be about equality of access for all our citizens. That is a key principle in the bill. That principle should also apply to all disabled persons—there should be no discrimination between different groups of disabled persons. The issue of permanency is important. We do not want the person who receives a request for information to get out of that request because they have made no permanent record of it. We are determined that the authorities that fall within the scope of the act ensure that they achieve the means by which all our disabled citizens have their request for information recorded in whatever form is appropriate to their disability. That is a crucial point. To use James Douglas-Hamilton's example, if someone who is blind were to telephone with a request, they would be offered the opportunity of having that request recorded in a way that would allow them to verify it. It is not only the recording and permanency of the request that are important, as the person who makes that request will have the opportunity to verify what they are requesting. The same applies to people who are deaf. The problem with amendment 56 is that every telephone call—that is, calls made by everyone, not just by disabled people—would constitute a request for information under the act and would therefore have to be recorded in some way. That would create a major bureaucratic problem. We believe that amendments 12, 22, 28 and 36 cover  the situation appropriately. Through the use of a statutory duty and a legal duty, we will require the authority to respond to the needs of the applicant. Other points were made in the debate. Both Maureen Macmillan and Brian Fitzpatrick referred to the question whether we would monitor the outcome of our amendments. Not only will we monitor that outcome, but the Parliament, through its Equal Opportunities Committee, must monitor it. In addition, the commissioner will monitor it and report on it to the Parliament. We give an undertaking to consult fully the organisations that Michael Matheson mentioned when we determine the code of practice, to ensure that any unintended consequences of our amendments for those organisations are not followed through. We will ensure that disabled people have appropriate access under the bill. I hope that members will support the Executive's amendments and reject those of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton.

I will be brief. I am grateful to Donald Gorrie for explaining the thinking that lies behind amendments 64 and 76. It is clear that both amendments are well intentioned. I understand exactly what Mr Gorrie is trying to do; he is trying to make less onerous the bill's burden on small groups. However, we consider amendments 64 and 76 to be impractical and therefore unnecessary in the context of how the bill is intended to operate. The key point is that the bill's provisions will work together as an integrated package and are indivisible. It is not possible to restrict the bill's application so that only particular sections will apply. For example, it would be inappropriate to remove the right of access or the obligation to devise and make available a publication scheme. In other words, we do not consider that it will be possible to partition the bill in such a way as to establish a lesser freedom of information regime that would impose fewer obligations on some public authorities. Moreover, amendment 64 does not specify the fact that the application of the bill might be restricted, nor does it specify the criteria on which the Scottish information commissioner would arrive at the opinion that an authority had only limited resources. Limitation of coverage—in so far as the act will apply to specified categories of information—is already provided under section 7. I will not go into the scheduling behind that. We understand the intention behind amendment  64, but feel that it is inappropriate, and I ask Donald Gorrie to withdraw it. We will, however, pursue the matter of providing appropriate guidance and help to small organisations.  Amendment 64, by agreement, withdrawn.

There are two points to make. First, when universities are in relationships with venture capitalists, the latter will want the universities to take a majority shareholding. Secondly, because of the way in which amendment 1 is worded, agreement to it would mean that the bill would not apply only to the public functions of the joint company, but to its private functions. That is a point that Michael Matheson has not addressed.

We understand the motives behind amendment 61, but, for various reasons, they are unnecessary or inappropriate and we cannot support them. However, I hope to reassure Michael Matheson that the concerns of those in certain sectors of the archive community are unfounded. I remind him that the archive aspects of the bill have been welcomed by the Keeper of the Records of Scotland and the Scottish Records Advisory Council. The amendments seek to apply to the archive service of a Scottish public authority the same arrangements as are provided in the bill for the Keeper of the Records of Scotland. They therefore betray a misunderstanding of the statutory functions of the Keeper of the Records of Scotland, the reasons why specific provisions have been provided in the bill for the keeper and the way in which those provisions are intended to operate. The amendments fail to recognise the distinction between the records transferred to the keeper for him to hold as part of his statutory duties to maintain and provide access to the National Archives of Scotland and information that any Scottish public authority might be holding on behalf of another person. In particular, the amendments do not recognise the effect of subsection 3(2) of the bill, which provides that the information being held by an authority on behalf of another person is not to be regarded as being held. Therefore, the authority holding on behalf of another authority is not caught for that information by FOI. I reassure Michael Matheson that the effect of that meets one of the primary concerns behind the amendments. I have a second point. The archive services of Scottish public authorities do not have the same legal standing as the keeper. They vary in nature and they do not perform the same statutory record-keeping functions as the keeper. The archive services of Scottish public authorities do not receive records from United Kingdom public authorities as part of the Scottish national archive—for example, records of UK departments whose activities relate wholly or mainly to Scotland. That role is unique to the keeper. I have dealt with the primary concern that the amendments seek to apply the special arrangements that are available to the keeper to the non-statutory archive functions of other authorities, which are not under the keeper's statutory regime. I do not therefore propose to set out the technical reasons why each amendment is  inappropriate. I am happy to write to Michael Matheson with further details if he would find that helpful. On the basis of the explanation and the reassurances that I have provided, I ask Michael Matheson to withdraw amendment 61.

The Executive called for this debate because we wanted to hear members' views as part of the consultation process. For the most part, the debate has been measured. We all clearly agree that it is imperative to end slopping out and to set a timetable for doing so and that, as Paul  Martin stressed, it is important to modernise the estate to meet modern correctional practice standards and to address issues of rehabilitation and reoffending. I agree with Paul Martin that the review does not cover rehabilitation in detail; it deals primarily with bricks and mortar. However, the thrust behind our policy is to address the problem of reoffending. We also want to avoid overcrowding. As some members pointed out, overcrowding is a problem in many prisons and we need to get rid of it. The one issue on which we do not agree is how we achieve best value in the new estate. However, the crux of the problem for the Scottish Executive centres on the advice that we received from the SPS, which we have attempted to verify. I have listened to members' criticisms on the matter and I should point out that we have at least made such an attempt. If we had not done that, members would have criticised our failure to do so. We have endeavoured to examine the situation closely. Why have we delayed the report for a whole year? We have taken so long over the issue because in the first instance there was disbelief about the figures. PricewaterhouseCoopers was given free access to all the available figures and came up with its own conclusions. Those conclusions, too, demonstrated the substantial difference between the private sector and public sector options. The question that Mike Rumbles has repeatedly asked SNP members is what they would do, given the advice that it would take 12 years to ensure public provision. The advice that we have received is that the ability to procure in the public sector, here and in England, will lead to substantial delays. The delay may not be as great as 12 years and we may be able to achieve what we need in less time than that, but that is the advice that we have received. The SNP has signally failed to come up with an alternative offer. I hope that it will do so during the consultation.

I shall give way to Stewart Stevenson in a minute, when we come on to Peterhead prison. Roseanna Cunningham refused to allow me to intervene to correct some of the misinformation that she was delivering. Michael Matheson, in an otherwise measured speech in which he covered specific points that must be considered in great detail, got one thing wrong. He spoke about high staff sickness levels, but the report shows that the average number of sick days a year for Kilmarnock was 8.5 and that the only prison with a lower figure was Peterhead. In some prisons, such as Dumfries prison, the figure was as high as 25.

I will not take interventions on that point. I may take one later, but not at the moment. We agree on what prisons are about. They are about ensuring that there is punishment, which is important, but public safety is also an issue. I completely reject Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's suggestion—again, in an otherwise measured contribution—that holding the majority of sex offenders in the central belt makes things unsafe for the public. There are 50-odd sex offenders in Glenochil and I hear no disturbance about that in my community. As well as the principles of punishment and public safety, there is also the question of staff safety. Kilmarnock prison has been criticised on that ground, but there have been attacks on staff in the public prisons as well. There is the question of reasonable terms and conditions—my colleagues have made a series of helpful contributions on the real concerns about the need for reasonable terms and conditions. We must have good training. Again, Kilmarnock has been criticised in that respect, although its staff are trained to SPS standards. As George Reid said, the staff are new, but they are nevertheless trained to SPS standards. Although the most recent inspector's report says that there must be further basic training for staff, it applauds the fact that there is training for management. We need an effective correctional programme. When Kilmarnock prison was set up, the contract was based on a work ethic and the prison achieved what it was asked to achieve—the highest proportion in any prison in Scotland of prisoners out in the workshops doing work. That is the task that was set and the prison has achieved it. The correctional policies are now changing and Kilmarnock's policies must therefore be revisited. We have already done that in one respect, in that we have given Kilmarnock an equal share of the transitional care money to ensure that drug programmes and rehabilitation programmes under the Cranston project are carried out in Kilmarnock as they are everywhere else. The health board will build a small health centre in Kilmarnock to deal with problem drug users who go out from Kilmarnock to the local community.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. If the member wants to speak to me later or write to me, I will be happy to listen. There are other important issues. Michael Matheson and other members have listed all the problems at Kilmarnock and Alex Neil goes on about the problems there all the time. The issue is not that the public sector is the best and the private sector is the worst or that the private sector  is the best and the public sector is the worst. The reviews by HM inspectors in the past year showed that there were 12 items of best practice for the whole service, and that—

Alex Neil should let me finish. On best practice for the whole service across Scotland, there were 12 items from Kilmarnock and there were eight items from Edinburgh and four items from Greenock. There is best practice in the public sector and in the private sector. There are justifiable criticisms. I will listen to Margaret Jamieson, because she has her finger on the pulse in relation to Kilmarnock. She knows the staff there; many of them are her constituents. There is no doubt that there are concerns about staff safety, particularly at weekends and in A wing. Why do we have an HMI system that covers not just the public sector, but the private sector? We have that system because there is a unified service that is inspected and treated as a whole. Why are there visiting committees across the whole estate? There are visiting committees across the whole estate because it is important that the public are represented when the estate is examined. Visiting committee members at Kilmarnock prison have the most open access—they carry keys and can go anywhere that they want to go. I have spoken to the chair of the visiting committee, who was very positive about the prison, as were the chairman of the Parole Board for Scotland and the moderator of the Church of Scotland. The question is not one of public good and private bad or private good and public bad—there is best practice in both the public sector and the private sector. I will speak about Peterhead prison, as it is the subject of the Conservative amendment—it was also the subject of Stewart Stevenson's excellent speech. Stewart Stevenson knows that, as a back bencher, I went on record applauding the work at Peterhead prison. I want to put on record again that there is absolutely no doubt that there is excellent work at Peterhead prison. However, the current buildings have outlasted their use and need to be replaced. Where and how should we replace those buildings? The majority of sex offenders are held in prisons in the central belt. Some 85 per cent of offenders will go back to the central belt and most likely will be relocated there once they have concluded their sentences. Links with the criminal justice social work system that will look after them when they are on parole are absolutely crucial. Whether we like it or not, maintaining links at a distance is not easy. The other day, I spoke to members of the central Scotland criminal justice team and asked them about the issue. They said that moving people  around is a difficulty for other prisons, too. There is a real difficulty in relocating high-risk sex offenders in particular.

We will continue to discuss the matter. We have had a meeting with Stewart Stevenson and Aberdeenshire Council. I confirm what my colleague Jim Wallace said at the start of the debate. He and I have instructed the SPS—specifically, Alex Spencer, who set up the programme at Peterhead prison and is now the director of rehabilitation and care—to examine the future of sex offenders in the Prison Service with the assistance of outside advice. The review will not be just internal; it will be external. If there is a decision at the end of the consultation period to move to a central prison, we will carefully consider how that will be done with the least disruption.

I am sorry, but am I in my final minute, Presiding Officer?

I ask the Conservatives to withdraw their amendment, as our proposals are broader than their suggestions. If the amendment were accepted, it would limit the review that we want to carry out. Most people have at least said that they are comfortable about there being a consultation. We could have taken a decision without consultation. The Executive is happy that the Justice 1 Committee is to conduct a review. We hope that the committee will hear from the chair of the Parole Board, as the board has interesting views. I urge a serious examination. So far, the most disappointing aspect of the debate has been the Taylor and Cooper review. I hoped that that would give us a better analysis and understanding of the substantial differences. However, the review is a  piece of polemic. Moreover, it confuses current costs per prisoner with net present value. For a professor of accounting to do that is totally unacceptable. I hope that the Justice 1 Committee, which is convened by Christine Grahame, will examine that carefully when Professor Cooper is in front of the committee, because we need to understand the substantial differences. We all agree that we want a modern prison service that ends slopping out, but we want it with staff who are committed, are paid reasonable wages and have decent pensions. Whether it is in the private sector or the public sector, the prison service must serve the needs of the public through providing proper safety and proper rehabilitation. The Executive wants to achieve that at best value, but that seems to be the one point on which we are not agreed. The Executive will not spend £700 million extra—if that turns out to be the figure at the end of the consultation period—on public rather than private prisons. I set a challenge, which Maureen Macmillan, Pauline McNeill and others have also set. There needs to be close examination of the figures. There must also be an examination by both sides of why the public service is so expensive. The issue is not just about one side being cheap and the other being expensive. The gap between the two is almost beyond belief and must be examined closely. We hope that it will be. I hope that the Parliament will agree to the Executive's motion, which welcomes the consultation. I also hope that people will genuinely take part in that consultation.

The latest figures from Kilmarnock indicate a turnover of 13.8 per cent, which includes transfers between the unit at Kilmarnock and other Premier Prison Services establishments in England and Wales. The next highest turnover figure, which does not include transfers, is 12 per cent and is in one of the SPS units. That means that Kilmarnock's turnover rate is now lower than that of many of the Scottish institutions.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am not making an intervention. Is it appropriate for a member to say something that is absolutely untrue and not take an intervention?

This has been a useful, if brief, debate. I particularly welcome the general support for the measures from all parts of the chamber and, despite some slight reservations from my nationalist colleagues, the acknowledgement that a Sewel motion is important on this occasion because of the interlinking between aspects of administration and receivership. I welcome Adam Ingram's support, particularly for the changes in administration, which are important. We could debate at length the divisions in the Scotland Act 1998 between reserved and devolved matters, but in this case we are dealing with the outcome of that act in an appropriate way.

The balance has not changed in the Scotland Act 1998. Receivership matters still lie with the Scottish Parliament and administration matters lie with the Westminster Parliament. That has not fundamentally changed, but there will be areas around any boundary that require discussion. The bill aims to reinforce the matter of administration and to ensure that companies are indeed given the opportunity to survive, change and develop, rather than being put into receivership by the primary creditor or floating charge holder, which was the position before. There are no fundamental changes, but we need to watch what happens at the edges very closely to ensure that things are working in the best interests of businesses in Scotland, and indeed in other parts of the UK. Rhona Brankin reflected the views of all speakers in the chamber when she said that the benefits of the bill are to improve the chances of rescuing companies. Alex Neil drew attention specifically to the question of the Crown's preferential treatment and how damaging that has been on occasion. The Federation of Small Businesses said: "We are particularly pleased with moves to abolish the Crown's preferential right to recover unpaid taxes ahead of unsecured small businesses. Whilst this will cost the Treasury around £90 million,"— I think that £70 million is probably nearer the mark— "it does mean that the small firms sector will benefit by the same amount, thus giving small businesses more chance to survive and prosper." It went on to say: "We do not see anything controversial in these proposals and would urge all party support". The FSB will be pleased that we have a measure of universal agreement in the chamber this afternoon. It is interesting to note that, in the initial debate on the bill, there was considerable concern about the primary creditor or floating charge holder, which is usually the bank. A bank's situation would be substantially undermined by the new provisions, but the British Bankers Association said in a letter of 26 March to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry:  "We have enjoyed a dialogue with your Department in which we have had the opportunity to explain how banks attempt to rescue businesses in severe difficulty ... The Enterprise Bill published today reflects that dialogue." We have managed to achieve a unique situation, as the Federation of Small Businesses and the British Bankers Association both agree.

The Executive will review the current law, consult interested parties such as the Law Society of Scotland and publish a consultation document. I am sorry that I cannot give a date for that, but it will be in our diary and is under review. Once consultation has taken place, we will move, probably during the course of the next session when we can find time in the legislative framework. In response to her concerns, I can tell Annabel Goldie that officials from my department have already met the Law Society of Scotland on at least one occasion and will do so again. The Law Society expressed no specific concerns about the bill to my officials. If Miss Goldie is aware of specific concerns, I would be grateful if she could communicate them to us so that we can continue the dialogue that will undoubtedly take place. Officials in Scottish departments are in close contact with their counterparts at Whitehall on the effects that the bill might have. Tavish Scott raised a more general question about Sewel motions, which I have to say concerned me when I was a back bencher. Problems have occurred on at least one occasion. The procedure is clear. If there is a substantial amendment to what the Parliament has approved, the Executive or an Opposition party should raise the matter in the chamber and lodge a fresh motion. If there is a substantial change, that must be done. I do not expect a substantial change in respect of this Sewel motion, but if there is, I am sure that Tavish Scott will advise me or Jim Wallace and we will take the appropriate action.

The Executive thinks that there must be a level playing field for enterprise in the UK. The bill provides an opportunity for that and the Sewel motion allows us to retain the integrated system of administration and receivership. We believe that the changes are important to Scottish business and to business in the rest of the UK.

I would like to explain why we are recommending a Sewel motion in relation to part 10, clauses 239 and 241, of the Enterprise Bill—noted as part 8 in the memorandum—which was introduced in the Westminster Parliament on 26 March. I will explain why we have given the UK Government our support on the bill and why we have co-operated on the corporate insolvency aspects. The bill is a substantial piece of work. The ground that it covers is mostly reserved, and I shall refer only briefly to those aspects. The aim of the Enterprise Bill—and the aim of the budget that is unfolding—is to improve productivity and competitiveness through reform of the UK's competition, insolvency and consumer protection regimes; to facilitate the rescue of companies; and to provide certainty and fairness to creditors and other stakeholders. The first nine parts of the bill relate to the establishment of the Office of Fair Trading, the Competition Appeal Tribunal, a new merger regime and new market investigation arrangements, as well as miscellaneous competition provisions and consumer legislation matters. Our focus today is on part 10 of the bill, which deals with insolvency. In this part, as well as proposals for change in relation to the law governing corporate insolvency, the bill sets out new regimes for personal bankruptcy. However, personal bankruptcy in Scotland is a devolved matter and is not covered in the bill. We will be consulting in Scotland on possible reforms to that aspect of the law in due course. The core of the debate today is the changes that are proposed to corporate insolvency law, which again is largely a reserved area. The changes seek to abolish the Crown's preferential right to recover unpaid taxes ahead of other creditors; to provide for a new regime for company administration; and to restrict the future use of receivership which, except for existing arrangements, will remain only for the financial markets, as set out in the explanatory note.  I now come to the aspects of the bill that require the agreement of the Parliament. Administration is reserved, but receivership is devolved. It might be helpful if I explain briefly the difference between administration and receivership. Administration is a comparatively new procedure, introduced in 1986 to facilitate company rescues by giving companies protection from their creditors while they are restructured and, it is to be hoped, saved. Members may know about chapter 11 bankruptcy in America, which is a similar procedure. Receivership, in contrast, is the mechanism by which a floating charge holder—usually a bank—enforces a security by seizing the assets of the company where there has been a default on an overdraft or loan. The first step in the proposed reform is to streamline administration to make it quicker, more flexible, easier to access and fairer. The bill does so by providing out-of-court routes into administration for floating charge holders and for companies and their directors.

I thank the member for that point, which I will address in summing up.

The bill removes the need for a court hearing in most instances. We hope to reduce court involvement. It should also enhance accessibility and reduce costs. It removes bureaucracy and introduces clear time limits, so that administration is concluded quickly. It creates simpler and clearer objectives of administration that promote company rescue or, when that is not reasonably practicable, produce a better result for all creditors. If neither of those objectives is reasonably practicable, an administrator can realise a company's property to make a distribution to one or more secured or preferential creditors. The amendment of the administration process strikes a fair balance between the interests of all creditors. The changes in the Crown rules contribute to that. The bill requires the use of the administration procedure by creditors who would previously have been entitled to appoint a receiver. It will ensure that all reasonably practicable options are  considered, but without prejudicing the interests of floating charge holders. The result of the changes is to shift the balance from a situation in which effective control is placed in the hands of a single secured creditor to one that takes account of the interests of unsecured creditors. In the place of receivership, the new system for administration will be an effective tool in encouraging company rescue. The Enterprise Bill contains provisions that affect the devolved matters of floating charges and receivers as part of a wider package of rules that is aimed at promoting the law on administration. The Scottish Parliament could not legislate on the new administration regime, which dovetails into the new restricted receivership regime, so the Executive's view is that the simplest and most effective route is to legislate through the Enterprise Bill. Although the Enterprise Bill as a whole relates to reserved matters, the corporate insolvency provisions cover devolved aspects of the law. The devolved matters are embedded in a wider package of provisions that will reform the reserved matter of administration. That is the basis for taking the Sewel motion approach to the bill. The bill modernises insolvency law, and we agree with the UK Government that, by doing so, it will improve corporate rescue. I move, That the Parliament agrees that provisions in the Enterprise Bill that relate to the devolved matter of receivership should be considered by the UK Parliament.

I welcome the publication of the  "Justice for Children" report and I congratulate Gil Paterson on drawing the report to the Parliament's attention. I participated considerably in members' business debates when I was a back bencher and I still believe that they represent one of the most important parts of the Parliament's function. They allow serious discussion of serious issues in a less partisan way. The report's central theme is that the best interests of children should be at the heart of our justice system—criminal and civil. The Executive and, in particular, the First Minister have said that the welfare of children—especially children under pressure—must be at the centre of what we do. The report picks up some of the key themes that the Executive is attempting to address. The points that Christine Grahame and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made, which were referred to in passing by Winnie Ewing, are important. We are dealing with a matter of balance. As the right balance is incredibly difficult to achieve, there have been delays, which have sometimes been regarded as rather lengthy, in achieving what we all seek—justice for the accused and sensitive handling of the children in all respects. We agree that balance is key. The report stresses the importance of effective inter-agency working within a properly structured framework. That is crucial. As a doctor, I was involved in interviewing children about quite significant issues. There are problems in interviewing children—as Winnie Ewing suggested, it is not an easy task to undertake. However, if children are given the right set of circumstances, they can be very reliable witnesses. Although we should not suggest that children are less reliable, they can be made to be unreliable if the questioning is inappropriate. The report stresses the importance of having the right range of options available to those who deal with children. It should be possible for child witnesses to give evidence in a way that allows them to be questioned fairly by the defence, without the experience being frightening or confusing. The report also underlines that cases that involve children should be given priority throughout the process of case preparation and presentation. Irene McGugan referred to the fact that it is not just the event that is important—everything that goes before it matters. Teachers and psychologists are involved in establishing the capacity of children to deal with the way in which cases are presented. There is a great deal of common ground on priorities for action. The issue is not new. I think that the Scottish Law Commission reported on it as long ago as 10 years ago. Plotnikoff carried out research in 1995 and Gil Paterson quoted some horrifying examples  of practice that needed to be addressed. The Lord Advocate's working party, which reported in 1999, made some 32 recommendations. We have implemented four of those. More important, we are progressing the work, although there was a delay in starting the process because of the pressure that the department has been under on such matters as the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill. I am not sure that that represents a correct set of priorities. However, we are making progress. The implementation group, which is a multi-agency group, got under way in September 2001. Children 1 st and NCH Scotland are involved in the process and their contribution is greatly appreciated. The group is working through three sub-groups. One sub-group is examining improved operational support for child witnesses and is preparing a paper for ministers' consideration on the options for organising that support. We intend to consult more widely before reaching final decisions. That group is looking at recommendations 1, 4 and 5 of "Justice for Children" and at recommendations 1 and 3 of the Lord Advocate's working group report. The second group is preparing national guidance to improve the quality of investigative interviews with children. Before that guidance is finalised, there will be consultation with key organisations. Any guidance that is issued will be made widely available on the web. The second group is dealing with recommendations 3 and 8. The planning interviews that Donald Gorrie mentioned are also part of the working group's efforts. We are also about to publish a report on vulnerable witnesses which, although not dealing specifically with children, will deal with issues that overlap and can be read across. We are working on guidance on the questioning of children in court. That work is closely linked to the separate work on vulnerable witnesses that I referred to. A consultation looking at the definition of vulnerable persons will be published towards the end of April. The consultation will also consider what current and future special measures could be taken to make it easier for all who need extra support in giving evidence. In addition to the three sub-groups and the central group, which are examining all the recommendations, other groups are considering the matter. For example, Gil Paterson referred to recommendation 2, which concerns the standards that should be set for the investigation of cases. That is a matter for the Lord Advocate, but detailed guidance is given in chapter 16 of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service's book of regulations. The Lord Advocate is looking at the matter.  Recommendation 10 is that specialist training should be undertaken, but there are specialist training courses already. Indeed, Crown counsel attended one such course last weekend, as they do each year. The Law Society of Scotland has also been involved in training. The provision of such training for judges and sheriffs is a matter for the judicial studies committee, but it is clearly important that people who question and manage children have the appropriate training to deal with those difficult issues. A great number of areas of work are being taken forward. I can give my colleagues an undertaking that I will press the issue with the greatest possible urgency. However, we need to be careful that we strike the balance that I referred to. My colleagues Jim Wallace and Cathy Jamieson have agreed to meet representatives of the three organisations that sponsored the report so that we can explore their ideas in more depth. However, members will understand that we also need to take into account the views of others.  There is no doubt that the First Minister, the Executive and the Parliament have all made dealing with our children a priority. If one child is traumatised and damaged by an insensitive justice system, that is one child too many. Some of the examples that were given by Stewart Stevenson, Winnie Ewing and others indicate how difficult this area is and how sensitively it must be handled. I will end as I began, by thanking Gil Paterson for initiating the debate. I also thank the organisations for their helpful report. Their report has a read-across to the Lord Advocate's report and to the work that we are doing. Their report has helped me to focus on the way in which we are taking matters forward. The debate has been up to the usual high standard of members' business debates. We will attempt to get the right answers for the children of Scotland in the near future.

On 31 October 2001, we announced details of a new community safety award programme, which will give all council-led community safety partnerships a share of £12 million over the next three years for local community safety initiatives. The programme will allow community safety partnerships to secure, for the first time, sustained mainstream funding to be used solely for the purposes of taking forward the community safety agenda.

The Executive is aware of the concerns of many MSPs and of their constituents about youth crime. We believe that community safety partnerships—which involve the local council, the local police, the fire brigade and many other groups, including the communities that are seriously affected by crime—have the opportunity to bring forward many different projects, of which there are excellent examples across the country. The Audit Commission has published a report on community safety partnerships and has put an audit system in place. It is possible to develop all sorts of new projects and many exciting projects are taking place. I encourage Elaine Thomson to work with the local community, as I know that she is doing, to develop that further.

As Lord James will no doubt be aware, a report on the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has been published. Indeed, one of the Parliament's committees has been examining the matter in detail. The Executive intends to take the matter forward with some expediency.

The behaviour that arises from drug misuse is significant. One of our reports indicated that 40 per cent of families in council flats said that vandalism and people drinking or taking drugs were common problems in their neighbourhoods. Tackling such problems is part of the community neighbourhood strategy that we are trying to develop. It is important that we ensure that the rehabilitation services are not only available, but available at the right time. The effective interventions unit of the health department, with which I work closely, is developing a programme on integrated care that will allow us to ensure that the proper services are available in individual areas for those who are involved in drugs. The programme will help people move out of drug misuse into more appropriate behaviours.

The debate has been interesting and, contrary to Roseanna Cunningham's suggestion, it has been worth while. I am grateful to members throughout the chamber for their constructive speeches. In that respect, Colin Campbell's measured tones were particularly helpful. I believe that the new interaction between central UK authorities and the devolved authority has to be tested—indeed, it was tested in our last exercise. The relationship between central Scottish and the eight regional authorities is also important. The boundary areas, to which Colin Campbell referred, are important.  I thank Tom McCabe, Bill Aitken and others for saying that the debate was worth while. I believe that the debate has given members the opportunity to make an input, which is useful. As Tom McCabe said, the debate has also given us an opportunity to reassure the people of Scotland that we are tackling the possibility of threats that we may face. We have only to look at the past two years or so. Threats have included the millennium bug, which turned out not to be a problem, but for which careful planning was involved. The fuel protest, innocuous though it was, could have had a significant effect on our infrastructure had it been allowed to continue. Elaine Smith mentioned that. George Lyon referred to the foot-and-mouth outbreak. It is true to say that Scotland handled the outbreak well. Our colleagues in the rest of the United Kingdom have considered some of the measures that we took and found them to be helpful. A number of members referred to Lockerbie. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and Bill Aitken made special mention of counselling. I was involved in a neighbouring practice to Dunblane when that nasty incident, which involved a lot of people, took place. I counselled some of the police officers who were involved in the Lockerbie incident and was involved in research on post-traumatic stress counselling that followed on from the Dunblane incident. We have learned a lot from the Lockerbie and Dunblane incidents and counselling is now available. However, some organisations such as the police require to make a culture change so that counselling is seen not as a measure of weakness, but as something that is important. I thank members for their comments on that subject. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned communications systems. A variety of measures are available and they are reviewed regularly. Encrypted measures are now available, but I will not go into any great detail about them. However, I will say that the emergency communication network, which is a series of private wires, now interconnects the Scottish Executive, local authorities, police, fire and ambulance services and other agencies such as nuclear off-site centres, water authorities and several large industrial complexes. As a result, I hope that I can reassure Lord James on that issue. Lloyd Quinan, Roseanna Cunningham and Michael Matheson referred to the energy sector. A plane crash on a nuclear installation has been recognised as a possible, not improbable, threat. Indeed, UK Government committees have been carefully examining that specific issue. Moreover, the operators of installations have for some time been required to draw up plans for the treatment  of people in the immediate area of a nuclear incident, although such steps would obviously depend on the scale of the radiation release. The health authorities have just made available eight mobile decontamination units for use in an emergency. That measure is supported by the fire service, which can provide the necessary equipment and personnel to deal with a large number of casualties. I hope that that will reassure Lloyd Quinan and Roseanna Cunningham. Bill Aitken referred to natural disasters. Members will know that I produced a report on flu vaccination, part of which dealt with pandemics, and I can assure the Parliament that Scotland is prepared for such a disaster and that health authorities have plans to deal with it. However, now that I am a minister, I will ask those authorities to dust down their files and have another look at the matter. Donald Gorrie, Elaine Smith, Michael Matheson and other members mentioned floods. I should point out that Ross Finnie opened SEPA's floodline, which provides flood warning information. That said, we are concerned by the current climate changes and will continue to watch the situation very carefully. The Executive and Whitehall departments are also working with the water industry to find out to what extent current resources could cope with a major water-related incident. No members have referred to the security of our MSPs, even though some of them have been threatened. In particular, we are looking at and trying to deal with hoaxes. I want to state very clearly to any hoaxers who are out there that this is not a laughing matter or a joke. For example, the services in Strathclyde deal with 6 million telephone communications a year; however, they also have to deal with a vast number of hoax calls, which cause huge problems for our emergency services. One day, those hoax calls will cause major difficulties. I hope that the Parliament sends out a message that hoaxers should stop their joking and that anyone who is found to have made such a call will be prosecuted. I believe that good structures exist, although I agree with the members who have said that we must not be complacent. As Scotland is a small country, with a small population and a small number of organisations, the lines of communication are tighter and we are able to work together. However, complacency is not an option. I hope that all members will join me in praising the emergency services; indeed, many members did so in their speeches. Their work is important. For example, their response to the recent incident in Perth demonstrates their watchfulness and the effectiveness of their planning. The officers are all full-time, not volunteers, although I understand  Michael Matheson's comment in that respect. However, they have to perform other duties, and we must ensure that those duties are balanced. I thank members for their speeches. The debate has been useful; I have certainly learned something from it. I realise that I have not answered all the points that have been raised—indeed, I am aware that I have not responded to one of Michael Matheson's points—but if members put their questions in writing, I will try to get back to them in writing. I will just end by saying that I hope that Scotland is well prepared for any emergency.

Civil contingency planning is part of the everyday business of Government, the emergency services, health boards, the utilities and the local authorities, as it is for the private sector and others. That planning, which is rooted in the principle of integrated emergency management, has served us well in responding to a range of incidents throughout Scotland over many years. Incidents might differ in scale, from an atrocity as horrendous as the Lockerbie disaster to the potential threat that was posed by the millennium date change. However, it is through the process of identifying the risks, planning the responses and practising the procedures that are to be followed in an emergency that we can be prepared for any eventuality. The unprecedented nature of the events of 11 September last year has necessitated a review of our emergency planning and a fundamental reassessment of what needs to be done to enable us to respond to a new scale of potential threat. The public rightly have a high expectation of the protective measures that should be in place, particularly in the light of the attacks on Washington and New York and the subsequent anthrax fatalities in America. For the next few minutes, I will outline the contingency planning arrangements that we will follow in Scotland and how they will link with such planning throughout the United Kingdom. I will also detail the actions that we have taken since the dreadful events of 11 September.

That is a matter for the American Government. I do not have the information to confirm or reject that point. Investigations are being pursued. However, a significant number of dubious packages were received in Scotland, but they all turned out to be either hoaxes or false  alarms. We are fortunate in Scotland that we have tried and tested structures in place that have served us well. We have a top-down and bottom-up approach that is based on the principle that the response to major emergencies should be primarily at local level, but should be supported as necessary by central emergency machinery. At national level, the central machinery is led by the Scottish emergencies co-ordinating committee, which is chaired by the head of the justice department. That committee brings together senior representation from all the emergency services and other key organisations, such as the health service, the local authorities, the military, the utilities and a wide range of other players. The committee can deal with an immediate emergency or consider what must be done in the longer term to upgrade our capacity to respond to the widest range of possible threats. The committee commissioned much of the new work that has been undertaken in Scotland since 11 September. At regional level, there are eight strategic emergency co-ordinating groups, which are based on police and fire authority boundaries. Those involve chief constables, fire-masters, local authority chief executives and others. They have a key role in planning and co-ordinating civil contingency planning across geographical and sectoral boundaries and in organising training, in developing exercises, and in promoting mutual aid. At local level, each of the 32 local authorities in Scotland has a council emergency planning officer. Those officers mainly report directly to their council's chief executive. Their roles vary slightly from authority to authority, but their primary purpose is to ensure that the full range of local authority services and resources can be brought to bear in an emergency. In that context, planning must embrace the full range of possible emergencies, from bad weather in winter to a full-blown emergency, such as the recent example in Perth, in which an oxyacetylene tank was found in a lock-up garage that had caught fire. The emergency planning officer responded, along with the fire brigade, and the area was cleared. I want to praise the authorities for their excellent work in protecting the public in that situation. That was exactly the sort of locally co-ordinated response that we expect in an emergency of that sort. At each level, the emergency planning machinery has been at full alert since 11 September. The single fundamental philosophy that runs through the emergency planning structure in Scotland is that there should be a planned and integrated approach to all disasters, irrespective of their causes.  It is not only in Scotland that arrangements have been reviewed. Central Government, led by the civil contingencies secretariat in the Cabinet Office, has significantly increased examination of the ability to protect the public from, and to respond to, the terrorist threat. The Scottish Executive has been involved in the full range of initiatives that have emanated from London. The Executive is represented by either the First Minister or by the Deputy First Minister on the Civil Contingencies Committee, which is chaired by the Secretary of State for the Home Department. We are also represented on two sub-committees that the Civil Contingencies Committee set up in the wake of 11 September. One committee is looking in particular at the threat from biological and chemical terrorism. The other is promoting improvements in the overall level of resilience across all sectors in our society.

I have not been introduced to the bunker yet, so I cannot answer that question. However, I will write to Mr Canavan and tell him whether the bunker still exists and which officials and members would go into it. Resilience, which is important, is a paradox. Although it appears to be necessary that we are ready for anything, such a level of preparedness cannot realistically be delivered. That paradox is an inherent and unavoidable part of the modern world in which daily life is sustained by a network of unprecedented complexities and interdependencies. Resolution of the resilience paradox relies on the most adaptable components of any system—people and their knowledge. Contingency planning, new or old, is about enabling organisations to manage their own risks better. I know that the Deputy First Minister was engaged in an exercise in Inverness in recent months, which involved UK elements as well as Scottish elements. I will take part in a desktop exercise in the near future. Those two types of approach are used regularly. Much work is under way on improving risk management within Government and in the public and private sectors.

I am getting through my time, so I had better not.

No. I am sorry, but I must go on.  Because much work is under way on improving risk management within Government and in the public and private sectors, contingency planning to address identified risks becomes a routine part of business. In my last few minutes I will address some of the issues that the Scottish emergencies co-ordinating committee has considered recently. Our recent work has resulted in increased activity by all members of the emergency planning machinery at all levels. We have improved guidance on dealing with the threat of chemical and biological terrorism, which has been issued to health boards and local authorities. Specific guidance on anthrax has been issued to general practitioners. We have put in place protocols through which laboratory facilities in Scotland will undertake analyses of suspect packages, the number of which, as I said, has increased since the 11 September incident. Provision of resources for personal protective equipment has been extended to police and ambulance workers as well as fire service workers, so that the emergency services and first-line responders to chemical or biological incidents are protected appropriately. The provision of new resources for the fire service to enhance its ability to carry out heavy rescue work was the subject of recent special funding, as was the provision of decontamination equipment.

I think that I am into my last minute.

In that case I will take an intervention from Mr Quinan.

I propose to return to that point in my summing up, if I may. Much of the work that has been done has been groundbreaking. We have come a considerable way in the past five months, but there is a long way to go and we are in no way complacent. The forces have been on a state of alert since 11 September last year. It is important that that momentum is maintained so that Scotland's reputation and ability to respond to threats is enhanced. The public will expect and accept nothing less. I am sure that the Parliament will join me in paying tribute to all the organisations that are  working to ensure that Scotland is prepared for any contingency that might arise. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the importance of civil contingency planning and, in the light of the atrocities in the United States of America on 11 September 2001, approves the ongoing work by the Scottish Executive, the police, fire and ambulance services, the National Health Service, the local authorities and others, in promoting measures to enhance the safety and protection of the people of Scotland.

It falls to me to close the debate on behalf of the Executive. I, too, welcome the committee's report and have found today's debate interesting. Despite Christine Grahame's worries, the debate has at times been quite stimulating. Certainly, it has provided food for thought. I do not have time to deal with all the points that have been made, and I am sure that members will acknowledge that. If I miss points, or if questions require more detailed answers, I ask members to write to me or to my colleague, who will give further attention to those points. Phil Gallie made an interesting point in relation to overseas matters, which I will deal with quickly. The member will be excited to learn that a European directive concerning cross-border support for legal aid is about to appear. One difficulty is that our system is more generous than that of other European countries. I am sure that when the directive hits Phil Gallie's desk he will stand up and cheer for something European. My colleague outlined a number of our initial responses to the report. I stress that those are initial responses, but I am pleased that members have welcomed them. We have identified the issues to which we are giving further thought, such as the regular uprating of capital limits, to which Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred. That is interesting, because he was the minister responsible during a lengthy period when there was no uprating. However, I agree that in many areas we should have a system of regular uprating, provided that the Parliament is comfortable with that. We are concerned that there should be a more user-friendly, joined-up network of quality-assured legal information, advice and help throughout the country. We set up a broadly based working group to consider a range of issues, and last November the group issued its report. The report does not constitute a fully fledged or detailed blueprint for the development of community legal services in Scotland, but it identifies problems with the current arrangements and some of the key principles and features of a comprehensive network. Along with the Scottish Legal Aid Board, we are considering that report, with the aim of producing concrete proposals. I hope that that deals with some of the points that Roseanna Cunninghame made about the issue of access, which many members raised. We all desire good, reasonable access that is not burdened by costs, but which we can afford. That is very important. We have been asked whether we will introduce all the new eligibility criteria in one move. Some of them require primary legislation, so we will not be  able to introduce them all at one time, but we will try to do so wherever possible. A number of members referred to the changes that we are introducing regarding the repayment periods. It is too early for us to know how effective those changes will be, but—as Christine Grahame said—the change to 20 months is welcome and it allows the middle-income group, to which Pauline McNeill and Maureen Macmillan referred, a longer period in which to repay, which is appropriate. The benefits review, to which Maureen Macmillan referred, is also important, particularly in the context of domestic violence, to which Gil Paterson referred. I will return to that later if I have time. I hope that we will be able to take a view on that and introduce proposals in the summer. That is partly dependent on the UK Government's current review of all benefits, so there are issues to consider. We accept that there is a need to consider the rationale between legal aid and the benefits system. I have referred to the middle-income trap. We have said that we will consider tapering, which is important. Gil Paterson and others talked about merit testing and Gil Paterson gave cogent examples of the interpretation by SLAB. We cannot instruct SLAB on individual cases—Gil Paterson is aware of that—but we will follow up the matter, see whether there is persuasive evidence of anomalies and consider whether we can tackle them. We have announced that we will make it easier for successful unaided opponents to get expenses from legal aid. I hope that that answers Phil Gallie's point and that it will make things easier. Small businesses were referred to and Bill Aitken referred to community groups. As sole traders, small businesses can already apply for legal aid, but given that businesses can get legal insurance quite easily, we feel that that is a more appropriate route. We have sympathy in relation to community groups and we will consider that matter further. I turn to the difficulties in civil legal aid. In 1990-91, 1,029 firms were involved in civil legal aid, whereas in 2000-01 the figure was 1,049. There has been an increase in the number of firms available. The number of firms is only one measure, but the Law Society of Scotland is introducing proposals and we will consider the question of civil fees in due course. That will need to be quality assured—Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and others referred to that—and we will ensure that any fee increases in that context will have to be accompanied by proper quality assurance. Michael Matheson's point on fixed fees is  important. There are slight concerns about the recruitment of young lawyers into criminal legal aid. We have not received great evidence that the fees need to be increased, but colleagues have made me aware of the fact that there are difficulties in that area and we will return to it. In conclusion, we welcome the report. I hope that members believe that we have acted on some issues and will act on others. We will keep the Justice 1 Committee informed of the outcome of our further considerations. I am sorry that I ran slightly over time.

I thank everyone who has worked with us on the bill, including the many voluntary organisations whose members gave generously of their time to make written submissions and to give evidence in committee. I thank the Justice 2 Committee, its clerks and all the parliamentary staff who have assisted in the passage of the bill. I also join Jim Wallace in thanking the bill team, who have worked hard to meet a tight deadline for the bill's introduction. The stage 3 debate has addressed several important issues. Having the debate on the public record concerning such issues as the disclosure of previous convictions has been helpful to the legislative process. We have achieved a balance—Bill Aitken said that he would be the last to mention balance, but I have that honour—and I am glad that Conservative members feel that they can now support the bill. As Roseanna  Cunningham said, we have to recognise that it is a finite and specific bill, addressing some definite issues; nevertheless, as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, it sends an important message of intent that we are addressing and will continue to address the important issue of rape. As many members have said, it is appropriate that we have had this debate on international women's day. I fully understand the desire of many people to have the bill's provisions implemented as soon as possible. That will require some technical input, such as new legal aid regulations, the designing of forms and the updating of information technology systems. There will also need to be further consultation on the procedural aspects. However, we intend to achieve full implementation of the bill before the end of the year, or sooner, if feasible. Following the implementation of the bill, we will need to monitor the effects of the new provisions. We intend to start collecting raw statistics on the operation of the bill as soon as it is fully implemented. Nonetheless, a bedding-in period will be needed to ensure that the qualitative research on the impact of the new provisions is not distorted by teething difficulties. We believe, therefore, that 18 months is a reasonable interval and we intend to commission qualitative research to begin in 2004. We know that a major problem with the old restrictions on sexual history evidence has been an enforcement gap and we are alive to the need to watch the new situation closely. That is the road ahead. I hope that today will mark the start of a fairer deal for victims of sexual offences in our criminal law and procedure. I ask members to join me in voting for the bill to be passed.  Meeting closed at 16:39.

We have had a useful debate on this subject, but, like other members, I am slightly concerned. The committee process is vital in a unicameral legislature and issues of this magnitude should be addressed at stage 2, which allows for the appropriate amount of consideration. I will return later to some of the arguments that Roseanna Cunningham put forward, which I found interesting. Amendment 10 would give the accused in rape cases a presumptive right to anonymity and amendment 17 would adjust the long title accordingly. In our view, it would not be right to grant anonymity to the accused in those cases, because the reasons that underpin the anonymity of complainers do not apply to the accused. Complainers are allowed to remain anonymous because of the humiliating nature of the evidence that they have to give. A victim of a sexual attack has to be taken through the detail of what was done so that the Crown can establish that the crime was committed in the manner libelled. There is also the prospect of evidence about the victim's sexual history being led. We hope that the bill will make that less common, although it will still happen in some cases. If victims have to face the prospect that the nature of what happened to them and the detail of their private lives could become public knowledge, sexual offences would become even more under-reported than they are today. The accused is not in the same position as the complainer and can choose whether to give evidence. His consensual private life is generally regarded as irrelevant. If the accused were given anonymity in rape cases, it could be difficult to resist granting anonymity to those who have been charged with other offences that the public regard as serious. Our system of open justice could be undermined. More important, amendment 10 would create some anomalies. For example, it is not clear why anonymity should be given to those who are accused of rape but not to those who are accused of the sexual abuse of children. At present, complainers have no automatic right to anonymity. My understanding is that anonymity is granted to  accused in cases of abuse only in circumstances in which naming the accused would reveal the child's name. Anonymity is allowed only for the protection of the child. Roseanna Cunningham made a similar point. If naming the accused were automatically to lead to the revelation of the name of the victim, there might be a need for anonymity of the accused. It is regrettable that we were unable to have that interesting debate at stage 2 because the amendments were not lodged for debate at that stage. The amendments would give the accused a clearer right to anonymity than the complainer. I draw members' attention to the list of offences under proposed new section 288C(2) of the 1995 act. Why has rape been singled out as opposed to sodomy or clandestine injury to women? Singling out rape does not create the balance that Bill Aitken referred to. On all those grounds, I ask members to reject the amendments.

Amendment 1 is purely a drafting amendment that results from the removal of a subsection by an Executive amendment at stage 2. The words "such an application" no longer make sense and amendment 1 spells out the type of application that is meant. Amendment 2 is a tidying-up amendment. The bill amends section 71 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 to allow a pre-trial hearing in a sheriff-and-jury case to be used for the determination of a character or sexual evidence  history application. Amendment 2 moves the words that achieve that effect to a more logical space within section 71 of the 1995 act. They will now come after section 71(2), which contains other matters that the court may consider at a pre-trial hearing. Amendment 3 adds character and sexual history evidence applications to the list. I move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  Amendments 2 and 3 moved—[Dr Richard Simpson]—and agreed to.

We are dealing with something that is not highly defined and Roseanna Cunningham is trying to define it in absolute terms. It is capable of being defined, but it should be defined by the court, which will make the appropriate decision. In the interim, in appointing a new solicitor, arguments about whether he or she would find themselves in the same circumstances will have to be examined. I accept part of Roseanna Cunningham's argument, but I do not see the situation occurring. The final new subsection proposed by amendment 9 refers to a code of practice drawn up by the Law Society of Scotland. The society already has the power to produce codes, which its members are expected to follow, so it is unnecessary to give it such a power again.  For all those reasons, I feel that amendment 9 should be rejected.

As Roseanna Cunningham said, amendment 9 attempts to define further the relationship between an accused and his court-appointed solicitor. Section 288D of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, which section 2 inserts, will impose a duty on the solicitor "to ascertain and act upon the instructions of the accused". It also states that, where a solicitor receives "no instructions or inadequate or perverse instructions", his duty is "to act in the best interests of the accused." Otherwise, a court-appointed solicitor has the same obligations and authority as a solicitor who is chosen by the accused. Roseanna Cunningham and Bill Aitken both referred to other UK acts. The Terrorism Act 2000 relates specifically to security and terrorism matters, which are quite different from sexual offences. The Youth Justice and Criminal Evidence Act 1999 makes provision for a court-appointed lawyer, but only to deal with cross-examination, whereas the bill that we are now considering will deal with the entire proceedings. Therefore, a corresponding provision in the bill would be difficult to justify.

A solicitor's duty to act in the best interests of his client will cover that. Solicitors must always act professionally, within whatever limits are set, so the matter is already covered. The first, second and fifth new subsections proposed by amendment 9 do not add to what is already in the bill. The term, "inadequate or perverse instructions", which the bill uses, is adequate to cover instructions that could not be carried out by a solicitor following the normal rules of professional ethics, which it is clear will continue to apply. The third new subsection proposed by amendment 9 would allow the court-appointed solicitor to withdraw unilaterally from acting. If solicitors kept doing that, the trial of the accused could be prevented from taking place at all.

I disagree. I want to continue. It would be a serious discourtesy to the court whose appointment the solicitor had accepted if the solicitor were to withdraw unilaterally. We believe that, if the court appointed the solicitor, only the court should be able to end the appointment. Section 288D(5A) would allow the court to discharge a solicitor that it had appointed and choose a replacement if the original appointee could provide genuine reasons for being unable to continue. That is an appropriate safeguard for the solicitor. The third and fourth new subsections proposed by amendment 9 would allow a solicitor who could not obtain appropriate instructions to act according to their own professional judgment, with no responsibility towards the accused. We believe that court-appointed solicitors should continue to owe the accused a duty to act with ordinary professional care and skill.

I want to finish what I am saying. It is clear that what that means may be limited if the accused has refused to co-operate fully. However, it would be unfair to the accused to allow the solicitor to escape all responsibility to him if the solicitor had, in fact, been negligent.

That we are having this debate is good. The argument seems to be that, if a solicitor believes that there are genuine reasons for them to be unable to continue to act, they can apply to the court to be discharged. The important point is that it should then be a matter for the court to discuss those reasons. Surely, that should provide adequate protection. A solicitor will not act against his professional interests or ethics. As Roseanna Cunningham pointed out, he will not act capriciously or he would be subject to disciplinary procedures. Therefore, I think that the present measures give adequate safeguards and continue to take the court—which appoints the solicitor—as the point at which the discharge should occur. The solicitor should not be able simply to give up because he feels that he is not managing.

Amendment 7 is misconceived and unnecessary. New section 288C(4) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, as proposed in section 1 of the bill, is perfectly adequate to cover the process by which the court can decide whether  to treat an offence as sexual and therefore to prevent the accused from personally questioning the complainer. As Bill Aitken has mentioned, the bill's intention is to ensure that an accused charged with any offence with a "substantial sexual element" will be prohibited from conducting his defence in person. The prohibition does not depend on whether there is a relationship between the accused and the complainer or whether the quality of the complainer's evidence would be affected by the fact that the accused was doing the questioning. The Executive believes that, as a matter of principle, complainers in all sexual offences should not have to contemplate the possibility of being personally questioned by the accused. Complainers in all such offences should also have the benefit of the restrictions on the use of evidence about their sexual history or character. In deciding whether to treat the offence as a sexual one, the court needs only to determine whether the offence is to all intents and purposes a sexual one—that is, whether it has a "substantial sexual element". Amendment 7 would introduce to the process criteria that are irrelevant to the question whether the offence is a sexual one. Furthermore, they are not relevant to the question whether the bill's provisions apply to the sexual offences included in the main list in proposed new section 288C(2) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. As a result, they should not be applied to any other offence, which is basically a sexual offence. Amendment 7 would also greatly complicate what should be a relatively simple process. The prosecution will be aware of the circumstances of the alleged offence and will simply draw to the court's attention the factors that show that the offence has a sexual element. It will then be up to the court to decide whether that element is substantial enough for the offence to be treated as a sexual one. There is no need for a complicated set of criteria to be set out in statute. Accordingly, I ask Bill Aitken to withdraw the amendment.

I, too, will break Stewart Stevenson's rule and congratulate him on securing his first members' business debate. As Nora Radcliffe said, the debate is a celebration of the success of Peterhead. I was slightly surprised that members did not say rather more about the prison estate. Only Pauline McNeill referred to that in detail. Peterhead prison was built in 1888 of shuttered concrete that is long past its sell-by date. There is no in-cell power and all prisoners have to slop out. The Parliament has made its views on the latter issue very clear. Despite those physical surroundings, the staff of Peterhead prison have achieved something of considerable merit, which, as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, has been recognised in many different ways. We have spent some money on the prison—on a new laundry, a new health centre, a new car park and other facilities. However, expensive maintenance is becoming a major difficulty. Whatever else happens, Peterhead prison as we know it, which was built originally to provide labour for the breakwater, will have to go. Restoring the prison is not practical. There is no doubt that the Executive has some tough decisions to make. Because of that, we have delayed putting out the estates review to consultation. One of the tough decisions that we must make concerns the future of Peterhead prison. Let me set out some of the facts about the  prison. At the moment, there are 292 prisoners in Peterhead. We expect to have between 500 and 600 sex offenders. At the moment, 85 per cent of prisoners come from outwith the north. About 4 per cent of prisoners come from Highlands and 11 per cent come from the north-east, but the overwhelming majority of prisoners come from elsewhere in Scotland.

Stewart Stevenson's point is well made—I was about to make the same point. Many of those offenders are disconnected from their families and from their original social circumstances. In many instances, such disconnection may be appropriate, but there are a number of prisoners who wish to have family visits. We asked their families what problems they faced and why they did not visit, and found that a quarter of the families who wanted to visit did not do so because of the distance involved. The prisoners will be returned to the community and many will return to the central belt. Throughcare and care beyond prison are important and connection to those services will be important for those prisoners. We are finding it difficult to recruit staff in Peterhead. The recruitment of specialists is one issue, but the recruitment of operational staff is also proving to be difficult.

No, not at the moment—I want to develop this point a little further. Peterhead is short of about 20 staff. A recent recruitment campaign achieved only two operational—not specialist—staff. David Davidson and Richard Lochhead spoke about the economic effects of any change in the situation. However, unemployment is 2.1 per cent in the city of Aberdeen and 1.7 per cent in Aberdeenshire. Although I acknowledge that there are important economic arguments about fish processing and other industries in the area, unemployment is substantially lower in the north-east than elsewhere.

Members are obviously listening closely to my speech—they are constantly anticipating my next remark. The delay in the estates review is regrettable, as it has created an overhang not just for staff in Peterhead but for staff in many other areas. I recently visited Barlinnie, where the staff's main concern was about when the Executive was going to reach a decision on the estates review. I hope that the review documents will be put out for consultation in the near future, but we must get them right. I will move on to address the programmes in Peterhead, which are delivered by prison officers who are supported by social workers and psychologists. Some 31 offenders went through the STOP programme for sexual offenders last year, whereas 86 offenders went through all sorts of programmes. More offenders went through cognitive skills and anger management programmes, which are available throughout the Prison Service. Six offenders went through the new programme in Barlinnie—the STOP programme is being developed in prisons other than Peterhead. I say in response to Lord James's speech that the Executive believes that Professor Marshall's comment that the Prison Service should build on and develop the programme that is already in existence is important. Some eight sites now provide the STOP programme, and we expect that work to develop further. Forty-two people provide the service in the central belt, of whom 16 are officers, while nine officers provide the service in Peterhead.

I do not have time to give way. I may come back to Stewart Stevenson later. Ian Gunn, who is the new governor of Peterhead prison, made it clear in his report to me that arguments continue around monoculture—in other words, having a homogeneous prison. For many sex offenders, the argument for a monoculture is clear: they feel secure and able to open up—I think that Stewart Stevenson made that point. Whatever we do, in whatever alternative provision we make and wherever we make that provision, it will be important that we create that security. The Cosgrove report will have an important impact. Members mentioned Professor Bill Marshall and Clive Fairweather—everyone is agreed that the programmes that are offered in Peterhead are of substantial importance. I totally accept that we will need to manage the change very sensitively. I think that it was Donald Gorrie who said that the issue is more about people than about fabric. We must examine carefully the management of any change that we undertake.

Alec Spencer, who is the Prison Service's director of rehabilitation and care, was the governor who introduced the sex offenders programme in Peterhead. At a meeting recently, I asked him how much damage transposing the programme elsewhere would create. His view is that it is possible to make that change, if it is managed sensitively. We will see. I accept what all members have said about that. In conclusion, there is no doubt about the message that goes out from the whole of the Parliament. The fact that Peterhead prison has been awarded beacon status as part of a UK Government scheme, along with the fact that it reached the finals of the TNT modernising government partnership scheme the previous year, sends a clear message from the UK Government and the Executive—the staff at Peterhead are doing an enormously valuable job in difficult circumstances. The value of what has been achieved must be protected. I give a pledge that I will try to ensure that the value of what has been created will be carried on within the Prison Service in whatever form we develop.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

I would have liked to start summing up by thanking members for their speeches, but that comment would be far too general. Some speeches bore no relevance to the debate. At least Paul Martin addressed police issues in respect of his constituency, which was far closer to the mark than Roseanna Cunningham's speech. When she did address the issue, she did not even know that pay and conditions is a devolved issue. It just so happens that at present the Executive, the police forces and the Police Federation choose to continue to act jointly with our colleagues in England and Wales and to have a centralised system.

No, I do not have time. The motion allows us to ensure that police officers who are seconded to the independent police complaints commission will continue to have their salaries paid appropriately and will have the correct terms and conditions. The SNP has  had a number of opportunities to debate justice issues, but it has chosen to do so only twice in the past year, which shows the low priority that it places on this issue. Donald Gorrie made the excellent point that we must make it clear that most of the Police Reform Bill is about radical reforms in England and Wales that will not apply in Scotland. I thank Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for making the point that we will proceed with our reforms in our own time.

Is Roseanna Cunningham really suggesting that we should not proceed with police reforms in Scotland in our own time in this chamber in a separate bill? That is what she is suggesting.

HM inspectorate of constabulary in Scotland is content with the arrangement that pertains to the Ministry of Defence police. We are merely putting that into operation through the Sewel motion. That move is entirely appropriate. Are the SNP members suggesting that that is not an appropriate use of our time? Gordon Jackson mentioned nationality. Are SNP members suggesting that we should have different arrangements in Scotland or that we should spend lengthy periods debating a small technical requirement that police officers should be British, Irish or Commonwealth citizens. Nationality should be no bar to being in the police force in Scotland. If we left the matter as it stood, that barrier would remain. The Sewel motion fulfils our obligation to the European Union by ensuring that, in Scotland, members of joint investigating teams who are from other European Union states will have the same rights and responsibilities as our police officers. Are SNP members suggesting that a Sewel motion is not the best way in which to deal with that technical amendment, which corresponds to European Union law? I believe that it is the best way.

I point out to Roseanna Cunningham that we have had to create two justice committees in order to handle the legislative work load. We have not increased the number of ministers who are responsible for justice and we have not substantially increased the size of the support system. Using Sewel motions judiciously allows us to get on with important legislation in the Parliament, without overburdening it.

I hope that the debate will be on the bill's substance, and that we will move away from a debate on Sewel motions, which we should perhaps have on another occasion. The Sewel motion that is before us is highly focused, because it deals with a limited number of aspects of the Home Office's Police Reform Bill. It is an important piece of proposed legislation which, since it was published last week, has attracted considerable publicity. The main items that are covered in the motion relate purely to Scotland, although most items in the Police Reform Bill are not relevant to us. The Scottish Executive has its own police reform agenda, which it is pursuing separately and in its own time. Progress has already been made on several components of that Scottish agenda. We have consulted on new ways of addressing police complaints and on regulation of the private security industry in Scotland. We have launched a review of the common police services and are developing the principles and practice of best value within the Scottish police forces. The Westminster bill contains four provisions that are in devolved areas, but which we wish to extend to Scotland. They are relatively minor provisions and are separate from the Home Secretary's wider reform programme. The first item is a consequence of the creation in England and Wales of a new independent police complaints commission. Quite rightly, it will be possible for Scottish officers to be seconded to that body. That being the case, it is necessary to make a consequential amendment to the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 to ensure that Scottish officers' terms and conditions of service are preserved while they are on secondment to the new commission. Technically, that is a devolved matter, but it is part and parcel of wider proposals that are not devolved. The second item relates to inspections in Scotland of the Ministry of Defence Police, which is a reserved body. Inspections of the MDP are carried out by Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary for England and Wales. The bill will require the latter to consult HM inspectorate of  constabulary for Scotland before carrying out such inspections in Scotland. That already happens, but the bill would put that procedure on a statutory footing. The third item is the abolition of the requirement for police officers to be British, Irish or Commonwealth citizens. We regard the current bar as unnecessary, as do the police associations in Scotland. We also think that it could be damaging were the rules in relation to that to vary throughout the UK. The fourth item has regard to our European Union obligations, following the framework decision on joint investigation teams and in line with the European convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters. The bill would put officers from other member states on the same footing as our officers as regards offences that are committed against them. It would also extend the liabilities of chief constables in Scotland to include damage that is caused by an officer from another member state who is operating in a team that is investigating in Scotland. However, the amount of the liability would be recoverable from the other member state. Reciprocal provisions will apply throughout the European Union. I spent this morning at the headquarters of Fife constabulary, where I discussed—among other things—the policing of the new ferry port at Rosyth. Close co-operation with Zeebrugge will be necessary in management of the port. During my visit it was stressed that the motion that we are debating was timely in respect of joint policing, particularly when the Zeebrugge police come to Rosyth to work on joint issues. The motion relates to limited but important changes in areas where Scottish devolved interests can most efficiently be served by our working with the UK Parliament. If the provisions that I have described are amended in any way at Westminster, those changes will have to be referred back to this Parliament, which is entirely appropriate.

I have finished. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the provisions within the Police Reform Bill which relate to devolved matters, including provisions relating to the terms and conditions of service of constables seconded to the Independent Police Complaints Commission, the inspection of the Ministry of Defence Police in Scotland, the removal of the nationality bar for police officers, extending (pursuant to certain international agreements) the liabilities of chief constables in relation to foreign officials from other member states carrying out investigations in Scotland and extending offence provisions in relation to such foreign officials, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

I point out to Donald Gorrie that, if Westminster amends a provision that relates to a devolved issue, that provision must be brought back to the Parliament. That is clear.

Classification of drugs is reserved to the UK Government. The Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs has been asked by the Home Secretary to review the classification of cannabis. A decision on reclassification is expected in the next few months and any advice to police forces will reflect the Home Secretary's decision.

I am disappointed that Mr Sheridan has not welcomed the fact that the Home Secretary is adopting a much more realistic approach to the issue. Reclassification, if it happens, will be done on the advice of the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs. That committee's advice is important. In practice, the police seldom arrest people for simple possession of cannabis, although that ultimately depends on individual cases and quantities. It is crucial that the message goes out from the Parliament that reclassification is not decriminalisation. Cannabis is harmful if it is misused; there is no doubt about that. If Tommy Sheridan had—as I have in my professional life—faced individuals whose psychosis had developed in association with the use or misuse of the drug, he would be much more cautious about overwhelming embracement of it.

I visited a constituency in Glasgow yesterday—not Johann Lamont's constituency, but Govan—and that was exactly the message that I was trying to give out. It is crucial that we support and rehabilitate chaotic drug users. To that end, the fact that we have provided £100 million for expenditure over the next three years is an indication of our commitment. Indeed, the funds have been so great that some local authorities have found it difficult to spend them this year.  We will pursue the issue actively. It is crucial to our communities, particularly communities such as Johann Lamont's, that we support chaotic drug users and move them from such use back into mainstream society.

Consultation is taking place with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland about the way in which we handle drugs matters. However, in practice, there is already a distinction between the handling of cannabis users and users of other drugs—that is appropriate. It is crucial that we support all drug users. The communication strategy, which we will launch in March, will indicate clearly that all drugs, when misused, are inappropriate. That is the strategy that we will adopt. I hope that Margo MacDonald will support that strategy because it is a realistic one.

My main objection to the debate is that half an hour is not long enough for members to discuss the whole issue of defence. However, that is not the Parliament's purpose. Members are here to deal well with reserved matters. I am not disappointed that members have expressed strongly held views about unilateral disarmament. They are entitled to express their views. However, they have failed to address the issue of how the protests should be managed. There are some 200 arrests on each occasion, although Dorothy-Grace Elder said that the protests are totally peaceful.

I am sorry, but that is impossible  as I have only two minutes. The chamber must send a strong message that the small number of violent people who create victims in such circumstances must be condemned. The majority of protesters are peaceful and there is good co-operation and understanding between the police and that majority, but we must condemn the hard-line activists who attempt to breach security and who are totally disruptive. A number of members have indicated that the UK Government takes part in multinational nuclear disarmament. That is appropriate and most members would not oppose it, although some would wish to go much further. The process of reducing one third of weapons and plans for considerable further reductions have been welcomed by Kofi Annan and the United Nations. That is a responsible approach.

I would love to take an intervention, but I cannot. Kofi Annan praised the UK Government. I hope that the jobs issue will be addressed. Jackie Baillie spoke strongly about that, but it is almost impossible in a debate of this length to address the issue. I am glad to have participated in Tommy Sheridan's day in the sun.

I have listened with interest to the points that were made by Mr Sheridan in support of the motion. As has been said already, defence is a reserved matter. It is for the UK Government to determine policy on Britain's nuclear deterrent and to account for that to the UK Parliament and, ultimately, to the UK electorate. Members of the Scottish Parliament can express views. Mr Sheridan's views were known from his previous speeches on the subject. I will deal briefly with the second part of his motion, which he did not address in his opening remarks, as it is important in terms of the issues that the Scottish Parliament can and should deal with. Strathclyde police are responsible for policing the annual protests and demonstrations that take place at the Faslane base. It is not uncommon for as many as 1,000 persons to take part in such events. Each protest demonstration represents a significant policing challenge. As my amendment sets out, such protests are entirely appropriate. We respect the right of individuals to hold strong views and to protest peacefully. However, Mr Sheridan needs to recognise the fact that peaceful protest is one thing, but other forms of protest are not victimless. When individuals have their cars rocked, they feel it and are traumatised by such an experience. I am aware that Mr Sheridan would not support that form of protest but, nevertheless, he is a regular part of a protest that involves victims. I want to make another point, in what will be a brief speech: because of the element who are involved in attacking individuals in a way that is totally unacceptable, such protests require the deployment of up to 750 officers. That is not without cost. It involves additional payments to Strathclyde police to manage the annual protest. Hundreds of thousands of pounds are required to have 750 officers, one tenth of the Strathclyde police number, police the protest. I would prefer to see police on that day policing the communities that Mr Sheridan professes to be concerned about. I also profess to that concern. Yesterday I was in Govan, talking to people about how to deal with the effects of crime on communities in Glasgow. Anything that distracts the police from that is unacceptable.

No, I am sorry, but I am into my last minute. I was almost into my last minute before I began.

The amendment sets out the right of peaceful protest. That is guaranteed in our constitution, as it must be by the Scottish Parliament. Protest must be peaceful. It is unacceptable to block a road and prevent people from getting to work. I had intended to refer to the matter of jobs in relation to Faslane, but Jackie Baillie, the constituency member, will talk about that issue in her speech. I move amendment 2633.1, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert: "supports the right of demonstrators to protest peacefully in support of world peace, but condemns those in a democratic society who abuse this right and act in contravention of the criminal law."

I am pleased to be closing the debate. I believe that the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill, when passed, will have a fundamental impact on the Scottish public and the public authorities that serve them. I feel privileged to be involved in such an important and welcome piece of proposed legislation. The bill has to be seen in the context of a desire on the part of the Executive for better public services, so as to put the citizen, the consumer, the client and the patient at the centre of the process, which gives them rights. Later I will address the argument that the Conservatives have consistently made against the bill. If we want there to be public confidence in our public authorities, we must have accountability. If we want accountability, we must have openness. The bill will go some way towards achieving that. It will produce real accountability and openness that are not based on discretionary codes or non-statutory regimes. Today we have had a very thorough debate, in which many issues have been raised and some well-argued points have been made. In the time available, I will respond to as many of those as I can. When closing the debate on freedom of information that took place on 15 March last year, Iain Gray said that this was "the right bill at the right time"— [ Official Report , 15 March 2001; Vol 11, c 549.]  The Minister for Justice has repeated that, and I share his view. We introduced the right bill because we gave it a great deal of thought. We considered the needs of the users, the public, and of the implementers, the public authorities. Achieving a balance between those needs was not easy. We also considered overseas experience and, importantly, we listened. We carried out two consultations, one on principles and one on the draft bill. The Executive met a number of interested parties and sought their views. We were subject to comprehensive scrutiny by the Justice 1 Committee and other committees of the Parliament, a task which they undertook with great thoroughness. I have listened to today's debate and will try to deal with as many of the points that have been made as possible. A point was made about the requirement for requests for information to be made in writing and about the simplicity of the access system that the bill will put in place. We believe that we have come up with a fairly simple access system, but I accept that the requirement  for requests to be made in writing may create difficulties for ethnic minorities with languages other than English and for the disabled. We will consider that issue in relation to the codes of practice and examine closely how it ties in with the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000. Christine Grahame made a point about the draft codes of practice. We have indicated to the Justice 1 Committee—I hope that that information has reached it—that we will provide draft working versions of the two codes to support stage 2 scrutiny of the bill. We will provide those drafts by 30 January, the date for which they were requested. However, I want to put on record that the codes are drafts and that the Scottish information commissioner's input to the final codes will be very important. The independent commissioner's role is crucial to the bill. Sometimes the juxtaposition of that role with the other provisions of the bill is not given enough emphasis. A number of members raised the issue of charging. A considerable number of those who responded to the first consultation expressed support for the second option contained in the consultation document "An Open Scotland", and we listened to what they had to say. Nevertheless, the Deputy First Minister has indicated that he is willing to re-examine the charging regime. I have registered the points that were made by Gordon Jackson and Roseanna Cunningham, as well as Bill Aitken's point that we must not create new blocks for citizens who are seeking access to information and that the charging regime needs to be reconsidered. That is one of the few points that I can take on board from the Conservatives. We note the comments made by the Subordinate Legislation Committee and will consider whether the charging and upper threshold limits should be subject to an affirmative regulation procedure. Alasdair Morgan raised the issue of relations within the UK and the transfer of information between the UK Government and the Scottish Executive. Is he really suggesting that information should be disclosed if it passes between UK and Scottish departments, even if that substantially prejudiced relations between the Scottish Executive and the other devolved Administrations, and was contrary to the public interest? Disclosure of such information will be subject to the two tests that have been outlined. The Scottish information commissioner will decide whether in such cases the criterion of substantial prejudice has been met. The issue of class exemptions has been raised. Exemptions are a common feature of freedom of information regimes around the world. Members should bear in mind that exemptions do not require that information be withheld or prohibit its  disclosure: they merely provide a means by which an authority can withhold information. Only if that authority can justify its decision to the independent commissioner can the information in fact be withheld. The commissioner's role is fundamental. Class exemptions act as a sort of road warning sign, pointing out to people that when information relates to a particular area it is likely that the commissioner will agree that it should be withheld. However, the power of decision will rest with the commissioner. The bill contains only a limited number of class exemptions. They apply to categories of information that are invariably sensitive and not appropriate for disclosure, or to areas where disclosure would harm the processes that are contained within the exemption concerned. For example, the disclosure of Cabinet minutes would substantially harm the frankness and candour of discussions on the formulation of Government policy. Most class-based exemptions also require the consideration of the public interest test. Therefore, the majority of class exemptions can only be claimed to withhold information where that would be in the public interest. Brian Fitzpatrick referred to the removal of exemptions, such as the 30-year period for the release of Government papers, the 60-year period for information about honours and royal matters and the 100-year period for census information. We will not revise the 100-year period for the release of information on the census. In fact, I note that we have just started the publication of information from the 1901 census. We began that work on 3 December last year and are continuing with it. I believe that an answer to a written parliamentary question on the matter will be published later. The code of practice that is to be issued under section 60 will deal with campaigns, or aggregation of requests, which were raised by Maureen Macmillan and others. The fact that information has been requested by a campaign does not mean that the authority can ignore the request. However, authorities do not need to respond to requests for every single piece of information. The aggregation element is addressed in section 12. I think that we have the right balance, but we can revisit the issue at stage 2. Michael Matheson raised the issue of ministerial certificates in his comprehensive and well-delivered summary of the debate. We believe that we should retain the ministerial certificate. The important point is that, unlike the procedure in the Irish legislation—which our colleagues in the SNP are fond of quoting—under which ministerial certificates are issued by individual ministers before the commissioner makes a decision, only  the First Minister will be able to issue the certificate under the Scottish legislation. In addition, the First Minister must consult his entire Cabinet. In New Zealand, the practice moved from the situation in which certificates were issued by ministers before the commissioner's decision to one in which certificates were issued after the commissioner's decision.

I will give way to Alasdair Morgan after I have finished my point. The effect of that change was that, although many certificates were issued up to 1987, subsequently not a single certificate has been issued. We believe that we need to retain that power, as issues may arise that would lead the First Minister to want to overrule the commissioner. I refer to issues that may not be linked to national security but that are nevertheless important, such as crime or terrorist activity. I think that it is understood that such certificates will be issued only in exceptional circumstances. It is also almost certain that such matters will be debated in Parliament.

Does Alasdair Morgan still wish to intervene?

We considered whether such decisions should made collectively by the Cabinet, but procedural difficulties with that approach arose—the Executive did not create those difficulties. However, in effect, a Cabinet decision will be made. That is our interpretation of that provision, which I am happy to put on the record. I will move on, unless Michael Matheson wishes to intervene.

I also mentioned the example of crime. I repeat that there are elements that mean that we need to retain that power. The commissioner, as an independent individual, may make decisions that are not regarded as being appropriate. I am sure that we will debate the ministerial veto during stage 2.  I turn to a question that was raised by a number of members, including John Farquhar Munro, who sticks to his last in relation to the Skye bridge, Robert Brown and Gordon Jackson. Michael Matheson quoted Glasgow City Council's evidence that openness should be "the price of doing business with the public sector". That is a good statement. The important point is that the test of substantial prejudice must apply. The Executive's intention and hope is that the majority of PPP/PFI contracts will be published. For example, I can advise members that the substantial part of the contract for HMP Kilmarnock will be published. The elements that will be retained will be very small. I want to correct one thing that Michael Matheson said. The Scottish Prison Service is listed in the bill, so he got that point wrong. I agree with him that it is important that the SPS is listed, but that is the case.

I understand that Elaine Bailey went beyond the remit that she was given on that occasion. That is why she wrote back. I accept that there was a mistake, but the intention is that the Kilmarnock contract will be substantially published. The overwhelming majority of the PFI-equivalent contracts in America are now published. As people become more confident about the process, I think that the amount of information that it is appropriate to put into the public arena will increase.

The hope is that the information will be made available. Bruce Crawford gave us some interesting information about environmental regulations and the Aarhus convention. We are preparing material on that and I will write to him separately about that matter. On the infraction proceedings, the Commission's approach is evolving and, as that is quite a technical area, I will get back to Bruce Crawford on that. I do not have much time left, but I want to  conclude by mentioning the issue of training and support, which was raised by Maureen Macmillan and others. She and Pauline McNeill also asked about public information. Those important issues are being addressed by the implementation group, which has been working for a year. That leads me on to mention our intentions on timetabling. The fact that we will move swiftly to appoint a commissioner after the bill passes stage 1, and the fact that the implementation group has been working for a year, should, I hope, give some good feeling to Roseanna Cunningham—not something that I am in the habit of doing. [Interruption.] I will stop on that point, but I hope that members will recognise how keen we are to bring the legislation into effect quickly. Five years is an absolute backstop so that we can give a total commitment. Several members mentioned the need to change the culture, but I do not have time to deal with that. In the two minutes that remain, I want to deal quickly with the Conservatives, who have been consistent—consistently stuck not in the 20 th but in the 19 th century. The Conservatives have opposed: the incorporation of the European convention on human rights, which allows citizens in Scotland to challenge matters in the Scottish courts; the Maastricht treaty, which gave workers rights; and the minimum wage—to which they are now converted—which also gave workers rights. They have indicated that they will oppose the Executive's proposals on smacking, which are to give children rights. The Conservatives' view is consistent and holds to what Brian Fitzpatrick called the use of arbitrary power. They believe that the authorities in power should give away power only if absolutely required. We believe that citizens' rights are fundamental and that they should not be doled out by people whose time has long since gone.

I am afraid that the Presiding Officer is signalling that I am already beyond my time, but I am sure that Lord James will pursue that with me at stage 2. Indeed, I look forward to the stage 2 consideration, when we will need to consider each amendment carefully. I say that because the bill is an intricate whole and a fabric that is woven of many parts. If we unstitch one part, we may unstitch substantial parts of the bill. We need to ensure that the balances that we have sought are maintained. The bill is robust and I believe that the Scottish people will be proud of it. I urge members to support it.

The Crown deserted the case of alleged sexual abuse because one of the child witnesses was unfit to give crucial evidence in cross-examination. The decision was based on advice from a child psychologist who was familiar with the child. Clearly, there are lessons to be learned. We must find sensitive ways of allowing vulnerable witnesses to give evidence. That will not come from a single quick fix, which is why Jim Wallace set up an implementation group to develop the relevant recommendations from the report of the Lord Advocate's working group on child witness support. My predecessor met the two constituency MSPs, Cathy Jamieson and Margaret Jamieson, and the Crown Office met the child's mother. Other initiatives might follow. We will report to Parliament as soon as possible on the outcome of the work.

Mr Gallie wrote to us on the subject and pressed the case for a public inquiry, which the Lord Advocate has said is not appropriate. We must consider the implications of the case, because they are significant. It would be helpful if Mr Gallie adopted an approach that took into account the alleged victims in the case. It is of the greatest concern to me that those children will grow up in the knowledge that the case was abandoned. However, under our criminal justice system, an  accused is presumed innocent until proven guilty in a court of law. In this case, the proceedings were deserted simpliciter—I am told that that is the legal term. Consequently, the presumption of innocence still applies. The Crown is barred from raising a new prosecution against the six accused in respect of the original applications. I believe that they should be satisfied with that, on the understanding that we are examining the implications of the case as a whole.

I know that Iain Gray, my predecessor, and the Lord Advocate met Cathy Jamieson and Margaret Jamieson when they were making representations concerning the interests of the accused, who were their constituents. The then deputy minister wrote on 24 October, offering a meeting between a justice department official, the MSPs and the accused to discuss general issues arising from the case. That offer still stands, and I can confirm it today.

We are concerned about the grooming of children on the internet. We are currently working with the Crown Office and others to identify the scale of the problem and possible remedies.

I recognise the member's helpful and continuing interest in this area. At the moment, the police may apply for an interception warrant under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act 2000 where they consider it necessary for the purpose of preventing or detecting serious crime and where the information sought could not reasonably be obtained by any other means.

Will the member take an intervention?

Presiding Officer, would you tell me how much time I have, please?

Five minutes is not long enough to do justice to what is an important subject. It is regrettable that the SNP has made a bad habit of holding short debates in anticipation of the publication of the—admittedly delayed—prison estates review. Although subsequent SNP speakers made helpful points, the SNP's opening speaker produced a catalogue of woes—she said that everything was disastrous. Her approach was wholly negative. SNP members then made the vague and uncosted promise that they would change everything. The nationalist position is clear: no private prisons—the public sector is the answer. Alex Neil tried, with his 10 points, to make that clear. If I have time, I will return to that issue.

No, I do not have time. The Conservatives, on the other hand, say that  we should not close any prisons, that the private sector is wonderful and that the public sector is a real problem. We are clear about the SNP and Conservative positions. As Donald Gorrie said, our position is that we want a prison estate that is best value. If we have delayed the publication of the report, that is regrettable, but it is because we want robust figures that will allow us to demonstrate the best way forward. The estates review is important. We have about 6,000 places and 6,000 prisoners, but we have empty spaces in low-security prisons and, as Richard Lochhead pointed out, overcrowding in Craiginches and other places. That is unacceptable. We need new designs to replace the old, out-of-date estate and new correctional facilities that will provide the sort of care and rehabilitation to which many members have referred. We believe that the prison estates review, which we will publish, will give us an opportunity to have a robust debate in the chamber and to take the matter forward. Slopping out is unacceptable. There should be acknowledgement at least of the refurbishment of Barlinnie, which means that, from March, remand prisoners will not have to slop out. I was there last Monday and I know that that will be an important advance. However, as the housing block is very old, the situation is still unacceptable. We have spent £5 million, although we may demolish the block in the long term. It was important to move towards ending slopping out and that is what we are doing, although not with the speed that members would wish. Sylvia Jackson, Christine Grahame and Roseanna Cunningham spoke about Cornton Vale, where there are about 260 prisoners in a facility that can take 230 prisoners. I met Stephen Swan at the women offenders group and talked to him about various matters. I will reply in some detail to the issues raised by Sylvia Jackson. Among other things, there are concerns about redesign of the facility. The women offenders group, which I chair, will produce its report shortly. It has considered the issues and will take forward the time-out facility that was referred to. Let me list some of the measures that have been taken: arrest referral; diversion orders; supervision orders, which we are modifying to improve their uptake; tagging; restricted liberty orders; drug treatment orders; and drug courts, which we have just launched. All those measures are designed to take people out of custodial sentences. Although the situation at Cornton Vale is difficult, only two prisoners are in there for fine default. The number of people received into prison for fine default has gone down from 10,770 in 1997 to 7,700 last year. We are moving in the right direction and I accept that we should put in  custody only those people for whom it is absolutely necessary. We have introduced transitional care, which means that for 12 weeks after prisoners are released they will continue to have the support of the Prison Service and its partners. The partners are important, because the SNP motion mentions the culture of secrecy. If it had moved that motion 10 years ago, I would have accepted it. However, it has failed to acknowledge the radical shift in culture that is occurring, which is undoubtedly opening up the Prison Service and making it much more transparent. The partnership arrangements that are being put in place will have a significant effect. We accept that we have to modernise the estate and that practices are changing, which is causing problems with morale. We need to get the estates review out of the way in order to help with that. However, we should also acknowledge that the prison officers have made significant changes in their practices. I believe that they will continue to do so.

No, it will be a matter of discussion and negotiation. Alex Neil said that Kilmarnock's assault figures were four times as high as those in the rest of the service. However, that comparison was with Barlinnie and not the service as a whole. Kilmarnock's assault figures fall within the broad band of assault figures. Barlinnie's figures happen to have dropped to an all-time low. We should be praising Barlinnie for that. We must be careful with the figures that we use, although there is certainly a long way to go and many things must be done. I finish with a point that Roseanna Cunningham and Christine Grahame made. The people who are sentencing must be given confidence in the alternatives to custody. That is something that we have not yet achieved. As a consequence, we have not been able to roll out all the measures to the extent that we would wish. I welcome the Justice 1 Committee's investigation into that issue and I look forward to working with the committee to improve our prison system, an aim to which I believe we are all committed.

In launching the criminal justice bill white paper today, we announced that we are going to change the sentencing arrangements for those who breach supervised attendance orders. We will substantially shorten those sentences, which should improve the take-up of those orders.

This has been a consensual debate and many of the contributions have been extremely thoughtful. If people read the Official Report  of the debate, they will be able to say that, on the whole, the Parliament recognises and understands the problems and is aware of many  examples in many of our constituencies of good work being done on the ground. We are taking the matter forward. Our current proposals are a good starting point. It is good that we have had a debate today to set the scene for the strategy and the plan of action next year. Good partnerships are up and running in most parts of the country, but we need to be clear that reducing youth crime is one of the key challenges facing our society and that achieving success will require sustained effort. We will return to the points that Irene McGugan and Michael Matheson raised on social work recruitment and retention and the whole work force issue, because we are aware that there are problems out there and that they may be growing. That is despite the fact that £135 million pounds extra—62 per cent more expenditure—has been put into those areas since 1996.

The question of multidisciplinary training is important, but it has been difficult to do that. Scott Barrie will remember when I lectured in social work and tried to get young doctors and social work students to train jointly—it is not easy. However, there are good and important examples in the continuing professional development field—for example, in central Scotland—of joint training in child protection for teachers and social workers and for other groups who are involved in child-abuse matters, so I accept the member's point. Pauline McNeill, Kenny MacAskill and others talked about the age of criminal responsibility. The Scottish Law Commission is considering a recommendation that has been made on that subject. We will return to the issue, which is an important one that we need to consider. Pauline McNeill referred to the context of children's hearings in Scotland, which makes us somewhat different from other countries. We need to recognise that when we consider the age of responsibility. Every member has defended the children's hearing system and its unique, or almost unique—Kenny MacAskill referred to the system in Massachusetts—ability to address problems by putting the children's needs at the centre. The system has served us well over the past 30 years. We should recognise that the substantial majority of offenders come before the hearings only once. It was disappointing to hear the Conservatives, in particular Bill Aitken, say that children greet the hearings with "hoots of derision". That is not my  experience. When I was in practice, the children with whom I dealt were shaking in their shoes in front of the hearing. The majority of children do not go back again. There is a point about reoffending. The latest figures show that 890 children came before the hearings with more than 10 offences. We must consider persistent offenders when we consider making further programmes available to the children's hearing system to dispose and deal with such children appropriately. [Interruption.]

Part of that work is to develop more community-based programmes for young offenders, several examples of which we heard today. Donald Gorrie referred to the Fregarrach programme in central Scotland, which was evaluated by the University of Leicester. That is an important principle—we must evaluate the programmes and roll out best practice. The establishment of the matrix project in Clackmannanshire, which deals with younger offenders in a similar way to the Fregarrach programme, is also useful. There are numerous other examples, including the Barnardo's new directions project for persistent offenders in Aberdeen, which has achieved a 76 per cent reduction in offending. In North Lanarkshire, the children's hearings over-16 initiative—CHOSI—has achieved an 80 per cent reduction in offending over two years. A number of members raised the issue of secure accommodation. The secure accommodation advisory group reported in June, but was not able to determine the necessary level of demand. We recognise that there are problems with the physical estate, and that there are questions about whether it is modern enough, whether the accommodation is in the right place and whether the number of places is sufficient. We will return to the matter in due course and I assure those members who spoke about it that we are aware of the problems. Kenny MacAskill referred to targets for looked-after children. We do not have specific targets for looked-after children, but we are trying to reduce the number of children in residential units. Their number has risen over the past few years. Robin Harper and other members referred to the need to integrate the whole programme from the start. That is what initiatives such as sure start, family centres and the new community schools programme are about. They all intend to address the early risk factors in order to identify people who are having problems with parenting and to assist them in the early stages. Such initiatives address the questions of parental support, bullying and improving educational opportunities.  Tavish Scott referred to the work that is being done in Shetland to reduce exclusion. That is fundamental if we are to keep young people on-stream and stop them getting diverted and feeling excluded, which leads to their offending. Several members referred to the importance of sport, leisure and other positive activities. Elaine Thomson spoke about a police-box cafe, which I thought was an interesting example. In Stirling constituency, there is the Hillpark multicourt scheme, and Scott Barrie referred to youth shelters in his constituency. There are endless examples of such initiatives, which we need to encourage. We have put £21.75 million of the £87 million of funding that is available for sport and recreation into diversion. That takes up one of the better points that the Conservatives made. Other organisations have made contributions, including the Duke of Edinburgh's award scheme, with its new start pilot projects. Hand in hand with a focus on early intervention is the need to improve the system for those children and young people who have to go before children's hearings. Good work is carried out by a range of agencies, but we need to extend that. Several members referred to child prostitution. I think that the First Minister's response on that subject during First Minister's question time today indicated how seriously we will take that problem. The Cabinet's social exclusion unit is seeking to develop a national framework on young runaways and we are considering whether we should link guidance about young runaways to the guidance that we are starting to prepare on child prostitution. I cannot conclude this part of my speech without absolutely condemning today's Conservative press release. It says: "Draconian steps must be taken to deal with those who are prepared to exploit youngsters for their own perverted gratification". That part is fine, but the press release goes on to say: "many of the youngsters involved are the authors of their own misfortune". I call upon the Conservative party to explain in a later press release exactly what they meant by that phrase, because I find it quite unacceptable.

I turn, in conclusion— [Interruption.]

I turn, in conclusion—

I turn to the question of victims. Reparation and mediation schemes, to which Scott Barrie and Brian Fitzpatrick referred, are important in confronting youngsters with what they have done. In particular, I mention Brian Fitzpatrick's graphic example of the youth who was confronted with the potential consequences of his throwing a brick through a window, had the brick hit a nearby baby in a pram instead. Those reparation and mediation schemes have now been adopted by 16 local authorities and I hope that they will be extended. I will conclude, Presiding Officer.

I do not want to cause problems in this, my very first front-bench speech. I believe that we have outlined an ambitious programme and that the appointment of Cathy Jamieson as the Minister for Education and Young People, with her experience with children, is testament to the fact that the Executive takes children and youth crime very seriously. I will not return to the SNP's comments on that issue during question time. The fact that relevant ministers in the education department and in the justice department respectively led and summed up the debate indicates our determination, across departments, to address youth crime and to reduce re-referrals to children's hearings by 10 per cent by 2004. Integrated community programmes will help us to deliver that. I support the motion in Cathy Jamieson's name.

I have two declarations to make. First, I have a son who is a short-term contract researcher with a university. Secondly, I have an honorary chair at Stirling University, where I have a research unit that employs short-term contract staff. I thank members for the support that they have given to the motion I lodged that is similar to the one lodged by Alex Neil. I will not repeat what everybody else has said. There is agreement that the situation is unsatisfactory. I will instead throw out one or two questions. Was research worse back in the 1960s and 1970s when there were only 6,000 short-term  contract workers? Is it better now that there are 39,000 contract workers in the United Kingdom? Has the process of casualisation, which was part of a philosophy that ranged across all our services, been to the benefit of research in our institutions? The answer is no. What was introduced as something that might be appropriate for someone at the beginning of their career, as a first contract, has become a way of life for far too many people. In at least one institution, 12 per cent of the contract staff, who represent a substantial proportion of the total staff of that institution, have contracts that have revolved over a period of 10 years. That cannot be good for the knowledge economy that we are trying to build. What began as a concept that would increase flexibility has become a way of life for far too many institutions. We need to change that. The damage is evident and the waste is clear. We cannot afford to treat so many bright, young people as a casual underclass with inadequate terms and conditions. The sort of partnership arrangements that Stirling University in my constituency is introducing are important, but the talk that has gone on for some time with the SHEFC initiative has got to stop. It is time for action to manage this group of people effectively for the benefit of Scotland.

I wonder whether Murray Tosh's constituents have similar concerns to those of some of my constituents, for example, that the regulation and bonding systems for restitution after the working of the coal are inadequate and that they are often avoided by various means. We need an effective system of prior deposition of bonds that cannot be interfered with. At least that will allow those communities where appropriate working is occurring a guarantee that their environment will be restored. That is not happening at the present.

I declare that I am still a fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatry and I am a member of SAMH. The Millan report is a patient, thorough and comprehensive review of our mental health law. The process surrounding it, which has involved at every stage all those who have a legitimate interest, has been excellent. In that respect, it builds on the report "The same as you?", which was highly praised for its involvement of users and carers. One of the most difficult aspects of legislation in this area is the need to promote the most effective treatment while allowing the individual as much freedom of choice in treatment as possible and, as  Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, protecting the public from the rare event of violence. Down the centuries, we have steadily progressed from the manacles and shackles of the 18 th century—which I was presented with as a student, as they were still being used in Australia in the late 1960s—to the acts of the 1950s, 1960s and 1980s, which moderated and regulated the infringement of liberty. Recently, I was involved in a study tour for Dutch health workers and politicians, who were astonished that we never use restraints, unlike in the Netherlands. Already, society in Scotland has moved significantly ahead of other countries in terms of the treatment of the most disturbed individuals. Through the legislation that we are about to introduce, we can embrace proposals that will be fit for the 21 st century and will promote what Des McNulty referred to: a genuine partnership between the patient, their family or carer and the health professionals. The principles in the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, which stated that the treatment chosen should be the least invasive and should follow the perceived wishes of the patient, presage the new legislation. The notion that the treatment and the setting should be the least restrictive will be a central part of the new bill. Nicola Sturgeon and others referred to advocacy, so I will not dwell on it. Forth Valley Health Board developed one of the earliest advocacy services, which has been crucial to some people with mental health problems. Advance directives, particularly on special treatments such as ECT, are absolutely vital. The management of those advance directives, combined with the nomination of an individual to act for the patient, provides a sensitive and important way of dealing with a difficult situation. This has been one of the most consensual debates that we have had in the chamber. It feels almost like a members' business debate, so little difference is there between the parties. The most exciting proposal is the principle of reciprocity, which will ensure that, if the state has to curtail aspects of liberty, the patient will receive the services and treatment that they need. That guarantee is crucial to every citizen. If it is enshrined in law, we will have moved care in Scotland forward in a big way. I would like the roles of the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland and the Mental Welfare Commission in protecting and guaranteeing that right to be spelled out and I welcome the fact that the Executive will review the Mental Welfare Commission. The CSBS must define the clinical standards that are acceptable and it must inspect the mental health services, while the Mental Welfare Commission must have powers to require health  boards to meet those standards. To ensure that we achieve the standards that we want, the mental health framework needs to be driven forward with real urgency and the health boards and community plans need to be subjected to rigorous local accountability and defined outcomes through the national assessment framework. I say to Robin Harper that community care began in 1956, following the report of the Dunlop commission. It has been part of my life as a psychiatrist for all my working years, although, for the most part, it has not been a reality. Some 80 per cent of our expenditure on mental health services is still on institutional care. We must work to change that situation. I cannot finish without commenting on one contentious part of the proposals—the new community orders. A recent review in the Psychiatric Bulletin , to which Des McNulty obliquely referred, could be summarised as indicating that, on the basis of the evidence across the world where such orders, in different forms, have been tried, there is as yet no proven advantage to compulsory community orders over high-quality services on their own. Before we proceed with the bill, we should use this brief period to produce research to assist in determining whether those orders are likely to help in fulfilling the Executive's stated aim of introducing greater flexibility and preventing hospitalisation As the Minister for Health and Community Care said, there is a danger that compulsion, even with guaranteed high standards of care, may be abused. We should commend the Millan commission for its report. I commend the Executive for the exemplary consultation process that it has gone through and for its ambition for the people of Scotland in this policy area. I await the new bill with eager anticipation. I commend the motion and the SNP's amendment.

I begin by declaring that I am the joint holder of a research grant from the UK Alzheimer's Society and that I am the director of a care home that looks after some people who suffer from dementia. I want to make one or two brief points. The programme planning group on mental illness in the late 1970s and early 1980s resulted in the Timbury report, which proposed domestic-style accommodation for people who suffer from dementia. However, only one unit was ever built. We had 15 wasted years of failing to develop a proper dementia policy. This Parliament has reversed that process quite rapidly through the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 and the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill that is now before the Health and Community Care Committee. Other members have referred to those measures, which will provide important support to individuals who suffer from Alzheimer's. The point about early diagnosis has been well made. We need integrated clinical networks between secondary and primary care. We also need to enhance the capacity of local health care co-operatives to ensure that the conditions that we are discussing are picked up and managed. As other members said, management of Alzheimer's is as important as its medical treatment. Inappropriate use of drugs to manage the condition is one of the most reprehensible aspects of the current situation. We must develop  adequate skills to manage the behavioural or psychological aspects of Alzheimer's through the LHCCs and community psychiatric nurses. As other members said, we need more research. We must use the health check for the over-75s much more rigorously in order to make early diagnoses. As part of the performance assessment process, we need to ensure that not just seven, but all health board areas have memory clinics. Finally, we must eradicate postcode prescribing, which is a disgrace. Nearly 100 patients are waiting for treatment in my constituency, which covers the Forth valley area. However, waiting for treatment is not an option, because the condition deteriorates and drugs do not reverse Alzheimer's, as is the case with other conditions; they merely arrest deterioration. People who must wait six months for treatment are six months down the line toward quite a cruel death, during which their families will have a dreadful time. I found it absolutely intolerable that a constituent who consulted me the other day—a war pensioner whose main carer has developed Alzheimer's—must wait for the appropriate drug and must pay £100 toward treatment. The condition must be carefully monitored. I say to Richard Lochhead that specialists, not GPs, should do that. The follow-up for those for whom the drug does not work is that they must be taken off the drug, otherwise the treatment is cost-ineffective. That work is done best by properly trained people and I regret to say that not all GPs are adequately trained in dealing with the condition.

Andrew Wilson made the point that Mr Byers is still open to offers for Railtrack, but the administrator is legally required to take the best offer for the shareholders. That is a statement of open fact. Ministers have no alternative in that respect.

Given the continuing and intransigent problem of delayed discharges—which contributes to the waiting problem—what steps is the minister taking with her colleague the Minister for Finance and Local Government to ensure that local authorities that are not spending up to their grant-aided expenditure allocation for community care are encouraged to do so and that those that are already spending up to or beyond their GAE allocation are rewarded? Will the Executive publish as soon as possible—and, thereafter, annually—the budget and expenditure for community care for GAE and resource transfer from the health boards?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive's plans for personal care for older people will contribute to social justice. (S1F-1270)

I thank the First Minister for his answer. He may be aware that yesterday and today the whole Parliament congratulated him, the ministers with responsibility for health, and the care development group on their work on free  personal care. The First Minister's steadfast and clear leadership on the issue has been pivotal in our reaching the present point. Will the First Minister go one step further by ensuring that the implementation group, the establishment of which Susan Deacon announced yesterday, will examine the strategic management of the community care sector, including delayed discharges and the programme of closing unsuitable, out-of-hours, long-stay national health service beds?

Will the member give way?

Margaret Smith was right to say that it was the Health and Community Care Committee—an all-party group—that made the strong recommendation to adopt the Sutherland principles. As I tried to indicate in my intervention on Ben Wallace, Government must decide on priorities. Christine Grahame made that point extremely well, but all her points will present more difficulty because we have made—rightly, and Christine knows that I support absolutely the Sutherland principles—a principled decision to spend £125 million on introducing free care. That money does not exist to support groups such as those that Christine Grahame mentioned. Such funding is not included in the £125 million, so we must find the necessary funding from other parts of the budget. I agree that we must fund and develop that support. I want to develop that theme in a minute.  The Executive said that it is negotiating on the possible transfer of resources to which the SNP motion refers and we will see what the outcome is. I do not intend to address that point, however; I wish instead to concentrate on the Conservatives' amendment to the Executive amendment and the matter of ring fencing. My one comment on the SNP motion is that the interrelationship between benefits and the Scottish budget must be examined. That relationship is complex in several areas, including employment and unemployment and moving people back into work with therapeutic benefits. Many matters in that area require and will involve continuing discussions, but we need to cater for those within the current settlement and we should not try to change it. The Executive's proposal is to ring-fence the new money. I am not in favour of ring-fencing and I believe that, in the long term, the Government is not in favour of ring-fencing. I presume that it is an interim measure. We must move towards pooled budgets and a comprehensive settlement. In doing so, however, the first step requires transparency about the situation, and I think that we have started to move towards that. The Conservatives, in their publicity over the past few days, have confused grant-aided expenditure and resource transfer and expenditure. Expenditure is published against GAE, not the combined resource transfer and GAE. That is how we arrive at a 44 per cent shortfall. I am glad that the Conservatives did not repeat their mistake in this morning's debate.

I will be happy to discuss the matter with Ben Wallace later. I want to make a separate point on what Christine Grahame said to the effect that we need to move on. We have accepted the principles and have guaranteed the money for free personal care. We need now to consider everything that is happening and to try to reach a comprehensive settlement on this sector of care. The sector has been highly fragmented since it was, in effect, privatised under the Conservatives, through closure of long-stay beds and moving services into the private, voluntary and independent sectors. The first step is to ensure complete transparency with the figures, and I look forward to a debate on that. We also need to deal with  delayed discharges, which are an affront to old people who wait in hospital for money to be found for them to get the care that they need in the appropriate setting. There are still 3,000 patients in that position; that is an affront that needs to be dealt with. The only way in which it can be dealt with is by pooling budgets, which the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill will allow. Funding for all those who have indicated that they are ready for discharge should come automatically under the pooled budget. As a first step, all long-stay beds that are to remain closed should be moved under a pooled budget, which means that expenditure for individuals whose place of residence is settled is the responsibility of local authorities. If that is not clear—it might not be—let me give an example. Within the Forth Valley Health Board area in my constituency there are two nationalist-led councils—Clackmannanshire Council and Falkirk Council. Clackmannanshire Council has overspent its budget in the past year but, in doing so, it has reduced the number of delayed discharges to zero. There is none beyond the contract period and the few that exist do not run up to the end of the contract period. Falkirk Council, by contrast, decided unilaterally—without discussion with its partners—that it would not take patients out of hospital to relieve its budget constraints. The results are that Falkirk and District royal infirmary is on red alert, that Stirling royal infirmary must take patients that would have been taken by Falkirk, and that Clackmannanshire Council and my constituents are suffering. That is not a party-political issue—[ Laughter. ] It is not. Clackmannanshire Council, which is SNP led, has done an excellent job, but Falkirk Council has not. At issue is the approach that local authorities take. This is about partnership. There must be pooled budgets and we must give responsibility to one unitary group. I hope that the Executive will take up the issues that I have raised and deal with them.

The record should be set straight. The Labour party was not against the principles of the Sutherland report. It was against the priority of putting the money into free personal care. Implementing the Sutherland report is costing us £125 million. That does not, in itself, benefit care of the elderly. The question is what Government must do, which is prioritise. The question is not the principles of the Sutherland report.

It does not improve care of the elderly; it deals with the principle.

Will the member take an intervention?

Confrères, je suis très content de participer dans cette discussion et j'offre mes félicitations à Irene Oldfather, qui est l'instigatrice de la motion. J'ai choisi le français pour mon discours aujourd'hui.  L'Ecosse a une tradition ancienne d'alliance avec la France, même plus ancienne que notre alliance avec l'Angleterre, et le français est la langue étrangère la plus enseignée dans nos lycées. Récemment j'ai assisté à un événement à l'Université de Stirling pour célébrer l'année des langues européennes. Notre ministre pour l'éducation, l'Europe et les affaires extérieures a fait la présentation. La moitié de son discours a été en français, mais il a avoué que, comme beaucoup d'entre nous, sa capacité et sa bonne volonté de parler les langues étrangères étaient, malheureusement, limitées. Il nous faut changer ces attitudes. Il nous faut moderniser nos méthodes pour enseigner les langues aux enfants. Quand j'étais élève, on a appris les langues, d'habitude, par la répétition et par les devoirs couchés par écrit. Je devais apprendre le latin au lieu des langues modernes parce qu'autrefois, c'était obligatoire pour l'étude de la médicine. L'enseignement des langues étrangères aux universités était aussi très traditionnel. Au cours de mon association avec l'Université de Heriot-Watt, il y a 20 ans nous avons fondé une école de traduction , qui n'était que la deuxième en Grande-Bretagne, et qui employait les méthodes les plus modernes. Nous devons faire du progrès. Les petits enfants possèdent une grande aptitude pour apprendre les langues, et il faut leur donner les occasions d'acquérir ces habiletés. Nous devons préparer nos enfants écossais pour un monde qui est de plus en plus accessible et de plus en plus communicatif. Je recommande la motion. Colleagues, I begin by welcoming this debate and congratulating Irene Oldfather who lodged the motion. I have chosen to make this speech in French. Scotland has a great tradition of alliance with France that goes back even further than our junction with England. I attended the launch recently of the celebration of the year of European languages by the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs at the University of Stirling. His speech was in part in French but he admitted, as so many of us have to, that our ability and willingness to speak foreign languages is sadly limited. We must change these attitudes. My own experience was of learning French mainly by rote and written exercises. I had to learn Latin in preference to a second modern language because Latin was at that time a requirement for medicine. When I was associated with Heriot-Watt University's court about 20 years ago, we  established the school of translation, only the second in any British university at that time, which used modern methods of language teaching. We must keep up with the times. Young children have a great capacity to learn new languages at an early age and we must provide them with opportunities to acquire those skills. We must prepare Scottish children for a global world that is becoming increasingly accessible and where communication is vital. I commend the motion.

That lost something in the translation.

I declare that I am the director of a nursing home company, albeit one that operates only in England. I welcome the minister's statement. Will she indicate the numbers of long-stay NHS hospital beds in geriatrics, psychogeriatrics and learning disability that are still to close? In considering the care development group's recommendation for 100 per cent resource transfer of the funds realised by such closures from the NHS to the local authority community care budget, will the minister ensure that the community NHS medical and nursing services are funded to take over the health care? Instead of ring-fencing the new money, will the minister consider requiring the local authority to publish its care of the elderly expenditure against grant-aided expenditure and resource transfer and consider, as part of a total settlement, making the local authority responsible for paying for nursing and personal care wherever the elderly person is situated, as that would remove the current perverse incentive? In Forth valley, that has led to the SNP-Conservative council in Falkirk increasing delayed discharges by unilaterally deciding not to take patients out of hospital because it saves the council money.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to improve health at work in line with the aims of Scotland's health-at-work week. (S1O-3773)

This morning, we had a debate about the extent of private sector involvement in health. Does the minister agree that we need to build on community planning for health by involving private employers in health promotion and provision at work? Does she agree that, at this time, employers could join us in promoting flu vaccination for those under the age of 65 who are  at risk?

Murdo Fraser should be aware of the fact that the overwhelming majority of community hospitals in Scotland were closed by his party. It was the Conservatives who removed local care instead of adapting it, and it was only in the last few years of their Administration that they suddenly realised that that might be a big mistake and conducted a review that concluded that it was a big mistake.

Murdo Fraser referred to local services.

David McLetchie's interesting analysis, which I listened to carefully, contains many truths. I welcome his acknowledgement of his own part in the sterile inter-party debate that has gone on. I would not call it a debate, however; I would call it scrapping. To call Susan Deacon the worst health minister that we have ever had is pretty rich coming from the party that spawned Michael Forsyth, a total zealot who gerrymandered the health service. The Conservatives' solution, which was outlined in the second part of Mr McLetchie's speech, is not about pragmatism—which we embrace—but about the creation of a much more substantial private sector. One of my constituents recently had a heart operation in HCI. He was given a deadline by which he would either receive the operation in the public sector or at HCI. When that deadline approached and it was clear that he was not going to have the operation in the public sector because of winter pressures, for example, he had it at HCI. That certainty was important to him and his family. That sort of pragmatism—using the extra capacity of the private sector—is not a problem. The Scottish health service is using the private sector for about 5 per cent of services. Our pragmatism and the creation of the one-stop clinics—as Susan Deacon said, there are now 300 of them—have meant that another of my constituents was seen in 48 hours at the pain clinic. That was followed up by NHS cardiac laboratory results inside a week and a triple bypass inside three weeks. That is faster than anything I could have achieved for my private patients when I was in practice. That is pragmatism and prioritisation and it is partly what this issue is about.

No, I do not. If we set specific waiting times and invite the now unified health boards to spell out those waiting times to their local populations, those should be guarantees, beyond which we use the private sector. Alternatively, we should use other health boards, if that is appropriate and if they have no waiting times, as can happen. That is a totally pragmatic approach. We do not need a national concordat in Scotland. Although pragmatism is important, so is the  building of capacity. I referred in my intervention on David McLetchie to the fact that the number of nurses in Scotland fell by 4,500. We have increased the number to previous levels and are just about to go beyond that. We will have a 15 per cent increase on the planned levels over the next few years. We are improving retention and reducing drop-out rates, although that is still a significant problem and we are not pretending that it has been completely solved. Doctors are also important. The consultants that Susan Deacon talked about employing do not just drop out of thin air. We have decided, on a UK basis, to increase the number of medical students from 5,000 to 7,500, but that increase will take time to come through. We are building capacity for the long term. As Susan Deacon said, we are not going for a quick fix. Des McNulty gave the best example of the problems that are created by the internal market—the three oesophageal cancer centres in Glasgow. In my constituency in the Forth valley, competition between Falkirk and Stirling meant that, every time Stirling appointed a consultant, Falkirk had to appoint a consultant, too. That is totally inappropriate for the size of population in the area. The immediate task of restoring the structure that will create the public sector ethos is now almost complete, and I welcome that. We now have the beginnings of a truly patient-focused, accountable service, whose modernisation is important. In modernising, we must have an open debate with the professions about their undoubted territoriality. As with some politicians, there are medical politicians who need to be told that shouting from the rooftops is inappropriate. I am not talking about the generality of health service staff, who are excellent, get their job done and are a caring set of professionals. However, there is no doubt that some professionals simply shout "Rubbish!" from the rooftops. What Shona Robison said about Hairmyres sounded reasonable until she said that profit was unacceptable. Some profit is always involved in a private contract, so that is not a problem. I have not had enough time to speak at length about the SNP, but I think that it should look carefully at the Finance Committee's PFI investigation, which I believe will show that the transfer of risks is important in the PPP.

Mr McLetchie's speech is very interesting and quite well balanced. However, in the interests of balance, will he talk about the vast increase in the number of administrators, and the reduction by 8,500 in the number of nurses, in the last 10 years of the Conservative Administration? The Conservatives' failure to increase the number of medical students landed us with an inadequate number of consultants, whom it takes a long time to create. If Mr McLetchie is really being honest, he must be balanced and talk about the problems that his party created for our party in 1997. Those problems were very severe.

For you, Kenny, I will wear it.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing this debate and welcome the fact that a woman is promoting men's health week, which is an important issue for men. All the data that have been collected in the UK testify to poorer access, uptake and outcomes in men's health. The most striking gap is, as Mary Scanlon suggested, in longevity, or premature death, because women have a greater life expectancy than men. Professor Ferguson Anderson, who was one of the most eminent geriatricians in Glasgow, used to say that the main role of geriatrics was to ensure that more men were kept alive to partner women in old age. I am not sure about that as an approach, but I understand what he was saying. The gap is closing, but regrettably it is closing for the wrong reason, because the numbers of men and women who smoke are equalising. One of the problems that we had until now was that more men than women smoked, so there were more premature deaths among males. I must declare, not only as a man but as a doctor and a member of the early prostate cancer working party of the British Association of Urological Surgeons, that I have particular interests in this area, and one of them is prostatic disease. I have been involved in research in that area over the past 10 years, initially in the field of benign prostatic hyperplasia. We asked men why they did not come forward when they had symptoms of prostatic disease and it was interesting that they did not do so for a number of reasons. One is because they said there was no bleeding and no pain, which were the two main symptoms that would lead them to come forward. The other reason was that they simply accepted as part of normal aging the changes that were occurring in their urinary flow. Of course, that is not appropriate. In our research, we estimated that more than a quarter of a million men had their activities of daily living affected and did not, in the vast majority of cases, consult a doctor. There is a profound need to educate people at all stages about what is normal and what is not normal. We need support at all levels of society. Prostate cancer is a growing cause of death in men. I know that patient groups are pressing for prostate-specific antigen screening, but that is a particularly imprecise test. It tells us something, but a negative test result does not mean that one does not have cancer, and a positive test result does not mean that one has cancer. Because it is an imprecise test, it can lead to a lot of stress and strain for individuals if they have it without fully understanding its implications.  The current view is that mass screening is inappropriate. Alan Milburn in England said that any man who wants a test may have one. I have found, as a general practitioner, that it is extremely difficult to say no to a patient who wants the test to be done. I am not sure whether we need to make a statement about the test. We need to understand that 80 per cent of men aged 80 have prostatic cancer, but the overwhelming majority of men with cancer will not die from it; they will die from some other cause. At present, we cannot tell which microcancers will flare into symptomatic cancer, causing significant problems. If we knew that, a screening programme would be appropriate, but we do not. I confess that, although I am approaching the age of 60, I have not had the test and I do not intend to. If a man has the test and finds that he might have cancer, he has to have a biopsy, with the risk of death. If he then finds that he has a microcancer, he has to decide whether he will take the risk of living with it or have a major operation, with the likelihood of a number of effects, including impotence and incontinence. Men have to consider whether they will have the quality of their life impaired. That decision is not easy. We need to play a major education role and I entirely agree with Mary Scanlon's points about access in a variety of settings.

I acknowledge that many of those who oppose the measures do so with good intentions. They firmly believe that smacking children is a good method of imposing discipline, that no child has ever been harmed by smacking and that smacking a child is altogether different from hitting a child. However, let us be clear about the language we are using. The word smack seems to be a softer  word than hit, but the intention is the same for both: to cause pain, whether physical, psychological or both. If an adult smacks another adult, we call it an assault. If an adult—for example, a teacher or a foster parent—smacks someone else's child, we call it an assault. However, the critics of the measures claim that it is all right for people to smack their own children. That suggests that the issue at stake here is one of ownership—that is, that a child is in fact a possession and the parent has the right to treat the child as he or she sees fit. That is according to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. No one, least of all the state, should have the right to interfere. That belief in the right of ownership of one person by another also underlies the abhorrent practice of domestic abuse, which the Parliament has debated at length and is trying to eradicate from Scottish society.

The thing about domestic abuse that interests me is the Zero Tolerance Trust survey that showed that 20 per cent of young men believe that violence against women is appropriate in certain circumstances. I wonder where they get the idea that violence is appropriate as a means of developing a relationship. Could it be that it is because we allow corporal punishment of our children? Our most recent children's legislation in Scotland—the Children (Scotland) Act 1995—is underpinned by the principle derived from the UN convention that a child has rights. One of those rights is the right to protection. I see the proposals as a modest but logical extension of those rights. The legislation will ban the use of implements. Apparently, Lord James is not in favour of that either.

Not at the moment. Childline has provided us with some distressing insights into the types of implements used by adults to "discipline" their children. Children who have used the helpline have talked about being smacked—although they call it hit—by adults, no doubt, in many instances, in the belief that it was for the child's own good, with sticks, slippers, bats, pool cues, belts, straps, electric cables, spades and tools. People talk about the use of implements—let us just call them weapons. Why do we use these euphemisms? They are weapons. They risk serious injury to the child. It is a blessing that there are not more serious injuries as a result.  The consultation proposes to ban the shaking of small children and blows to the head. The first experience that I had in Perth royal infirmary was of someone who had shaken a small child. They stated clearly to me, and I remember it to this day, that they had no intention of damaging that child, but only of controlling it. We must ban the shaking of small children. That is absolutely imperative. There are sound medical reasons for banning the shaking of children. Shaking a child can cause internal haemorrhaging in the head, leading to brain damage. The intention of the proposals is not to lead to increased interference in family life, to increased prosecution of parents or to the bogeys that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to. Experience in Sweden, where all smacking of children is outlawed, has shown that no increase in prosecution of parents has occurred since the ban came into force. Mike Russell referred to attitudes in Sweden, where only 6 per cent of people now believe that corporal punishment is appropriate. We need a change of opinion, and this Parliament must lead with its legislation. This is a modest proposal to improve things. I would prefer a total ban, but at least all children under three in Scotland will in future be definitively protected by law, which is important.

rose—

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made by the Scottish Advisory Committee on Alcohol Misuse. (S1O-3660)

Once again, in the past couple of weeks, a teenager has died from acute alcohol overdose. That is a timely reminder of the significance of underage drinking. What steps are being taken to improve young people's understanding of alcohol misuse?

The Finance Committee has been clear—despite "honest" David Davidson's speech—that the budget documents have improved. I think that David Davidson said "honest" about 12 times in his speech. There was nothing about dishonesty. He should find a new word.  There is no doubt that the budget documents are an improvement on last year's—the Finance Committee agreed that unanimously. However, we recognise that progress has been slow. The two areas in which there have been the greatest difficulties are local government and health, which account for two thirds of the budget. Therein lies a perpetual problem of national policy and direction versus local autonomy—the issue of hypothecation or management of a budget over which one has no control. That also applies to many quangos. Alex Neil, I think, referred to that in an intervention. I will talk a little about health. The massive aggregated sums, particularly in the hospital and community services budget, approached £5 billion. The Health and Community Care Committee is left to debate the much smaller central budget or to seek ever more information. On this occasion, it tried to join up the health improvement plans of the health boards and the policy documents—of which there are a considerable number—with the budget. That was an almost impossible task, even although we tried to do it retrospectively. For example, on the basis of last year's budget, we were able to identify only £1 million for cancer services—one of the three national priorities for six or seven years. We make a plea to link policy objectives to new funding—that must be done. The Health and Community Care Committee also tried to determine what it perceived as being new money, and it produced a fairly innovative table to try to demonstrate that. It was interesting because the table turned out to be in line with the research that Professor Arthur Midwinter produced for the Finance Committee. I will not summarise the proposals in Professor Midwinter's report, because they are set out in paragraph 42 of the Finance Committee's budget report. In practice, the situation is complex. In health, any uplift of funding will initially have to be used to meet standard increases in wages and so on—the general deflator, in a sense. Money is also needed for additional increases in wages that are allocated in accordance with UK review body reports. We need money to cover the deficits that arise from a previous year, but we do not know what those deficits are and therefore cannot see how much of any money that is available is being used for that. We also need money for what I describe as stabilisation: the posts that are kept empty by managers for three or four months to save money within budgets. In health, that is an absolutely disastrous practice, because it leads to major clinical inefficiencies and costs a huge amount of money, but it goes on all the time. We need money to tackle specific areas, such as junior doctors' wages or the European working time and other directives. There are other costs; for  example, we know that the increase in drug costs is about 8 per cent. There is not a lot left when we add all that up. It is not the 1 per cent or 2 per cent that Arthur Midwinter discusses in his report; it is probably a lot less. If we are to have clear discussion about how we are to proceed, we need greater detail in the material that is presented to us. I appreciate that there is a danger that we will start collecting ever more information, and that the health service will become so involved in that that staff do not get on with the business in hand. I put that to Susan Deacon when she appeared before the Health and Community Care Committee. We simply must improve the data that we receive, so that we can determine whether the clinical services that are being undertaken are valid. I will conclude—I realise that I am out of time—by saying that the other matter about which I feel strongly is our need to get the PFI-PPP thing back in. In other words, we have to understand the continuing revenue consequences of PFI-PPP in the budget. Our investigation on that will help, and—although I know that it is available elsewhere—I hope that the table of information will be restored as part of the budget document next year.

I declare that I undertake occasional work with Astra-Zeneca, a company that has some interests in respiratory health. I join others in congratulating Michael Matheson for securing the debate. There are about 4,600 new lung cancer registrations every year. As Michael Matheson said, it is poor indeed that the five-year survival rate continues to represent about  6 per cent of cases. In addition to concerns about the numbers that are diagnosed and the five-year survival rate, the other concern is that the median survival rate is only three months. Those figures show the poor outcome from lung cancer disease. In the past 20 years, the incidence of women who are diagnosed as having cancer has doubled. The rising trend of smoking, especially in young women, is storing up problems for the future. The tobacco industry is more than happy to replace women who die from lung cancer with new recruits. I hope that ministers will continue to press their UK counterparts to reintroduce the bill to ban tobacco advertising. If that happens, I also hope that it will not be blocked by the Conservative Opposition or by the House of Lords. We need an effective care pathway that is based on grade A evidence, because that would more than double the five-year survival rates to around 14 per cent. It is suggested that if that happened, at least 300 lives would be saved each year. That would involve 100 additional, timely operations, 600 additional courses of radiotherapy, the introduction of CHART—the particularly intensive form of radiotherapy that produces the best results, to which Michael Matheson referred earlier—and 400 additional chemotherapy courses. To achieve that, the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland must not only comment on the standards, but report on the specific resources that are needed, so that those needs can be addressed. It is a matter of concern that the Health and Community Care Committee, in consideration of the budget for last year and on examination of the health improvement plans, found that only £1 million of new money could be identified as going into cancer. At that rate, and unless the new cancer plan is costed quickly and implemented, it is unlikely that we will make improvements. We need earlier presentation and we need to deal with the bottlenecks—especially in radiology—and ensure that the managed clinical networks that are beginning to be set up are properly implemented, with good care pathways. In other words, we need an improved cancer journey. On asthma, passive smoking—as one of the main triggers of asthma—must be tackled. Although there is no doubt that there has been a substantial improvement in asthma care over the past 10 years, many people still die of asthma. Best practice must be implemented in all areas. That can best be done through the local health care co-operatives which, through their programme of clinical governance, must ensure that the primary care teams throughout the country respond by improving practice. I commend the fast access respiratory clinic that was set up in Falkirk, in the Forth Valley area that  covers my constituency. That was based, entirely appropriately, on previous research that demonstrated that such a facility would reduce emergency admissions by some 18 per cent. That is the sort of one-stop clinic that the Executive has been promoting. However, I wonder why it is taking so long to introduce such measures. Surely such best practice should be rolled out more quickly throughout the country. Finally, the role of occupational health must be examined closely. Scotland's Health at Work, under the chairmanship of Andrew Cubie, is beginning to make an impact on what is done in employment situations. However, when we hear that 58 per cent of employers still do not have a no-smoking policy in place, we realise that we still have a long way to go. We must start getting there.

I commend the Executive for the process so far of developing a modern approach to the difficult issue of serious violent and sexual offenders. The Minister for Justice has outlined the principles that underlie the white paper and he stressed that the protection of public safety is paramount. However, the white paper attempts to combine that with a humane approach and, where appropriate, with treatment. The response to the MacLean committee and the consultation process is to be commended. I want to talk mainly about people who have mental disorders. There are difficulties in integrating the Millan report, the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 and the MacLean recommendations. The principles that are outlined in paragraph 12 of chapter 3 of the white paper are to be welcomed. They stress public safety but also, as the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 does in another context, that public safety  should be achieved through offenders' placement in the least restrictive settings. However, I have some reservations about the last element, which is that offenders should be managed "As near as possible to their own homes or families if they have them." That will not always be appropriate and I assume that it will be examined closely as part of the risk management. The white paper correctly separates different types of mental disorder. Mental illness might be continuing, severe or limited. In this, as in all cases of high risk, the addition of a risk management assessment to a review of the illness and its effects will help to determine the appropriate disposal. The guidance that is mentioned in the paper on seeking to increase interim hospital orders is welcome and should help to achieve more appropriate disposals. Gordon Jackson referred to the fact that, with the white paper, we now have considerably more options. Hospital direction, subsequent transfer to prison and the new orders for lifelong restriction build on what has gone before and provide options that should allow more appropriate management. However, that will need to be integrated with the response on compulsory treatment orders in the Millan report, which is a matter for considerable discussion. We will come to that. People who have personality disorders are the most difficult group to prescribe for. As we saw during the passage of the Mental Health (Public Safety and Appeals) (Scotland) Act 1999, tension exists between psychiatric practice and legal problems. In supporting that bill, Gordon Jackson and I expressed concerns about bringing personality disorder within the context of mental disorder. We will return to that debate, too. The white paper uses a telling phrase in paragraph 5 of chapter 3, in which it says: "Finally, we will work towards addressing the difficult problems of personality disorders and their links to offending." That is a difficult area. The Executive states in other paragraphs, for example in paragraph 17 of chapter 3, its aspiration to provide a "robust system" for treatment. However, will such treatment actually happen within the prison service? Sexual offenders are treated well at Peterhead prison, which is mentioned approvingly in Lady Cosgrove's report. However, it is my experience of other prisons that, notwithstanding some of the new measures that are being introduced, we are a long way from adequately training people in the prison sector. I have grave doubts that we will be able to manage the problem appropriately. I also have concerns about sexual offenders  whose risk assessments indicate medium risk at present, but who are either recidivists or show an escalating pattern of behaviour. Will the risk management plans deal effectively with such problems? When can we expect a response to the Millan committee's request for a serious review of learning disability? Finally, I welcome the commitment to research. I hope that the Executive will ensure that the new authority will take part in UK studies as well as dealing with Scottish studies. I commend the Executive's white paper. It is a model paper that meets the needs of Scotland in a modern context.

I join other members in congratulating Donald Gorrie on securing this debate, which is on an important area. It is useful to celebrate the occasion of the formation of the national young carers forum. I support Donald Gorrie's call for that forum to be helped. I feel strongly that, among other things, young carers need to have an advocate. The problem for many young carers is that they have to find their own way round so many different services and so much bureaucracy that it is extremely difficult. Instead of things being made easier for them, things are made more difficult. Mary Scanlon referred to needs assessments. Young carers are entitled to needs assessments, but do they know that? How do they know that they are entitled to needs assessments? If we do not identify young carers in the first place, they will not look for needs assessments. Much more careful planning and much more joined-up thinking is needed. Young carers need relief and respite as much as adult carers do. The welcome additional funds that are going into respite care, which the Executive has announced, need to be used for young carers. The other thing that we need, which the Executive has largely recognised, is one point of contact for all young carers—or at least for the vast majority of them, who are of compulsory school age—which must be the school. We need to establish units like the one in Alloa Academy, in which youngsters who are in difficulties or who are having problems can be supported or helped.  Such units are important. The unit in Alloa Academy takes youngsters who have perhaps arrived in the morning tired and without breakfast—perhaps having supported a difficult family situation in which they have acted as the carer—and negotiates on their behalf what they will do within the school that day. The unit provides them with breakfast, if that is the first thing they need. There is a caring approach within the school. Previously, although individual teachers may have recognised the problem and on occasion endeavoured to give support, such children either ended up being excluded from school or would feel that schooling—which was already difficult for them—was becoming impossible. I welcome the establishment of such units and I hope that they will be extended. I know that the Executive's strategy documents have recognised that problem, which Mary Scanlon also referred to. We need to hear how progress is being made. Community schools are an example of where progress is undoubtedly being made in joined-up thinking. Community schools involve not only the teachers and those in the units that I mentioned but other health professionals and other care workers. Such schools provide a better opportunity for joined-up thinking. However, there has not been enough joined-up thinking about the group that I am most concerned about—the people who have either a temporary illness or an illness, such as a terminal illness, that is of a fixed period. The current division between primary care and social work does not serve people in those circumstances well. During my 30 years in general practice, there were at least four periods when we had social workers attached to our practice. The enhancement to my ability as a doctor and to the ability of my team to provide a comprehensive service to families and to recognise the needs of groups such as young carers who have to deal with a family illness was very much enhanced during those times. Reversal of the separation of social work and primary care would provide the opportunity for joined-up thinking. There would be ready identification, which would mean that services could be provided. I thank Donald Gorrie for giving us the opportunity to have today's debate.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. A question that is withdrawn so late prevents you from selecting questions in an appropriate order for First Minister's question time. Would you ask SNP front-bench members to talk to one another and to get their questions right? Some of us had important supplementaries to question 4.

Will the First Minister join me—and urge the whole chamber to join me—in asking the Grampian nursing home owners to call off their action, in view of the fact that the people who are suffering as a result of it are old people? The Government now understands the problem and is acting on the matter. The action should be called off today.

I join in the welcome for the inclusion of the general principles. As a generality, bills of this sort should include general principles. The minister will recall that we discussed whether there should be a fifth principle about consultation. However, the significant number of amendments relating to consultation that we have already debated have largely satisfied my concerns in that regard.

I want to quote from the e-mail I received from David Wiseman after our meeting. He says: "the local authorities would want to demonstrate an 'even-handed' approach in how we commission services between different types of public, voluntary and private providers, with transparency about intentions for 'managing the market'. Therefore any preferences for one ... type of provider would need to be explicit and defensible since it was recognised that in some instances local authorities may essentially be in competition with voluntary and private sector organisations to provide certain services." That is the sort of transparency that we are talking about, and COSLA is committed to it.

Section 24A was inserted at stage 2 and the Executive now seeks to delete it. Members have heard the arguments for that deletion from the minister—I will come to those. I want to put on record some facts and concerns about care in the community that led me to introduce section 24A. The bill seeks to deliver for Scotland's most vulnerable and needy citizens a quality of care that treats them with respect and  dignity. The principles of the bill that the Parliament will approve today aspire to maximising the autonomy and independence of those who require care. Through the commission for the regulation of care, we will attempt to create care facilities that are fit for purpose and of the highest standards. Through the social services council, we will ensure that the staff are valued, trained and motivated. Those are worthy goals; indeed, all those aspirations are highly commendable. However, without any mention of the funding of care, the bill is doomed to remain simply an aspiration. Without a mechanism to deal with funding, the bill will have problems. Without a mechanism to ensure a level playing field for funding, inequities will remain, either for the quality of care or for the terms and conditions of those who work in care provision. It is vital that the funding issue is addressed, for it will not go away.  Let us examine briefly the history of care in the community. Ever since the process began of closing long-stay national health service provision, the voluntary, charitable and independent sectors have expanded to accommodate those in need. The past seven years have been characterised by a continuing squeeze on the funding of both public sector and non-public sector providers. However, blame for that cannot be laid entirely on the local authorities, as we should recognise the years of underinvestment in care and the difficulties that were incurred as a result of inadequate resource transfer from health boards. The reality is that whenever local authorities have difficulty with funding care, they tackle first the problems of those who are at home and in greatest need. That approach is based on the entirely reasonable premise that those who are in hospital, awaiting discharge into community care, are at least being looked after by the NHS. Research in 1997 showed that the number of blocked beds, as they were called then, in Scottish hospitals was around 2,500. Today, despite additional funding from the Government, there are still nearly 3,000 elderly patients languishing in hospital, exposed to the growing risk of hospital-acquired infection, to which the elderly are particularly vulnerable. Meantime, resources in the voluntary and independent sectors are underutilised. Delayed discharges are not only dangerous and distressing for the individuals affected; in addition to the human cost, there is a significant financial cost to the taxpayer. Let me give one or two examples to illustrate how desperate is the need to address contracting and funding issues. The Church of Scotland is one of our largest not-for-profit care providers. In 1993, its capital expenditure was £5 million. Last year,  that expenditure was down to £1 million and was spent entirely on essential repairs. Why? Because the purchasers—relying on the dedication of that provider—had reduced funding. As a result, seven homes have been closed and the remaining 34 are under threat of closure. Staff wages are no longer linked to the Scottish Joint Council for Local Government Employees terms, although they have, in practice, remained close to those levels. The Church of Scotland has spent no less than £20 million of its own money to meet revenue costs, yet that provider superannuates its staff and offers 80 training courses annually to Scottish vocational qualification levels 3 and 4. Except for the decaying fabric of its buildings, that employer will meet the care standards of today and most of those of tomorrow. How long can it continue to run any homes if proper levels of funding are not made available? Crossroads (Scotland) runs 53 care attendance schemes, from Shetland to Stranraer, and the funding increases for the past three years have been zero. As a result, staff have had only one inflation-level pay increase in the past three years, although they are being asked to take on increasingly complex, quasi-nursing tasks. Their social work equivalents are paid more, have greater job security and, in many regions, will not perform the tasks that I have referred to "because our staff are not insured to do them". Crossroads (Scotland) has recently been advised to raise money from private clients to meet that deficit. The William Simpson Home in my constituency, which looks after those with end-stage complications of alcohol abuse, has received awards for its staff training. The trustees report to me that they have reached the end of the road in their ability to fund activities, because of the squeeze on revenue. I do not propose to go into great detail about private sector issues, which have made headlines in the past week. If we continue to collude with the Government and local authorities in the funding system, offering low levels of pay and poor staff conditions, and paying minimum wages and no superannuation, how can we realistically expect the quality of care to improve, which is what the bill aspires to? I understand that 100 homes have closed in Scotland. Further closures will reduce choice for those persons who require that sort of care. Many voluntary organisations are funding either capital or revenue costs, or both, out of charitable money. Two thirds of them are no longer able to employ their staff on joint council terms and conditions. In a post-Sutherland era, the local authority will be the monopoly purchaser of care provision. In  my discussions with providers, I have detected a reluctance to expose funding problems for fear of antagonising the purchaser. I therefore want to acknowledge the positive response that I have had from COSLA, and from David Wiseman and Alexis Jay in particular, about ensuring that the process becomes open, transparent and equitable between public and other providers. The aspirational care standards that are embodied in the bill must not be achieved through either the exploitation of workers in the sector or the charitable contributions of the public. We need a system that will ensure that funding is fair to all sectors and which recognises and values the importance of a partnership between the Government, the local authorities, the voluntary, charitable and independent sectors, and the workers. We need a system that recognises that, post-Sutherland—with free personal care, with the elimination of the residual Department of Social Security benchmarks, and with the economics of the new single-care home system replacing separate residential and nursing homes—the Government will be the monopoly funder and the local authority the monopoly purchaser with public funds. I accept that the commission may not be the best organisation to deal with funding issues, as Malcolm Chisholm has said. I share his unease, which was also expressed at stage 2 by John McAllion, about a quango being able to comment in that way on local authority financial matters. As a result, subject to the assurances that the minister has given, I will support the deletion of section 24A. However, I need the minister's reassurance that the series of meetings that he referred to will result in a long-term, sustainable solution that will ensure that our future care standards are not built on the backs of care workers, but recognise the value of those workers. I can support the deletion of section 24A if, as he said he would, the minister undertakes to report back to the Parliament in the autumn. I hope that he will also consider dealing with the issue in the bill on long-term care of the elderly or the bill on best value. I give notice that, if sustainable solutions are not agreed by all partners, I will seek to ensure that one or other of those bills deals properly with the issue. I am content that the insertion of section 24A at stage 2 has opened up to debate the connection between care standards and funding, which is crucial to the implementation of the bill, and that the crucial importance of funding to the delivery of the aspirations that are enshrined in the bill has been acknowledged. I am happy to support amendment 34.

I share some of Shona Robison's concerns. In trying to make clear the costs of the commission, we may introduce a bureaucratic system in which the public pound will circulate through several hands and be devalued. I continue to feel instinctively that we have not got the system correct. However, I hope that amendment 24 and the terms of the bill will allow the minister to reconsider the arrangement and decide that fees should all be paid centrally. We should get rid of the bureaucracy. In a post-Sutherland era, where personal care is to be free, the public pound will pay for almost the whole of the care sector—apart from personal living costs. The situation will change radically and the system will need to be re-examined. I wish to raise a point about registration and deregistration of beds in interim periods. At a meeting of the Health and Community Care Committee, I indicated that, when care homes in the Tayside Health Board area have a reduced occupancy that is perceived as continuing over a period of time, they are not allowed to adjust their staffing levels to be appropriate to the number of beds that are occupied at the time. The care homes in that area have to continue to staff themselves as if they were fully occupied. In some  circumstances, that can cause the homes considerable funding difficulties. A process that registers and deregisters care homes with any frequency means that the occupancy figures, which we will return to when we look at section 24A, are invalid. Comparisons across the sector and the sort of level playing field that the minister has referred to as being essential and central to the bill will also not apply. I hope that the minister will consider those processes in his discussions with the commission so as to ensure that they are in the least bureaucratic form.

I will make a declaration as this the first time I have spoken. I am a director of Nursing Home Management Ltd, which operates nursing homes in England, a  member of the British Agencies for Adoption and Fostering and a member of the Scottish Association for Mental Health. I welcome amendment 12. It is vital that we put the persons to whom the services are offered at the centre of our activities. The amendment allows individuals to request information in the format that they prefer. That is appropriate.  Amendment 12 agreed to.  [Amendments 13 and 14 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.]

I am  disappointed that I am the only male back-bench member who is present to make a speech on this subject. [ Applause. ] Karen Gillon was lucky to have a student nurse as a partner, as the men are important and their attitude can often put women off breastfeeding. If the men are not prepared to support their partners in breastfeeding, the women are in real trouble. When I sat down to write my speech, my hand naturally began to write out the advice that I used to give lady patients when they first presented pregnant. I talked to them about breastfeeding at their first interview on the basis that, if I got in first, I might be able to change attitudes. Attitudes are the problem and until we change them, we will not restore breastfeeding to its rightful place. I pay tribute to my colleague health visitors in the practice in which I worked for the level of breastfeeding in that practice. It was a mixed practice, including a lot of academics from the university and some fairly poor people from an area of Stirling. Across all socioeconomic groups, we achieved an initial breastfeeding level of 70 per cent. We must set ourselves that target. More important, more than 50 per cent of women in the practice were still breastfeeding at six weeks. As Mary Scanlon said, the decline in the level during that time is not because mothers do not want to continue breastfeeding, but because society fails to support them. I therefore welcome the development of self-help groups and mothers support groups. We should encourage them and ensure that our health professionals do likewise. I draw members' attention to two important issues. First, why do we support milk substitutes? Milk substitutes were entirely appropriate in the 1940s and 1950s, but they damaged the practice of breastfeeding because it became the norm to bottle-feed and use formula. We must revisit the matter and level the playing field. We should either give tokens to breastfeeding mothers, which they could use for other things, or reconsider support for formula milk. I do not have the answer, but I hope that the minister will take up that point and address the issue. Secondly, there is the question of the promotion of milk powder in this country and abroad. The companies that promote milk powder were scandalised and treated with deep opprobrium a few years ago. After being attacked by many groups, they held up their hands and said, "Yes, okay. We will do something about it." Yet today, the position has improved only marginally. Especially in third-world countries, where there are problems getting clean water supplies, the promotion of formula milk is an abomination and should not be allowed. I therefore urge the minister to ensure that, in co-operation with our Westminster colleagues, we develop our overseas  aid and help to promote breastfeeding in those countries. We should also continue to work with the companies that produce milk powder to ensure that any promotion that is undertaken is appropriate. My first memory of working with new mothers at Stirling royal infirmary is of a consultant obstetrician who was ruthlessly determined that every mother in whose birthing she was involved would breastfeed. A number of women left hospital feeling guilty because they had tried hard to breastfeed but had failed and felt bad about it. The experience of breastfeeding is psychologically important not only for children, but for mothers. If they can breastfeed, mothers gain enormous confidence. We should not make them feel guilty if they cannot breastfeed, but should promote breastfeeding as natural and normal.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in ensuring good relations between the police and ethnic minority communities. (S1O-3452)

The minister will be aware of the rise in reported incidents with a racial aspect in the Central region area and I am sure that he will welcome the initiatives that Andrew Cameron, the chief constable of Central Scotland police, introduced at the meeting at Inchyra that involved the Commission for Racial Equality. Will the minister say whether any research is being done in Scotland to determine whether the increases in such reported incidents reflect the increasing confidence in ethnic minority communities in police and policing or a real increase in racially motivated crime?

I congratulate Tavish Scott on securing the debate.  I should declare that I am a member of the Royal College of General Practitioners and the British Medical Association. I have experience of working in a locality that stretched from Stirling to Oban and covered a very large geographic area—a locality that consisted of six practices. It was interesting because the practices represented the gradation from the suburban practice right through to the rural practice. The problem is not in finite bits. There are particular problems for the islands and for some of the very remote communities that Jamie Stone referred to. The problem comes right through into less urban areas or geographically disparate areas. For example, the recruitment and retention problems in areas such as Kinross and Milnathort in my constituency are exacerbated by the fact that they are not in an out-of-hours co-operative. Over 80 per cent of Scottish GPs now work in out-of-hours co-operatives. Frankly, the out-of-hours co-operative movement saved primary care from disaster in the mid-1990s, when morale was at an all-time low, although some of my GP colleagues have forgotten that. We need to examine carefully the problems for doctors in rural and island areas. I have already suggested that out-of-hours practice is a problem, but getting time off for training is also problematic. The clinical governance requirements in primary care are increasing substantially and GPs who work in isolation need to keep up to date. If there are three or four partners, the GP can share information with them and discuss problems and worries, but it is difficult if the GP is isolated. Holiday leave is also increasingly difficult for rural and island GPs, because availability of locums has decreased. Locums are hard to get even in urban settings, but they are almost impossible in more rural settings. Rural GPs are also not able easily to participate in their local health care co-operative, which is the main thrust of development of primary care and is our main engine for change. Of course, there are advantages to working in a rural or island practice—I will not repeat Rhoda Grant's speech—but GPs have to be able to take a multiskilled approach in primary care in such settings. For example, the need for good work in accident and emergency is important. The minister will not be surprised to learn that I have a number of suggestions. We need to look again at the model that is used in the Australian outback, where young graduates are encouraged to take up posts that are hard to fill and, after a period of time, are given a bonus that helps them if they want to move back into urban settings. For example, although I was fortunate enough to work in the village of Bridge of Allan and obtain a house when property prices were cheap, no GP could  now afford to acquire a property in certain parts of that area. That is also true of some of the large cities. Doctors who might wish to practise in such areas may be prepared to spend some time in more difficult places. In that regard, I suggest that we need to consider golden handshakes and to consider paying the student loans for such doctors. Doctors' courses are longer than most graduate courses and a young doctor's debt is now very substantial. If that were done over a period of years, it would encourage people to move. Relocation costs, which Tavish Scott referred to, need also to be examined. Why should primary care doctors be treated differently from other doctors? I see no reason for that. The issue should be re-examined. Local health care co-operatives and primary care trusts should be strongly encouraged to employ young registrar doctors—that is, newly qualified GPs—to act as locums. That would give them enormous experience of working in the Highlands and might allow some to develop an appetite to experience the quality of life that comes from serving a community in the way that Jamie McGrigor mentioned. Such service gives enormous satisfaction, but unless one has tasted it and understood it, going to a remote community might be quite a fearful thing. We also need to look at the use of NHS Direct. One of the things that we did for one of our more rural practices was to provide nurse and doctor triage so that any calls that were received were already known to be calls that were definitely valid and would not be problematic.

I am on my last sentences. We are in the process of beginning to renegotiate the general medical services contract. I urge the Executive to join our Welsh colleagues, who have similar problems, in examining closely whether it would not be better to have specific contracts for rural, island and other disparate geographical communities.

Does the minister agree that safety must be the paramount consideration in the implementation of the maternity strategy? If we are not to demoralise Scottish midwives, will she ask her officials to ensure that the changes required in working practice to implement the team midwifery systems—which are important for pre-conception, prenatal and postnatal care—are handled carefully? Furthermore, will she ensure that her first priority in appointing additional community midwives should be understaffed areas and areas of deprivation?

Given the limited number of opportunities for the Opposition to initiate debates, I find it quite extraordinary that the Conservatives have chosen to debate this topic at this time. On reflection, there could be three reasons for the motion. First, I suppose, the Conservatives had to search for a topic on which they are reasonably united—not an easy task. Secondly, they had to search for a topic on which they take a similar line to the UK Tory party or, as in this case, in which the UK Tory party probably has no interest. Thirdly, the party has to be allowed to plough its own line without too much embarrassment and it will want to score some election points. I congratulate David Davidson on his interim report to the Finance Committee—at least he is prepared to get involved. The interim report is sober, rational and well balanced. It shows where the project team and the progress group are succeeding, where there are problems, where the outcomes are known and where there are still difficulties. I hope that David Davidson does not support his party's ludicrous motion. It is safe for David McLetchie to lodge the motion—no one will  be interested in it south of the border. Brian Monteith made a ridiculous comparison to the dome—the Scots have greater confidence in their future than that. What about the cost? Well, £195 million is the cost at 1999 prices—Mike Russell acknowledged that. There is the cost of construction inflation.

No. The success of the economy and the construction boom in Edinburgh—one has only to look around to see that all the holes in the earth are being filled up—mean that the construction costs will be much greater than the amount allowed for them in the original budget. I hope that we will hear from the progress group about that. I congratulate the team on the savings that it has achieved without detriment to the design and the building's appearance. Brian Monteith suggests that the solution to our problems is to stop at the ceiling and leave the roof off—that is where the Tories stand on the matter. They have not come up with one serious suggestion about what we should do. We have committed £90 million in costs already—do we leave the site as a sort of folly?

No. I congratulate the team on bringing in the first £50 million of tenders at the predicted cost and on ensuring that Scottish materials, such as Kemnay granite, Caithness slab and Scottish oak, are used. The building has to be a showpiece for Scotland. I raise a note of caution in relation to Historic Scotland, which John Home Robertson alluded to.

I do not have much time. Queensberry House was not such a unique building that it should have been retained. Its state of disrepair when discovered makes it clear that it should have been demolished and replaced by a replica. I am concerned, if the rumours are correct, that there are some serious problems. I gather that the stump of a tower has been discovered and that Historic Scotland is insisting that it be restored. I gather that it has been discovered that the roof was raised some 200 years ago to make the top floor of greater use and that now, according to Historic Scotland, it must be lowered at great cost and with loss of space. I understand also that Historic Scotland wants the building to be finished with limewash, which went out 150 years ago because the maintenance costs  were too high. If those three rumours are correct, Historic Scotland is really hysteric Scotland and should, as a quango, be brought under greater control. I encourage the progress group to take seriously those utter stupidities and to go against Historic Scotland. Let us control costs where we can. Brian Monteith referred to Sydney Opera House. The same carping by Opposition politicians nearly destroyed the construction of Sydney Opera House. The subsequent costs of refurbishing it are such that they outweigh the original costs of the building, because the politicians cut, curtailed and ate into the internal design. Only now have they apologised to the architect for fiddling around with his original design. We are creating something that Scotland can be proud of. The Tories should stop carping, come on board and help us to control the costs and to create something of which Scotland can be proud.

Presiding Officer, I will help you by making a fairly short speech. I am slightly surprised to find that I am the only Labour back bencher present, although I am sure that that does not reflect my fellow back benchers' interest in this subject. On the other hand, members might be slightly surprised that I am here at all, given that there are no distilleries in my constituency.

Being a doctor is a good reason for speaking: whisky is an excellent medicinal that I would thoroughly recommend. I am speaking because two thirds of the world's whisky is stored in my constituency, which makes Clackmannanshire an area of vast importance to the whisky industry. The industry's survival is important to sometimes slightly fragile economies. Although the EU abstraction directive is itself good and important, it will create problems if it is not applied sensitively to a number of industries. Instead of repeating other members' specific—and correct—points about, for example, the whisky industry's balance with the environment over hundreds of years, I will raise a general point. We charge SEPA with implementing directives in an often insensitive way. I was recently involved with the paper industry's discharge of effluent. The problem was not the cleaning of the effluent, but its temperature, which is not allowed to rise by more than a couple of  degrees, but the water temperature of the river into which the effluent flows changes by more than a couple of degrees. We should examine the rigorous application of these directives closely and ensure that SEPA applies directives sensitively. In the case of whisky production, as in the case of other distilling, our natural advantages may put the industry in Scotland at a competitive advantage without affecting the environment adversely. I would support either exemption from or very sensitive implementation of the directive.

I congratulate Robert Brown on securing this debate and declare my membership of the Manufacturing, Science, Finance union. As everyone has said, there is no doubt that the funding arrangements for health visitors and other community workers are inadequate and that the bureaucracy of the system is overly complex. It is difficult to overestimate the irritation that is caused to clinical staff by the system. MSPs will know how annoying it is to fill in forms on parking costs every month; it is even more annoying for clinicians who are under considerable pressure. Obviously, public funds have to be accounted for, but the system is incredibly bureaucratic. As a general practitioner, I, too, was employed by two trusts at one point. Every year, I had to fill in two different forms for the two trusts. Do we have a corporate NHS or do we not? If we do, let us have a uniform system throughout the NHS. Whether public servants of the type we are discussing should have access to some form of red diesel or red petrol is another matter. There is a lack of uniformity on parking: in some towns, GPs get car permits; in others, they use various emergency doctor badges that do not have legal standing but which are accepted through custom as meaning that doctors can park illegally on double yellow lines and so on, but even they are sometimes subject to charge and cases have gone to court. There is a need for health professionals to have access to a scheme like the orange badge scheme. We should have a national green badge scheme with clear guidelines. People with the green badge should use it appropriately and they should get in trouble if they use it inappropriately. We will not go into parking at hospitals again today, but the appropriateness of access is an important matter. Michael Matheson rightly referred to other groups in the community, but let us first consider the model of primary care teams. When I started, there was one multipurpose community nurse/health visitor/midwife. When I retired to come here, there were 30 workers in the primary care team. Some of them came from the primary  care trust, some came from the acute services trust and some came from the local authority. They all needed to have access to patients. In addition, there were volunteers who transported patients. They, too, had difficulties with parking. We need a scheme whereby the service can work smoothly and efficiently. I hope that, as part of establishing a corporate national identity, we will get such a scheme. Donald Gorrie was trying to draw out themes. Another one is bureaucracy. The abundance of paperwork that professionals must put up with now at all levels needs to be tackled. That is one small area where we could make a start.

I welcome the unprecedented reduction over the winter, especially against a background of higher activity within the health service. However, will the minister now give consideration not to the numbers involved, but to instituting definite time limit guarantees to people who are affected by delayed discharges? In my constituency, a delay of up to two years can occur. Will he consider giving a guarantee similar to those under the NHS plan for in-patient waiting times?

I welcome the First Minister's response. As part of the implementation of " Our National Health: A plan for action, a plan for change " , will the First Minister ask his colleagues with responsibility for health and community care to ensure that, as proposed in the plan, high-quality counselling and written information about MS are provided? Sadly, such counselling and information are lacking at present. Will the First Minister ask ministers to establish at least some of the pilots that were recommended in the SNAP report to which he referred?

Will the member give way?

When today's debate was announced, I began by feeling that it was very unwelcome at this time; that point was discussed extensively in the Health and Community Care Committee yesterday. I continued to feel that up to the point at which Nicola Sturgeon called for a public inquiry, because—in my view—that would be an expensive waste of money, just as, in Nicola Sturgeon's view, clearly it would not be. I feel strongly that after an inquiry has taken place, which has disclosed all the facts, there is no reason to have a further public inquiry.

I do not think so, because I have expressed that view in the committee. What the committee's report says and whether it is  unanimous are matters for consideration. I would not be talking about the issue today if the SNP had not raised the matter for debate. As I said, up to that point in Nicola Sturgeon's speech I heard exactly what I had expected. However, since then members have all indicated that this is a serious human issue, which the chamber must address. The Executive's amendment is also very much to be welcomed. Keith Raffan has consistently reminded the chamber that hepatitis C is a ticking time bomb: 10,000 Scots are known to be infected, but the figure is probably nearer 30,000. This is a broad issue; it is not only about those who were infected in a particular way at a particular time, or about whether there may be legal considerations. What is most important is the NHS plan, which clearly states the Executive's intention to provide support for hepatitis C sufferers during screening, diagnosis and treatment. If we are to make progress, we must flesh that out and ensure that everyone who suffers from hepatitis C is given the support that they require. Of course, there are alternatives. Specific support for those who were infected inadvertently through blood transfusion is an interesting option. I have serious concerns about the effect of the ruling and the application of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 in that way. I have not yet read the full report, but I have read the summary. If the act is designed to ensure that best practice, producing the best product, is available quickly across Europe, no matter where the investment in that product has been effected, I think that it is a good law. However, if its effect is that any risk will have to be compensated, it will make the NHS incredibly risk averse. Doctors—indeed members of all health professions—already practise increasingly defensive medicine. Good governance is vital, as are open and transparent results. Informed patients are vital. Brian Adam's point is well made; informed consent is dealt with in a much better way than it was previously. I am surprised that the court judgment is not being appealed against—not on the human issue, but on the legal issue—and I caution that it will have a serious effect on the NHS. Health professionals will begin to practise a degree of risk aversion that will seriously damage patients. I ask members to think what doctors would have done in the mid-1980s—knowing that non-A, non-B existed, but not knowing exactly what it was or whether it could be, or was being, treated—had they known that substantial compensation would have to be paid as a result of using a particular blood product. I suspect that they would have seriously considered not applying such life-saving products.

When she is reviewing the situation with her officials, will the minister ensure that she examines the figures that I have received, which show that the passenger element of the bid was wrong by a factor differing from £2.2 million to £9.9 million? Will she investigate what the official submission was and how on earth the bid could ever have been approved in the first place if those figures are indeed correct? Furthermore, will she agree to hold an urgent meeting involving Scott Barrie, Sylvia Jackson and me, and Clackmannanshire Council, Stirling Council and Railtrack, to review what appears to be a disastrous bid so that we can endeavour to resolve the problem in the interests of all our constituents?

I declare an interest. I give advice on adoption and fostering to the three local authorities that made up the former Central Regional Council. As someone who was himself adopted, I have had a lifelong interest in this issue. Although I was lucky enough to be adopted as a baby into a secure family and to have had what was a privileged upbringing, I have recognised, from my 19 years of working in the area, that society has substantially failed the group of children we are talking about. How much better we can succeed with additional resources is, of course, questionable, because nowadays such children are often damaged or disabled. Two thirds of them have mental health problems or have behavioural difficulties that are difficult to solve. I find the efforts that are made by some of my social work colleagues inspiring, but those people are often working against a difficult background in which adoption is not given a high enough priority by their authority. We recognise that stability, security and safety are paramount for children. However, the children about whom we are talking have the opposite: they have insecurity and uncertainty in their lives. When they have to be taken into care, they find that they may be moved from their school and separated from their friends. They may lose even the support services that they had in their home when things were difficult. They change health visitors. They change general practitioners. Often they have to change social workers as well, because many social workers move around. The children have no continuity in their lives, so it is no wonder that they have the sort of problems to which Ian Jenkins referred. We recognise, as the minister said, that baby  adoption now forms a much lesser part of the whole. However, we should also recognise that the number of adoptions and permanent placements of children with a disability or some sort of difficulty has been increasing. That is an important plus. Things are not all negative; some things are, with the efforts of so many colleagues, improving. We read statistics in the various reports, such as that 18 per cent of children have three or more placements in a year. However, the statistics do not reflect only the uncertainty and insecurity of the adopted children; they often represent genuine attempts to keep families together. That is important, because keeping families together may be the best option. A difficult decision has to be made: at what point should one move a child from a family that one has been trying to support, but which is disintegrating, to a family that will be a permanent placement? We should be cautious about interpreting the statistics at face value. A comprehensive range of services is needed. Many of those services are available, but in many areas they are fragmented. We need befriending; we need respite care; we need in-home support; we need support for the families; and we need crisis intervention, so that a family in crisis gets immediate intervention—not from a stranger but from a respite care supporter who has been associated with the family over time and who can give appropriate support. If anyone is in any doubt about the failures of the system, they need only consider statistics such as the fact that 40 per cent of the men in the young offenders institution at Polmont come from looked-after care backgrounds. Figures for homelessness have also been quoted; I will not repeat them. As I said, things are not all bad. The sure start programme is helping and community schools are helping. However, I have grave concerns about the health service's participation in those community schools. There are problems, and I urge Mr McConnell to work with the ministers in the health department to ensure that that participation is effective. If we can get the schooling permanency right and give children a sense of worth and well-being, and if we can also support their families, we will have a better chance of success. I am concerned by the fact that people still perceive a massive difference between adoption—which used to be a sort of clean-beak arrangement—and permanency. Those are not two separate entities. Nowadays, we have a continuum. At one end, we try to maintain the family and integrated support; after that, the children may have to have short-term foster care; and then, at the other end, they may move on to permanency. That is extremely difficult to plan, but  we have to try. We therefore have to provide greater resources. I agree with Cathy Jamieson that residential care is not all bad. However, there are alternatives. For example, Barnardos freagarrach project is working with the most difficult children, who would previously have gone into secure accommodation. Those children are now maintained in families with foster care parents who are given support. We should not just say, "The children are in foster care, that's it, fine." We should say, "The children are in foster care and that foster care family needs to be adequately supported—not just with finance but with other types of support."

I apologise for missing Kenny MacAskill's opening speech. I was involved in a press conference on behalf of the Health and Community Care Committee. However, I understand that I did not miss much. My colleagues inform me that it was the same speech that he usually trots out, but with slightly different verbs, adjectives and nouns. That is a pity, as I hope that the one thing that will come out of this debate, in the summing-up speeches, is a clear and unanimous message that Scotland is open for business. If that message does not go out, but is confounded by anything that the Opposition parties say in their summing-up, that will be a great pity. Let us make no mistake: the impact on the tourism industry, of which many members have spoken, is enormous. A trade survey for the Argyll, the Isles, Loch Lomond, Stirling and Trossachs Tourist Board recently reported that four out of five tourism businesses have reported losses in turnover. The average loss per business is already nearly £6,000, and some businesses have lost between £70,000 and £30,000. The overall loss to businesses in the tourist board area so far amounts to some £10 million.

Bruce Crawford is reading from the same letter that I have received, from James Fraser, which says exactly that. No member in this chamber doubts that the situation is having a major impact throughout Scotland, especially in rural areas where the effects on tourism are enormous. Therefore, I  welcome the fact that we are considering the problem in a rational way and providing immediate short-term help. I presume that the SNP will welcome that in its closing speech. The hardship fund is there for small and medium enterprises and the rates relief will be applied.

No. I am sorry, but I do not have time. I have already allowed one member to intervene, and he pinched part of my speech. We are talking to the banks. It is important that we involve the private sector in this, and that the banks are urged to do their bit to support small businesses. Some of the banks have already announced their support, and I hope that, through the discussions between the minister and the banks, that will continue. The banks can make a major contribution to alleviating the immediate cash-flow problems that these people face, as Alex Neil mentioned. If the £5 million given to visitscotland allows us to advance its action plan and publicise the fact that we are open for business, I hope that that will have a significant effect in getting rid of some of the appalling publicity that we have received overseas. That has been beyond belief in some cases. Some of the website coverage in America has been ridiculous and inappropriate, and the factual errors in it are enormous. We must correct that situation as far as we can. I welcome the minister's announcements and I call on the SNP to support the measures that we have taken. I welcome Alex Neil's speech, which was measured and tempered, and I am sure that the minister will respond to it appropriately. However, if the Parliament does not show unanimity in its support for "The Comeback Code" and the announcement that we are open for business, we will have done a disservice to the people of Scotland.

I want to concentrate on a couple of areas, but I will make an unusual statement to start: I agree with Lyndsay McIntosh that Keith Raffan's speech was one of the best in the debate so far. I will not reiterate the points that he made, but they are important. I think that the Executive is taking the point about co-ordination on board, but I believe that action on alcohol and drugs should be combined in drug and alcohol action teams, or DAATs, and that there should be single substance abuse teams. I have spent some time dealing with the problem of drug misuse in my constituency, having had an interest in it for many years working in Cornton Vale women's prison. I attend most of the substance misuse forum meetings in my constituency and am impressed by what is beginning to happen as a result of the Executive's policy. As Des McNulty said, we need to feed that in to local communities and to get them engaged in the process. A lot of structures are in place now, but they are not yet producing the goods; we are not yet getting to the very root of the problem. When I attended the Cowie forum last night, I was impressed to see it being attended by representatives of many agencies from that village, as well as by individuals. I was also impressed that the local police were represented. We were discussing the effect of reintroducing local policing into communities such as Cowie, Fallin, Clackmannan and parts of Alloa, where the presence of an identified local police officer has meant that the gathering of intelligence has improved immeasurably. The statistics for Clackmannanshire show that arrests of drug dealers this year already exceed the figure for the whole of last year. I find that impressive. That is happening because communities in my constituency are beginning to feel that the police are with them and gathering intelligence. Despite problems with getting warrants because of the European convention on human rights and so on, their actions are really becoming effective. That is what Des McNulty was talking about in relation to communities.

I know Tommy Sheridan is almost obsessed with the cannabis issue. It is an important issue, but to an extent it is a distraction. I was talking about the dealers, not about possession. The improvement that I have mentioned reflects communities' involvement and the involvement of young people in activities in their communities, which they organise themselves with community workers leading, but not undertaking, the activities. That has been very helpful. Paragraphs 87 and 89 of the committee report deal with prisons. The Executive has funded pilot projects on diversion from prison, whereby the courts can take routes other than custodial sentences. That is highly commendable and I look forward to the evaluation of those projects. They are not research projects, but second-line pilots based on previous research, which I think was carried out in Plymouth. It is vital that we have more than the prison strategy that has been announced for dealing with longer-term prisoners—those who have been in prison for six weeks, two months or more. They can undertake detoxification, and throughcare can be set up for them in an effective way. The prisoners about whom I am most concerned, and whose problems need to be addressed now, in the next phase of the strategy, are those who go in and out of prison on a revolving door—on very short-term sentences. It is impossible for the prisons to deal with their drugs misuse, because they cannot even start to detoxify them. All they can do is hold them over a period of time. We need to identify those people and ensure that they are picked up by the relevant community groups when they get out, if they are at the point in their addiction of acknowledging that they really have to do something about it. In that context, putting women into jail, in particular, is not the answer. It is totally inappropriate. If 70 per cent of women prisoners are drug addicts, we are not treating the problem properly. We must take a radical shift in moving the strategy forward.

I welcome the bill, and I recognise the difficulty for the Executive in pursuing ECHR compatibility with some expedition and reasonable consultation, because that balance is difficult to strike. Two thirds of members in the chamber welcome the bill. It is a pity about the remaining small percentage who are not in favour. I welcome the trend that is being followed by the Labour-Liberal coalition, in a number of areas, of developing legislation that advances citizens' rights. That is not about subservience to the UK or to Europe, but is part of a general trend that is supported with some enthusiasm by most in the chamber, except the Conservatives. There is now a clear dividing line between those of us who are enthusiastic about ensuring that the principles of the ECHR are fully incorporated in law and are part of citizens' rights, and those who are not. The fundamental flaw in David McLetchie's argument is that it is built on the false premise that citizens did not have the right to take issues to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. The rights have always existed—all that we are doing is making them more accessible to Scottish citizens. Not only that, they will be dealt with in this culture, in Scots law, by Scottish judges. I fail to see why that is such a difficult issue for the Conservatives to accept. I would rather that judgments were made, at least initially, by our courts, than that they have to be taken to Strasbourg. The approach of making our law compatible with the ECHR—combined with the proposed freedom of information bill and the changes that are taking place in medicine with regard to informed consent and organ retention—are part of general trends that will ensure that our citizens have rights that they understand, and are not subject to ministers making judgments that are often based on the pressure that they are under, for example from the tabloid press in relation to mandatory life prisoners. The trend of removing ministers from  appointing temporary sheriffs, dismissing Parole Board for Scotland members, and deciding on mandatory sentences, is absolutely compatible with an increase in citizens' rights and is entirely appropriate. The independence of the Parole Board is to be welcomed. I have some slight concerns about victims. I understand what will be done. Maureen Macmillan explained the position carefully. However, victims should have the opportunity to become proactive—it is sometimes difficult for them to know when they can do that—and, on the basis of informed consent, to opt out of the process. However, perhaps I have not understood that absolutely clearly. On reading the Justice 1 Committee's report, I had some concerns about the remedial powers. However, the minister clarified several points today, which is to be welcomed. The minister said that the issue must be compelling and urgent. That is appropriate. He said that action would normally be taken through primary legislation. That too is appropriate. As I understand it, normally the court will trigger the issues. The minister also said—if I remember correctly—that the issue would normally be suitable for subordinate legislation, and I welcome that. On all those points, the minister has gone some way towards reassuring us that the remedial powers will not be abused. As I understand it from the committee's report, the committee had a further concern. It was worried about when the decision to use the powers would be taken and whether the power would be used in a way that went beyond what was necessary to address the incompatibility. That issue has not yet been addressed. Perhaps when the Deputy Minister for Justice sums up he will tell us a little about that.

It is important that we be ahead, not behind. In dealing with citizens' rights, that is appropriate and compatible with the general principle. The Conservatives seem to have the misunderstanding that the ECHR contains a set of absolutes. It does not; it is a set of constructed rights with checks and balances.

For example, the Conservatives talked about drug courts. The situation already applies in Ireland. We will see whether the system stands the test of compatibility with the ECHR. It involves two issues—individual rights versus the general rights of the public interest. The courts should decide about that. I am happy for the Scots  courts to decide that. If someone wants to take the issue to Strasbourg afterwards, that is a matter for them. In conclusion—

I welcome the bill. The compatibility of the forthcoming bill on mental health with the ECHR will be interesting, because it may remove people's rights to liberty. We will need to consider that closely. I support Margo MacDonald's comments. I find slopping out totally offensive. I worked in prisons for many years. That is the most offensive part of the degradation of prisoners, and anything that we can do to speed its removal should be done.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It is a real point of order—

Could you ensure, Presiding Officer, that members of the Parliament do not use terms such as "schizophrenic" in relation to political matters? That stigmatises people with mental illness.

Will the member give way?

There is a fundamental difference  between buying one's home and buying a Porsche.

I, too, congratulate Marilyn Livingstone. I attend a lot of members' debates, because a lot of them are on health issues. It never ceases to impress me how many of my colleagues have experience, knowledge and understanding of what are often very complex issues. This is one of the most complex. My experience and background comes from the women's prison and from running a sexual problems clinic for a significant number of years, where I became increasingly aware of sexual abuse survivors having problems in adult life. As Cathy Jamieson said, there is a range: there are people who are intensely damaged and have severe personality problems as a result of the massive damage inflicted on them as children; others have survived, having managed to bury it deep in themselves and to carry on with a normal life, but the damage and the scars are nevertheless there. I want to pay tribute to the survivors whom I have known over the years. They are some of the bravest people I have met. I want to describe what can happen, because this is the reality. If you are a survivor who has not raised the issue of abuse previously, and you do so within your family, the almost inevitable consequence is the disruption of that family. That is true for children—it is the threat that the abuser uses to control the child—but it is also true for adults. I have seen many families that have been completely disrupted as a result of that action. Dorothy-Grace Elder is correct that people are brave in coming out. It is important that our society is one that allows them to feel that they will be supported if they come out. That is why I support the concept of a strategy to tackle sexual abuse. We need it. We are at the stage of development in this area where it is a topic that is now discussed. It has reached the point where it is debated in our Parliament. It is supported by many voluntary organisations of the sort mentioned in the motion. Open Secret in my area does a fantastic job. There are many groups working in this area, but we need to support them. We need to allow them to collaborate. We need to provide a national framework to allow them to continue to develop.  Help for abused individuals comes in many different forms. Abused individuals will choose the point of access, but they should be made aware of the many possible points of access. Once they are into a process it may be difficult for them, and they have to take it at a speed at which they feel comfortable in themselves. It is not for everybody to take a public stance on this issue; for some it remains a very private matter. A book that I used to recommend, called "Cry Hard and Swim", by an adult survivor, talks in moving terms about the difficult process of coming to terms with abuse. We are moving towards a situation in which we can develop an effective strategy. I will finish by paying a compliment to the Executive on one issue. I welcome the fact that the unit at HM Prison Peterhead that treats sexual offenders will be retained, and that the prison will be rebuilt. I welcome that, because it has taken some time to get that team together. The people who are treated there are among the most difficult people to treat and manage. Indeed, it is questionable whether many of them can be treated successfully, but they can be contained. The team there is doing good work, and that has been proven. I congratulate the Executive on that, but I hope that it will look at developing a national strategy.

I shall begin by declaring that I provide medical advice on adoption and fostering to Clackmannanshire Council, Falkirk Council and Stirling Council, I am a member of the British Agencies for Adoption and Fostering, I have a directorship in Nursing Home Management Ltd—a company that operates in the nursing home sector in England—and that my wife works in child protection services. I hope that that covers most things. I should also say, in response to Kay Ullrich's excellent speech, that I was a lecturer in social work for 19 years, but I am not sure whether that declaration has much merit. I will mention a few issues that have been raised by most speakers. Members are agreed that there should be two bodies and everyone is concerned that there must be close links. Having a joint headquarters is an important start, and I welcome the fact that it will be in Dundee. There should be a single support staff, which should be shared as much as possible. There should be close links between the governing bodies of the commission and council. There should be a single point of access for whistleblowing, so that people do not have to decide whether they should go to the commission or the council. We must address the issue of identifiable local access points for the public. That issue has arisen with regard to health, which is why boards have been unified in the health service. I urge strongly that the access points should be the 12 mainland health boards plus Dundee. Such units would be an appropriate size. There is also a need for cross-expertise between health boards and inspection teams, which will need to be bought in. It is important that there are good relationships in, for example, pharmacy. I will not return to nannies and nanny agencies because others have dealt with that issue, but I stress what Scott Barrie said: fieldwork services are important. Adoption and fostering will be considered at stage 2. I know that BAAF welcomes the fact that it has been consulted. The bill is not quite unprecedented in terms of the amount of consultation that has taken place, but  there has been a lot of consultation, particularly on the on-going discussions on care standards. One of the important things in the bill is single-care registration. Members have already found the division between nursing home and personal care or residential care to be completely false in another debate in another context. It will be possible, in determining the dependency needs of individuals—which change over time—that appropriate resources are applied to the support of those individuals, whether they are in residential homes within the local authority, the private sector, the voluntary sector or the charitable sector. I hope that the care commission will be in a position to comment on the contracts that are set between purchasers and providers, to ensure that the required resources to meet the desired standards—or the additional standards that may be set as things progress—are provided. The commission or Audit Scotland should be able to conduct an audit. I support two annual inspections—one announced and one unannounced. Governance is crucial. In the medical profession, we have seen how governance is changing quite substantially. As a result, General Medical Council costs are rising—from £30 to £180 in the past 18 years or so. That is a six-fold increase, which matches the increased and necessary work. Increased work will be necessary with the council, so I urge strongly that we consider carefully some of the lower paid workers and how much those workers will be charged. I know that the minister has taken that issue on board. I do not think that the Finance Committee has been mentioned. In its report on the financial implications of the bill, that committee welcomed the financial aspects of the Executive's proposals as the best so far. I want to put that on record.

I want to raise two points of interest. The NHS is treating 100,000 more cases than in 1997, which means that efficiency has improved without the bureaucracy of the internal market. Secondly, after five years of fundholding, I had 12 yards of paper that contained all my contracting data. That had nothing to do with clinical care and everything to do with bits of paper circulating round a system. We have got rid of that. Although some aspects of the internal market were very good, other aspects were very bad.

I shall begin by declaring that I am still a member of the British Medical Association and of the Royal College of General Practitioners. However, that declaration is incorrect in that I no longer do any locum work—I am not a practising GP. I have tried to write this speech about half a dozen times since I learnt that we were having this debate. As Nicola Sturgeon rightly said, I have been waiting for this opportunity for two years. The  extension from four to five minutes in the time that we are allowed for speeches is very welcome, but even that will not give me much opportunity to say what I really feel about primary care. I think that everyone in the chamber agrees that British primary care is unique. It is evidently trusted by patients, although the minister has rightly referred to access problems. The system saves an enormous amount of money by providing a gateway. I think that "gatekeeper" is the wrong term—again, the minister is quite right. It should be a rapid transit system that allows people to get the care that they want, either at secondary or, equally important, at intermediate care level, which has not so far been mentioned. The strategies that are in place are correct. I welcome the minister's speech, which showed the way forward and all the initiatives that are either being undertaken or in the process of being undertaken. However, at present, they are insufficient. The minister recognises that we still have an awful lot to do. We need to change the role of the general practitioner, for two reasons. First, the general physician has now gone in the secondary care sector, being replaced by the general practitioner. Secondly, the general practitioner's overriding wish is to have more time to discuss with patients the extremely complex care that they now receive at secondary care level. That desire is matched by the patients themselves, who also wish their general practitioner to have more time. However, that will be totally impossible unless the role of general practitioners is changed substantially and they are freed to undertake that additional work. Over the years, many systems have been employed to try to change practice, but I will touch only on the ones that have been employed over the past decade. Mary Scanlon referred to fundholding, but Margaret Smith had a much more balanced approach to that. Fundholding was bureaucratic, market-based, competitive and divisive—and I say that as someone who was a fundholder. On the other side of the coin, it brought out new leaders in general practice; it created innovation of a sort that I had not seen in my professional life; and it changed secondary care practice, in a way and at a speed that had never occurred before and that has not occurred since. When fundholding was stopped—and I am absolutely convinced that we were right to stop it, because I have no desire to return to that bureaucratic market system—we threw the baby out with the bath water, as Margaret Smith said. In effect, we decapitated many of the new leaders, by taking away from them the opportunity to change secondary care. Part of the waiting list problem that we now have has come as a result of  that. There is now no pressure on secondary care to meet its targets. I will come back to the waiting list initiative at the end, because it is not so important. What have we had instead of fundholding? In 1997, when trusts' structures changed and primary care trusts emerged, the JIF was introduced. If any members have not heard of the JIF, it was the joint investment fund—referred to as a lemon by most people in primary care. The JIF was the opportunity to replace fundholding, but it died the death in 1997 because there was no funding available to make it work. Its obituary is one of the shortest in history: three lines in the NHS plan saying that JIF is no longer with us. That is regrettable, because JIF was about service redesign and about creating vertically integrated networks—which we are all agreed should happen. We were on the point of getting the money that could have allowed the JIF system, which was created by Sam Galbraith, to function. We now have local health care co-operatives. Those are collaborative and have been welcomed by GPs, but their honeymoon period is almost over. It is over for two reasons. First, in the first year, generic drug cost rises—which we did not ameliorate to any great extent—meant that the LHCCs had no flexibility and little opportunity for innovation. Secondly, there are no funds, no mechanisms and no levers for change for LHCCs in relation to the secondary care sector. In the primary care sector and across community care they are making big changes, but in the secondary care sector they are not. I have some suggestions for the minister. First, give a small amount of money—£100,000 to £400,000—to each LHCC. Sow those talents, and hold the LHCCs accountable. Insist that patients are involved in the spending of that money so that it is spent wisely. Secondly, for goodness' sake push the public health nurse initiative and the school health nurse initiative as hard as possible. I know that the minister is very keen on those initiatives. Thirdly, give the LHCCs some commissioning powers so that they can develop vertically integrated networks, choose a few topics such as diabetes, and make things work. Fourthly, merge practice nurses and community nurses so that the discrepancy between the two is removed, provide 100 per cent funding for practice nurses, and ensure that teams are self-managed. Fifthly, introduce intermediate care and ensure that all minor surgery is done in primary care rather than secondary care. That will help the waiting lists. We should ensure that endoscopy, which is done in Liverpool and for which there are no waiting lists, is increasingly done in primary care resource centres. We should ensure that cystoscopy, which is done in Bradford, is done in  primary care in Scotland and that sigmoidoscopy, which is fundamental to the colorectal initiative, is done in primary care—that will also reduce waiting lists. I have one last comment on the waiting lists. There have been 100,000 additional procedures carried out on the NHS since 1997. If that had been 90,000, the waiting lists would have gone down; if it had been 120,000, the waiting lists would have risen by double the amount. The NHS is more productive and its performance greater than ever before and it is insulting to suggest otherwise.

I am sorry but I am already running over time. The waiting list issue is about an increase in performance and not simply an increase in waiting times and lists.

I congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing the debate. There is no doubt that the current system gives rise to a waste of talent and, to an extent, an artistic brain drain. There is also no doubt that the funding for performing arts students is not the same in Scotland as it is in England and Wales. I will broaden the debate out from Ballet West, if I may. In my constituency, young people are able to join Forefront, a local performing arts group. It has an excellent reputation, and I have attended a number of its productions, which are of a very high standard. A number of the young people from that company have gone on to train in England. At one point in the early 1990s, funding was available to help them to do that. However, the local council has latterly been unable to find the funding from its discretionary funds. As a result, talent is being wasted, and that is quite unsatisfactory. I have spent some time over the past year working with Scottish Youth Dance. It runs some excellent programmes. Its millennium programme, attended by more than 500 young people in Dunblane as well as by the then Deputy Minister for Culture and Sport, Rhona Brankin, was an excellent production. It has also had financial difficulties, however, and has found that, although pupils can be trained at the dance school based at Knightswood Secondary School, which has 70 residential pupils studying classical dance, or can train with Scottish Ballet associates or with other professional dancers at a young age, if they are eager to pursue dance as a career, we leave them high and dry. What does that say about our strategy being joined up? Highly talented students from Forefront who have been accepted by top training institutions for music and dance in England have had to meet their own tuition and maintenance costs, which are very substantial. What does that say about social inclusion? Some of the pupils are from families from quite poor backgrounds, and money has had to be raised in order to support them. I will not go into detail on the variation among local authorities that Kenny Gibson referred to, but I acknowledge that that variation exists. In all  fields, I think that we are too small a country to allow such discrimination, which allows one local authority to tell a talented individual, "Yes, go ahead," but another to say "No." We have to take a grip of the situation and change it. Young talent is undoubtedly being put off by such financial and cultural barriers. We are too small a country to afford to waste that talent, which can lead to the creation and development of a vibrant culture, as is so rightly encouraged by the cultural strategy. However, we need to put the strategy into practical effect. The students and pupils whom we educate in Scotland face severe barriers as they attempt to reach a professional standard. They are at a serious disadvantage compared with their counterparts in England and Wales. That is being perceived increasingly, and we should do something about it. There are other issues. My colleagues at Scottish Youth Dance tell me that they have serious problems in finding qualified teachers in Scotland for their programmes. Ballet West says that the nationalities of the dancers on cast lists are varied. We should favour, develop and respond to the internationalism that classically has been part of our culture. The way in which we promote dance, song, music, culture and drama sends a message around the world about the nature of our civilisation. I strongly encourage the minister to look again at this issue and consider whether we can deal with it on a national basis. We should remove the postcode element to funding and provide adequate funds for this relatively small group, to sustain and ensure the development of our vibrant culture.

I, too, congratulate Trish Godman on securing the debate. The children's hospice is in my constituency and I, too, have visited it and found it to be a place of great warmth and support to families. I congratulate CHAS on finding a site at Balloch for its second home, which I hope will be funded and supported. In a week in which I have had my troubles with the Daily Record , it may seem strange for me to say that on this matter I think that the newspaper got it right. I congratulate its readers on raising funds for Rachel House. The funding of the children's hospice has been a different issue from funding for the national hospice movement. I think that it needs to be treated differently. I suggest to the minister that the children's hospice is a national resource and should remain so, even when the second site is established. It was a mistake to make it the subject of negotiations with 15 health boards and 32 local authorities. That is a waste of time that could be applied to clinical work. I ask the minister to consider making it a national resource and to reach a separate agreement with the children's hospice.  On hospices generally, I congratulate the minister on reaffirming at the recent annual general meeting of the Scottish Partnership Agency for Palliative and Cancer Care that the 50 per cent funding arrangement which, as Dennis Canavan pointed out, is unique to Scotland, has been continued. We need a national framework of agreed expenditure. The hospice movement needs to bite the bullet. No department can afford to write blank cheques. My local hospice in Strathcarron—of which I was chair for some time—believes that there are some areas of care in which the health board wants to develop palliative care in a particular way. The health board rather than the hospice should be 100 per cent responsible for such funding. Equally, there are elements that the hospice wishes to develop and that the health board is not keen to develop. They should be 100 per cent hospice developed. For those areas that are agreed service developments, however, the 50 per cent level should be applied. I urge the minister to consider that. The cost would be £3 million if all the current Scottish hospices were moved to a 50 per cent funding basis. That is £1 million additional funds each year over the next three years, rising to £3 million if funding were made over a three-year period. That does not seem to be a lot to pay for a resource which, in its connections to the local people in each area—to which Dennis Canavan has alluded—is fundamental to the sort of support that we need for our public services. I want to finish with a brief case history. When I was practising psychiatry, I was faced with a patient who presented at the age of 37 with profound depression that came out of a clear blue sky. There was no evidence of any reason for that depression. As we gradually discussed the situation, it emerged that when the patient was 12, his father had died at the age of 37. The child had been excluded from the process of that death; he had been sent to live with an aunt away from the prolonged cancer death that his father suffered in considerable discomfort at home. His father wanted that because he wanted to remain in the child's memory as strong, fit and active and because he was ashamed of the weakness associated with cancer death. The child was sent away for perfectly good reasons, to protect him from the process. The depression, however, told me that we cannot protect people from the realities of life; that death is part of the reality of life; that medicine can stave off death only for a period. The hospice movement has reawakened the basic knowledge that death is part of life. In reaffirming life for as long as life goes on, the  hospice movement pays a major contribution to our culture and attitudes. We need to support it.

What plans does the minister have to make the work of the development and implementation group an open and inclusive process? Will he publish a list of the groups that that group will consult? Will he keep the Parliament informed of progress, to ensure that we end up with a clear, widely acceptable and—most important—sustainable implementation plan?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the fact that an iterative process is developing between the Minister for Finance and Local Government—as was developing with the previous Minister for Finance—and the Finance Committee, after its 18 or 20 months of existence. That is helping to move the budget process forward effectively. We have not reached the end of the journey yet—there is a long way to go—but there is a welcome desire to move forward. Before coming on to some of the budget issues, I found it astonishing to listen to what Adam Ingram said about the oil fund investment. I have a picture in my mind of Adam Ingram and Andrew Wilson in their dreams. Their worst nightmare is about being in charge of the Scottish economy  and opening their newspapers one morning to find that the oil price has dropped to a new low because oil is no longer required. I am not claiming that the SNP says that its budget is based entirely on the price of oil, but it is irrational to say that a futures fund can be set up before the national debt is drawn down, as the Chancellor of the Exchequer is doing.

It seems rather bizarre, starting from a position of debt, to start a separate investment fund. If the national debt could be drawn down, the amount of interest that would have to be paid on it would reduce. That is an investment. If we went into a recession—we hope that we will not—and if public expenditure had to be maintained from such a fund, national debt could be expanded.

I want to move on, as we are getting into a sterile debate. The Conservatives' position on the budget is even more of a nightmare. Their combined proposals of tax cuts and increased public expenditure seem bizarre in an English context. In a Scottish context, in which the Conservatives now seem to be committed to universal free care and abolishing means testing for almost everything, their proposals seem quite beyond belief. The cross-cutting issues are the most important. The minister referred to that in his speech. In health, for example, it is important that we do not look only at the 15 per cent increase in real terms over three years and the effect that that will have on the health service, but that—as the Scottish Council Foundation suggests—we consider the health impact of every budget. That is a positive thing to do. For example, measures such as central heating for the elderly have a health impact. I would like the budget and the budget statement to say for each element of the budget what the impact is on health. The Executive is very good at saying what its cross-cutting spending on drugs is. I would like such information to be laid out for each element of the budget so that we know what the target is for each department and what it will spend. That practice could be extended to other areas,  so that we could see the impact of the social justice targets that the Government is rightly setting itself, and how that links with the UK budget for objectives such as the elimination of child poverty. The Scottish people should be able to see integrated partnership working in practice. We should not be afraid of referring to the UK budget in our budget papers. In conclusion, I welcome the budget as it is laid out. I welcome the progress that we are making on the budget process, but I do not believe that we have reached the end of that journey. We have a long way to go.

Will the First Minister join me in praising the Scottish Organisation Relating to the Retention of Organs and parents for their dignified and positive support for the continuation of organ donation? Will he ask the Minister for Health and Community Care to join Alan Milburn, who has called for a summit to promote organ donation for transplant, in ensuring that any unintended adverse effects that may arise from the organ retention report do not damage the transplant programme?

Some of what I was going to say has already been said, but I will emphasise some points. We have already had a member's debate, initiated by Lloyd Quinan, which raised many of the concerns about the MMR vaccine. I am sorry that I missed that debate. Debating this motion when the Health and Community Care Committee is on the point of receiving its report is almost a discourtesy to the Parliament because it bounces us into making decisions. I will vote against the motion, although I will keep an open mind on the Health and Community Care Committee report. I look forward to discussing the issue once I have been able to consider all the evidence. I say that as someone who has read much of the evidence and many of the studies. The first challenge to the vaccine is that it is not safe. Dr Wakefield recently attacked the vaccine as unsafe and suggested that it had been inappropriately licensed. That is invalid for two reasons. First, as Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, the number of doses that has been used across the world demonstrates that there are no real safety fears. Secondly, there are the results of the initial Finnish twin study, published in 1986, which met the strictest scientific criteria. The study was unique and classical—it was a placebo-controlled, double-blind twin study and demonstrated the vaccine to be safe. Not only is the vaccine safe, evidence published last year by the Finns in the Journal of the American Medical Association demonstrated positive benefits. The Finns were also considering another theory, which is held there and which was suggested here by a doctor—I am sorry to say—in an article in the Daily Record not so long ago: that measles is not that bad because it somehow helps the immune system. That is complete and utter rubbish. The Finnish study shows that the levels of asthma, eczema and allergic rhinitis in children who receive MMR is reduced by between 32 and 67 per cent when compared with those who have had measles. That was a substantial study showing that the MMR triple vaccine has benefited the prevention of those diseases. I hope that we will be able to demonstrate that in Scotland, too.  There is no doubt that the individual measles vaccine was an effective vaccine. However, the level of measles in Scotland did not drop until the introduction of the triple vaccine. It was not until the mid-1990s that vaccination levels meant that the appropriate reductions in infection were achieved.

I am sorry, but I do not have time.

As Margaret Smith said, measles causes death and disability, mumps causes significant disability and brain damage, and rubella causes serious problems for unborn children. Even if the link were to be proved, the situation is not simple. As I said, I will keep an open mind until we receive the Health and Community Care Committee report. I look forward to seeing the evidence from the Dáil, the Irish Parliament, which is discussing the same issue. My last comment—

It is my last comment. In Japan, when the MMR vaccine was withdrawn, within a short time, there was a significant measles outbreak. The message must go out that no link has been proven. On that basis, the MMR vaccine should be promoted to the greatest possible extent.

I add my congratulations to those that have already been given to Cathy Peattie on securing this debate. I owe a debt because I was able to volunteer. About 25 years ago, I did not get selected to stand for the constituency that I now represent, so I  retreated into volunteering. I was involved in establishing the Strathcarron hospice, which is one of the earliest hospices to be set up in Scotland. I mention my involvement with it because my experience there over 12 years might illustrate some of the advantages of treating volunteering organisations differently, to which Donald Gorrie and others have referred. I was initially the fundraiser for the Strathcarron hospice. It was difficult to raise funds. We got the capital, but covering the running costs year on year, with relatively little support from the local authorities at the time and only a small amount of funding from the health board, was quite a challenge. I will not tell members how we did it, but we succeeded. By about 1985 or 1986 the Strathcarron hospice, like all hospices, was entering a crisis. We found that it was a struggle to get funds. Now, I hear from many voluntary organisations that the time and effort that is required to raise money has grown and grown, particularly in what is a time of stringency. In the late 1980s, we seconded our director—the late Tom Scott—for nine months, with a single objective. His mission was to persuade Michael Forsyth that hospices in Scotland were worth supporting. In the end, Michael Forsyth—unlike his English colleague, who would not agree to it—came to the hospice in Denny and announced that hospices in Scotland would be funded pound for pound up to the amount of money that was raised by the public. That was an acknowledgement of the Government's absolute intention that the hospice movement in Scotland should succeed. Last night, evidence was presented to the effect that, although the cancer plan has slipped back to some extent, the Executive has renewed that commitment to 50:50 funding. There are other examples. Through compacts with the Government or local authorities, set up through negotiations with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, and by saying to the public, "You raise money for this—we will match it, we will augment it and we will leverage it," we can reinforce the voluntary sector more effectively. Voluntary Service Overseas is a very good example of such an arrangement. For every £1 that is contributed by an individual to VSO, the other grant mechanisms at local, national and international levels turn that £1 into £6. I commend to the Parliament and to the Executive the concept of leverage—it is worth examining. I will make only one more main point, because much of what I was going to say was said by other members. Although unemployment has fallen enormously—which is excellent, despite the possibility that that has adversely affected volunteering—1.6 million people in the United  Kingdom are on incapacity benefit. Thirty years ago, there were only half a million people on incapacity benefit. That may be partly related to the stress of living; it is certainly related to the enforced redundancies of the 1980s, which made people feel completely destroyed. I believe that a substantial number of those people, with some support and help, would use volunteering as a mechanism to begin the process of getting back into work. The Scottish Council Foundation recently produced a report on incapacity benefit. I know that benefits are a UK issue, but the foundation has made a number of relevant recommendations on volunteering and therapeutic earnings. As a country, we need to consider that means of encouraging people to use volunteering as a process for getting back into work. I support Cathy Peattie in acknowledging the huge importance of volunteers and I welcome the fact that we have had this debate.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it correct for a member to accuse another member of speaking when he does not represent the area, when in fact he represents constituents in the Tayside area? Mr Monteith should do a bit of geography.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on getting this debate, which will be, I think, one of a series of debates on acute services reviews up and down the country. The issues are not totally dissimilar in different areas. I question some of what I have heard. Having been responsible for the Stobhill report, which has changed the pattern of consultation by health boards, I listened with some dismay. It seems to me that, in many cases, consultation has undoubtedly improved. In the case of Tayside, the report that I have received indicates that the board established a patient reference forum of 30 individuals, consisting of patients, carers and Tayside Health Council. Members of the forum were involved in every single group that was consulted in the review. Forty public meetings were conducted, involving over 5,000 people. Two deliberative conferences, facilitated by external organisations, were held, involving 160 members of the public.

No. I do not have much time. Tayside Health Board was involved in meetings with pressure groups that were held by Professor Rowley. The patient reference forum, staff partnership forum and professional bodies jointly determined the criteria against which the options, benefits and risks would be determined. That does not sound like an appalling consultation process. Rather than rhetoric, we need to hear specifics of the sort that Mike Rumbles put forward when he said that no public meeting had been held in the Mearns area, and that people in that area were not consulted. I can accept that, but I cannot accept, on the basis of this evidence, that there has not been some measure of consultation, even if that process remains flawed. The problem on Tayside is that it is bedevilled by the funding issue in the background, which has resulted in a lack of trust in the trust boards and the health board. That makes consultation difficult, because it is not based on  trust. The problems of south Glasgow were recently debated and, as I said, there will be debates about many other areas. The main issue across Scotland must be that, in preparation for the next 10 to 15 years, we develop safe services. Nobody would suggest that we should expand neurology services beyond the areas that they are in at the moment.

I am sorry. I do not have time as I only have three minutes. I am going to run out of time anyway. No one is suggesting that those services should be expanded. Are we suggesting that the services that we have, in the places that we have them at the moment, are safe? Unless that is the case, members must sign up to modernisation along with everybody else and produce proposals as to how that is to be achieved. I will finish by dealing with obstetrics.

I am sorry. I do not have time to take an intervention. If I had more time, I would let Margaret Ewing intervene. The advice that I have received about obstetrics from the colleges is that 3,000 births are necessary to sustain the clinical work of consultants. If that is not the case, we can have a different debate. The same massive debate took place when centralisation occurred in Ayrshire and Arran some 10 years ago. No one in Ayrshire and Arran would now propose to divide those units again. In Forth Valley, although we are having a debate about where the services should be centralised, they are being centralised. The dilemma that is being faced is that services must be safe, but must also be as local as possible. Susan Deacon should not be in the chamber, because she will have to make the ultimate decision. It is inappropriate for Roseanna Cunningham to attack her on that basis.

Andrew Wilson made a point about using reserves for other purposes. Duncan Hamilton is now making a point about using the NHS underspend at the end of each year. There has been an underspend every year since 1948; it is in the nature of the way in which the money is spent. However, it is not totally predictable. To predicate care of the elderly on the basis of expenditure which we cannot be certain of in future years seems to be the height of foolishness. Is that now SNP policy?

We must nail a myth. A supposition is growing that Sutherland is infallible. I have great respect for him and his report, but when he says that only £25 million has to be found, he is wrong. Substantially more will be required. For Mr Wilson to refer—rather glibly, if I may say so—to the reserve being used is inappropriate.

I draw Shona Robison's attention to my amendment, which requires the development—not review—group "to consider the practicalities, costs and implications of providing free personal care for all and to report by August 2001". That is the absolute intention behind the development group.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I begin by declaring that I am a director of a nursing home, although it operates in England and will not benefit from any action that is taken by the Executive. The time has come for a mature debate on the care of elder citizens. Yesterday, according to Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia, there was a major breakthrough. Why did that organisation use that term against the cacophony of soundbites from the SNP and the Tories? It did so because it recognises the reality of the future. There has been a major breakthrough because we have radically challenged the basis of the debate. No longer will any elderly person or their carer have to decide whether the type of care that they receive is nursing care or personal care. That sterile debate is over. Now we have a Scottish solution to the problem. We have a care needs assessment system that will ensure that many more people will now receive the help that they need. The discrimination against people with dementia, mental illness or learning disability, which was inherent in the concept of free nursing care, is over. The Parliament should now concentrate on the definition of personal living expenses. Not even Sutherland has ever suggested that those expenses should be anything other than a personal responsibility that is met through personal income, pension or benefits. No matter where people live—in a nursing or residential care home, or at home—they will have to meet their personal living expenses, assessed under the benefits system.

No. The Parliament must recognise that even people in national health service units make a contribution to their personal living expenses, through the stopping of pensions above £15 per week after they have been in NHS units for six weeks. Yesterday, the Labour-led coalition made it clear that we have begun a journey towards the renationalisation of health care, which the Tories privatised.

No, I am sorry. The changes that have been announced represent a decisive break with the rest of the UK. Does the Opposition  welcome that? No.

The SNP does not welcome the break. The long-term care bill will offer an opportunity for the Parliament to hold a rational discussion about how we create sustainable funding for the long-term care of the growing number of elderly people who need it.

We have to decide and define where personal responsibility ends and the state's responsibility begins. I do not object to debating that matter on the basis of Sutherland, but we have to define that boundary on a sustainable basis, as the demographic pressures on the Parliament's budget will be substantial. The Parliament has an opportunity through the implementation group and the long-term care bill to define reasonable and sustainable boundaries between personal costs and the state's costs. Instead of acting rationally and reasonably, the Opposition and—I regret to say—some of our coalition partners want soundbites. Rationally, if I were in opposition and had heard the Executive state yesterday that the end of the journey on which we had begun was free personal care, I would immediately have asked what constituted the free personal care that had just been agreed to and where the line would now be drawn. There will always be boundaries between what is personal responsibility and the responsibility of the state.

I am sorry; I am in my last 60 seconds. I tell our partners that, notwithstanding the efforts of the Tories and the SNP, whose sole purpose is to wreck the coalition— [Interruption.]

The SNP's profligate promises to the Parliament amount to more than £5 billion. The SNP would wreck our budget and economy. I appeal to our Liberal colleagues to join us. We believe, as they do, that we should move towards the restoration of the state's responsibility for the care needs of older people, but we recognise that this is a coalition and that Labour has a commitment to those in greatest need. We have commitments, which we will not abandon, to  central heating for the elderly, social inclusion and the extension of respite care to support our carers. There is no dispute about what we want. Margaret Smith and Keith Raffan know the extent of my commitment to the goals that we share. I appeal to the Liberal Democrats to move beyond the rhetoric and ensure that the path that we are on leads to a common goal. I call on them to join us and not pander to the Opposition, whose sole purpose is to wreck the coalition. They should accept the responsibilities and disciplines of government and support the amendment. I move amendment S1M-1589.2, to leave out from ", while" to end and insert: "recognises that there are benefits in providing free personal care for the elderly; welcomes as a major step in this direction the further package of proposals announced by the Executive on 24 January 2001 which set out a process that will lead to a substantial extension of free personal care; notes that there are significant issues of cost and practicality in moving further and calls upon the Executive to broaden the terms of reference of the Development Group to require it to consider the practicalities, costs and implications of providing free personal care for all and to report by August 2001 with proposals that will inform the Executive's expenditure decisions for 2002-03 and beyond."

I welcome the statement and recognise the Executive's commitment to supporting our older citizens as a top priority for future funding. I also acknowledge the progress that will arise from the statement. Am I right to interpret the statement as, first, a  renewed commitment—in reviewing all the resources that are currently applied to the elderly—to achieving equity across all care settings? Secondly, does the statement mean that the false division between nursing and personal care will be abolished and replaced by a care needs assessment whereby a threshold of need will be set, above which all care needs will be met but below which there will continue to be means testing until we can afford otherwise? Thirdly, is it the Executive's intention to drive that threshold down, as resources become available?

I, too, congratulate Alex Neil on getting this debate, which is on an important topic. I will not reiterate all the elements that have been covered by other members. It is generally accepted that we are dealing with an unknown quantity. There are  10,000 known cases, but various numbers have been cited in the chamber and it is anyone's guess how high the actual figure might be. In any case, hepatitis C will give rise to a major cost for the health service in the not-too-distant future. There are several strands that we must follow in tackling the problem. The first stage was the publication, last year, of the SNAP report. That is a necessary prerequisite to proceeding with a step-by-step, rational strategy. The motion mentions a screening programme. The problem is what is meant by a screening programme. A mass screening programme would not be suitable. What would be appropriate, however, is a system whereby members of high-risk groups are readily and easily able to obtain the necessary information about their particular circumstances. I have worked in a prison setting. Testing can be—and is—done in prisons, and support can be provided to individuals with the condition. I understand that the main reason for liver transplants in the United States is hepatitis C. We are already moving in the same direction; the need for transplants will pose a major problem. It is already generally evident in NHS accounts that the provision of funds for negligence claims, or to cover similar problems, has risen enormously over the past four or five years. Although that is not particular to the subject of hepatitis C, I believe—in the context to which Cathy Jamieson and Dorothy-Grace Elder referred—that there will soon come a time when we should ask the Executive to consider fault in our health system. The time is coming when we need to consider the adoption of a different system: that of no-fault compensation. The present system is too difficult and the courts' involvement makes for far too long a process for dealing with compensation. It is very expensive and it prevents people admitting risk, admitting that things have gone wrong and admitting near-misses. The time is coming when we will have to debate that. I do not think that a mass screening programme is appropriate, but we need to have high-risk screening. I am sure that the minister will say this in his reply, but I think that, in taking this issue forward, we will need to prepare a programme that matches the growing need in this area.

Does the First Minister agree that using terms such as "spurious" to describe the research paper from Finland, which involved 18 years of research and 2 million individuals, does not serve the case of those parents who have understandable concerns about the increasing rates of autism?

If there is no link between the MMR vaccine and autism, there is a danger that those parents are going down a cul-de-sac and pursuing a wholly spurious cause, which may ultimately be damaging for them.

Glasgow is not my area either, although it became so briefly during the Stobhill events. I want to be clear about this for the record. Was a single option presented to the people of the south side of Glasgow, or were they offered several specific options, including a new-build option—even if it was rejected?

I should begin by declaring that I am a director of a nursing home company that operates in England. I am probably more concerned about the bill in the English context. However, I welcome this Sewel motion and the proposal to transfer preserved rights, which makes sense and is simply the implementation of the Sutherland recommendation. As Keith Raffan said, we await the announcements on the rest of the recommendations next week. The extension of powers to prescribe medication is welcome and long overdue. The groups mentioned in the reference papers have for some time been straining at the bit to be able to prescribe. However, it is important that prescribing is properly controlled and managed and that those who prescribe are properly qualified and trained. The section of the Scottish NHS plan that deals with information refers to the accessibility of clinical history information to the various prescribing groups. Confidentiality will have to be managed in a highly effective way. That is an important issue. I hope that the minister will extend the range of prescribing that nurses undertake, which is currently severely limited. There are specialist nurses in diabetes, epilepsy, asthma, colostomy care and a number of other areas, but they cannot prescribe the drugs for the care area in which they operate. I particularly welcome the extension to pharmacists of powers to prescribe, because pharmacists are partners in health care who have been seriously underutilised. My one concern is that we may have missed an opportunity with this Sewel motion. The Scottish Executive is not taking up the references to care trusts in clauses 45 and 46 of the Health and Social Care Bill because they implement paragraphs 7.9 to 7.12 of the English NHS plan. The Health and Community Care Committee of this Parliament, in its recent report on community care, referred to problems between social services and the NHS, which those clauses will address in an extremely positive way, so I wonder whether we have missed an opportunity. I acknowledge that the Scottish NHS plan states that the Executive will at a later date deal with any impediments to appropriate accommodation between the NHS and social services in terms of  pooled budgets, for example, but the Sewel motion would have provided an opportunity for us to piggy-back on the much more advanced measures that are being taken in England. However, I welcome the motion and hope that it will be supported.

As a result of the excellent work that has been undertaken by the information services division of the common services agency, in producing the statistics on delayed discharges, at least we have the facts. Can the minister assure me that the waiting times for those individuals who are, unfortunately,  delayed discharges will be restricted? Does the Executive intend to introduce targets as part of the system of allocation of funds to local authorities, to ensure that no one will have to wait longer than a year?

I too supported John Home Robertson's original amendment. I have had considerable discussions with the lower proprietors in my constituency, who are on a board that is totally dominated by the upper proprietors, who have made strenuous attempts to limit the fishing rights of the lower proprietors. I am particularly concerned because this bill refers to water bailiffs, who, as I understand it, are appointed by district salmon fishery boards. It is ludicrous that bailiffs are expected to enforce law on the people who employ them. They are expected to inspect the boards and ensure that they comply with regulations. That is complete and utter nonsense. Any extension of the powers of water bailiffs, as proposed in the bill, will mean that the boards, which are completely inappropriate for the modern age, will have extended powers. I am looking for a reassurance from the minister that this issue will be looked at as a matter of urgency, and that the boards will be reconstituted in a modern form such that the public interest predominates in the boards rather than the rights of either the lower or upper proprietors.

Does Fiona Hyslop agree that the people who have most access to the groups that we have been talking about are health visitors, who work with young families, the elderly and home helps? While we are waiting for legislation, it would be worth while for the Executive and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to consider establishing training programmes for health visitors and home helps, because a lot could be done with those groups. I know that some local authorities are already doing such things.

I welcome many of the principles that the minister has expounded and I look forward to the Health and Community Care Committee studying the detail of the plan. The Parliament should congratulate all those who have been involved in the work. What arrangements does the minister propose to put in place to ensure the detailed implementation of the proposed local health plans, which will replace health improvement programmes and trust implementation plans? How will those plans link with local authorities' community plans and the plans for developing community schools, health-promoting schools—under the health promotion unit—and the long-term commitment to healthy living centres? How will the plan cement local authority links?

Will Shona Robison give way?

Will Shona Robison tell us how many beds the SNP would close? The motion opposes the fact that we have closed beds. What is the SNP policy on accelerating the bed closure programme, which is the opposite of what the motion calls for?

I am not sure whether I should make a declaration, but I refer members to my membership of various medical societies. It has taken Nicola Sturgeon only two debates in her new position as Scottish National Party spokesperson on health to reach, in this motion, what is probably the lowest point. To dissect the motion, one needs the skills of a forensic pathologist, since it is so buried in the past that it bears little resemblance to a modern party's approach to health. For a party that would like us to think that it is an alternative Government in waiting, the motion is a disgrace.

No, not yet. Let me explain first, then I will allow— [Interruption.] Later. First, let us deal with bed reductions. If I were in opposition, the aspect of our Government that I would attack is that we are moving too slowly on bed reductions. I have spent a professional lifetime as a psychiatrist trying to persuade Government after Government to provide decent, effective support to people in their own homes—including supported, group and sheltered homes—so that we do not continue the bad old habits of putting people with learning difficulties into asylums and large hospitals and, in essence,  forgetting about them. An 80-year-old constituent was recently given a new lease of life on their release from the Royal Scottish National hospital to a group home. In its motion, the SNP is saying to that patient, "We are sorry—we will reopen your bed and put you back into old-fashioned care."

I will take the point in a moment. The 3,000 beds that have been closed are long-stay beds that were long overdue for closure. Will the SNP come back to us in two and a half years' time, in 2003, when we have closed a further 2,300 learning disability beds, and say, "More bed reductions"? Let us have a clear policy—Nicola Sturgeon promised it to us in her speech, but she revealed nothing of the positive policies of the SNP. Will the SNP support us in closing the beds that are long overdue for closure? We should accelerate the closure. In her new brief, Nicola Sturgeon should indulge in some reading. For her Christmas stocking, I suggest Irving Goffman's "Asylums", which was written in the 1960s, but is a seminal work on institutionalisation. In fact, I will buy it for her.

I will come to that. It is not that the facts in the motion are wrong; it is that they are so irrelevant and so damaging to the development of modern health care that they are a disgrace. That is the problem. Scotland has proportionately substantially more acute beds than England. Why? Because we in Scotland have not moved as fast in introducing day care operations. Will the SNP really say to us, "We want to reverse that policy"? I will give some examples. Is the SNP saying, for example, that we should return to the point in the 1960s when there was a maternity lie-in period of 14 days after having a baby? Or does it accept that the length of time in hospital for maternity is now two days and dropping because we are providing better care and getting people home more quickly?

And there are others who want to  go in, have the baby, and come out again within a few hours—we are not adequately supporting them yet either. There are plenty of areas on which the SNP can criticise the Government—we are not moving fast enough on many issues—but the motion is a disgrace. Delayed discharge is also mentioned in the motion.

I hope that you will give me a little latitude, as I have been interrupted at length.

I will wind up. For the first time, we have a proper information services division survey of delayed discharges. They are the first accurate figures that we have ever had, but instead of concentrating on some positive policies and supporting the suggestions that I have made to ministers—for example, that because we now have the information we should have targets to say that no one should wait in delayed discharge for more than a year or nine months and that we should clear the orthopaedic bed waiting lists to deal with the orthopaedic bed problems—the SNP comes out with a bland statement. I am utterly appalled at the motion. Of the SNP's motions on health, it will be one of the easiest to vote against. In the past, the SNP has talked some sense. There is plenty of scope for constructive criticism and encouragement, but the motion is appalling and I hope that the chamber will reject it.

On a point of order. Keith Raffan was—rightly—interrupted by the Presiding Officer for failing to address the motion. With due respect, Presiding Officer, I request that Dorothy-Grace Elder be asked to return to the terms of the SNP motion.

On a point of order.

Dorothy-Grace Elder is continuing to address haemophilia.

If we are to have a debate on haemophilia, all members must be allowed to participate. We should not have to listen to Dorothy-Grace Elder's lies. Will she be stopped?

They were gross distortions, rather than lies.

I wish to address two issues: first, budget changes and, secondly, presentation that allows transparency and accountability. The Health and Community Care Committee was specific when it was asked to participate in this process. It recommended changes to the mental illness specific grant, proposing that it should be uprated to the value at its introduction in 1996, and, as is required in the process that we agreed with the Minister for Finance, that the funding should be transferred on this occasion from within the health budget. Of course, it was open to the committee to suggest that it should come from somebody else's budget. The committee also recommended that grants to voluntary organisations should be maintained at the real-terms value of the 1999-2000 budget—in other words, uprating them by £1.8 million. The Health and Community Care Committee welcomed the fact, as did the Finance Committee, that the minister confirmed at stage 2 that grants to voluntary organisations were to be increased, and that the mental illness specific grant was to be increased. While only small amounts were involved, that was fundamentally important, because it established the principle that subject committees and the Finance Committee can make specific budget proposals, and that ministers listen to them and accept them. It is not just the fact that the minister listened to the Health and Community Care Committee and the Finance Committee. We listened to the community that came to us and talked about the budget. For example, the National Schizophrenia Fellowship Scotland has welcomed the increase to which I referred, which helps many of the projects that it runs throughout Scotland. The interaction on the budget that we now have—and I accept that other speakers have said that it is far from perfect—is beginning to establish principles and processes of considerable importance.  The other thing that I welcome is the minister's commitment to present the figures in a better way and to consider further the appropriate level of detail to be included in future reports. That commitment is recorded in written evidence that accompanied the 22 nd meeting of the Finance Committee. I hope that that will mean that we begin to get much better expenditure level information. I know that we have not had the level III figures this year—I will not go into that as others already have—but it is important that those expenditures, when we get them, be understandable. In the area of health, they are not. The Health and Community Care Committee believes that the finance targets should be based on 10 to 15-year health targets and that the annual targets should be linked to those long-term targets. I hope that those long-term targets can be agreed by the whole Parliament, across parties, so that we get some general intention of where we are headed. Within that general long-term target, we can set up much more specific targets for much shorter periods of time. Some of the targets in the various budget processes have been woolly. I will give some examples. Tomorrow, we will debate an SNP motion on delayed discharges. It seems appropriate to me that we should have a target in that area, perhaps to deal with those who have been in a delayed discharge situation for longer than a year or to eliminate delayed discharges in acute hospital beds. Specific targets of that sort will have meaning for this Parliament and for the public, who will know that they can hold the Scottish Parliament to account if it fails to meet those objectives. Another general objective in the health budget has been the establishment of one-stop clinics. Everybody is keen to have them, but there is no indication of how many one-stop clinics exist already, how many it is hoped will be achieved in year 1 and how much of the target is to be met in years 2 to 5, so we can monitor it against the next year's budget. Perhaps I am hoping for utopia, but I think that we need to get a better timetable for this matter. Having said all that, I think that the Executive is to be congratulated. Progress has been made and I am confident that Angus MacKay will continue the start that has been made by Jack McConnell, not only in working with the committees but in working directly with the public. The meeting in Aberdeen demonstrated that that is continuing and is important. If we can get openness and targeting and we can deal with the problems that exist in relation to the comprehensive spending review, the resource account budgeting and the question of the separation of capital charges and interest charges, we will have moved some way from Westminster and a long way towards involving the  public in a participative budget process. I hope that we can continue that process.

Will the member give way on that point?

First, should such a bill be a committee bill? There would probably be a wide measure of cross-party support for that if the Executive has not got the matter covered in its timetable. Secondly, I would be interested to know whether Donald Gorrie feels that the people involved in selling drink, including the licensees, should have some duty of care.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

I have no interests to declare on this matter, other than the fact that the only time that I have gone fishing, I was with my grandfather at Walkmill Ferry beat on the Tay and caught an 18 lb salmon. Reading Tom Devine's recent book, I found it interesting to consider the workers' feelings about  their contracts in relation to salmon. It is an interesting historical note that they almost went on strike at one point because they were fed salmon too often in the week. If I had to assess this bill, it would be as, "Worthy, but—". John Home Robertson made many of the points that I wanted to raise, but I think that they bear reiteration. He will know that when he was Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs, I raised with him the question of the district salmon fishery boards and in particular the Forth District Salmon Fishery Board. I had been approached by constituents about problems arising from that board's request to restrict catches to the disadvantage of the net fishermen, whose interests, as Alex Fergusson has said, are just as important as those of line fishers. Clearly, there has to be a partnership. The landowners and beat owners are an important part of this whole area, which in turn is important to Scotland. However, I entirely agree with John Home Robertson that the time has come to reform the system of management of our fisheries in Scotland. It is based on a Victorian system, which has had its day. A system that puts landowners in charge of conservation is one that may not always act in the interests of the country. It is inappropriate to have a uniform system of management across Scotland that is predicated on an ancient system. I welcome the move to merge some of the 52 district salmon fishery boards, as that may lead to a slightly better system. I am concerned about the powers of enforcement, entry, search and arrest for the water bailiffs. Certainly, in my area there have been occasions on which the local water bailiff has confiscated the nets of the net fisheries on a purported charge that has then been thrown out by the court. There is a general feeling of antipathy between the upper-reach owners and the netters. The association between the water bailiffs and the district salmon fishery boards is not entirely appropriate, and the bill will make the situation worse. Many speakers have raised the other issues that I wanted to discuss, but I will draw attention to changes in the river-beds, which are the spawning areas. I understand that there have been significant changes over the years in the spawning beds, whose management is important. Some district salmon fishery boards have done excellent work to try to improve those river-beds. That effort should be promoted nationally. The forms of enforestation close to the river-bed are also a matter of concern. Mink, which have been released into the wild by animal protection groups, have not been  mentioned. I understand that they are a growing problem, which needs to be addressed. I welcome the minister's reference to research, particularly on sea lice and the seal population. However, there are areas that need to be examined, such as the industrial fishing of sand-eel and krill. We do not know how important that is, but it needs to be examined further. We need to take a more robust approach to phasing out the Northumbria and Yorkshire fisheries. The reduction of the number of licensed fishermen by half to 71 is welcome, but we need to phase them out more rapidly. If we are to restrict the period during which net fishermen can fish, compensation is due to them. It may be necessary to restrict them much further and, if that is the case, there should be temporary compensation to allow a very ancient form of fishing to continue. Although I welcome the legislation, I think that its limited scope does not address the issues. Indeed, we do not know what effect it will have. We hope that it will have some beneficial effect. I have not discussed overfishing in the Greenland and Faroese fisheries over the years. That is now very small, although the Faroese fishery has reopened. Why are we allowing that to happen? The major issue of climate change is worrying, although it is beyond the scope of the debate. I support the bill, but I think, as does John Home Robertson, that the time has come to amend substantially the whole management of fisheries in Scotland. I hope that the ministers will consider doing that in the course of this parliamentary session.

What is Mr Harding's interpretation?

I have a question about hypothecation or ring fencing. Local outcome agreements are a welcome step. However, at a meeting of the Finance Committee, I asked Councillor Murray what would happen if a local authority did not move on a trend basis over three years towards the objectives that had been set jointly with COSLA or that the Executive wished to see met. Will the minister address that issue?

I also congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing this debate and on his very clear exposition of the problem of mesothelioma. This issue is different from many other medical issues that we have debated in this chamber, in that this condition is a lethal disease with an absolutely clear cause. That is an important distinction. I first became associated with the problem of asbestosis or asbestos-related diseases in the late 1970s when I worked for a construction company in Glasgow and discovered that its asbestos division did not have proper medical supervision. The laws on protection from asbestos were only then becoming totally clear. This Government is faced with many competing claims for compensation on the grounds of disease caused by past events. We have already examined hepatitis C and haemophilia, and the Health and Community Care Committee is currently considering the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine and its proposed but unproven link to autism. Those are all difficult issues for individuals; however, it is important for the Parliament to investigate them sympathetically. Although we will be asked to consider other conditions, these conditions are evident but not as complex. For example, the miners are now receiving compensation for lung disease. In their case, conditions of work were a major contributing factor, but because of the contribution of smoking and the general environment, it was difficult to address compensation. I am proud that the Labour Government has grappled with the problem. Although the process can be frustratingly slow for some of my constituents and their families, we are getting there. Mesothelioma can be caused only by asbestos, so there may be issues of fault. Duncan McNeil  alluded to them and cases that have been settled have been cited. We need to consider no-fault compensation, because, as Duncan McNeil said, the families cannot wait. There is a system for such compensation, but the Pneumoconiosis etc (Workers' Compensation) Act 1979 is not sufficiently sympathetic to cases of this sort. It does not allow us to proceed with the expeditious approach that Duncan McNeil and I would like. When mesothelioma has been diagnosed, compensation should be immediate and generous. We need a society in which it is clear that people who suffer severe and serious consequences as a result of work, who were neither offered guidance on nor made aware of the disease that could be caused, should be compensated. The law will deal with the question of negligence in relation to known risks, which is a different matter, but the whole area of no-fault compensation in the workplace and associated medical risks should be re-examined. The Government should perhaps consider compensating individuals on a no-fault basis and then seeking to recover funds from those who may have been negligent. That would be a different approach, which would remove the fundamental problem of companies that offer defence taking years to settle claims, even when previous cases have highlighted that the case law is correct. It seems to me that insurers, for goodness knows what purpose—probably profit—decide to delay compensation beyond a point that is reasonable for families.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I did not wish to interrupt the previous speaker, but will you indicate what action will be taken against John Swinney,  who during First Minister's question time indicated that information about people leaving the employment register was contained in a Scottish Parliament information centre document? He implied that the document was available to all members, but as far I can judge it is not generally available.

Does Shona Robison accept the point that members are making, that the joint futures group report and the Health and Community Care Committee report would have allowed the debate to be much better informed? Passionate advocates from the Health and Community Care Committee would have supported some of the excellent and passionate points that we all want to make.

On that point, does Hugh Henry agree that the SNP completely missed the fact that there are two streams of money? There is a stream through health boards. In my area, Forth Valley Health Board has allocated £800,000 to care of the elderly this year. Separate from that, there is a stream through local authorities amounting to £10 million. Those resources have been used to release beds and provide a rapid response to prevent those beds from becoming blocked again.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I gave you notice yesterday of the point of order that I am raising this morning. I ask you to rule on whether it would be appropriate in the forthcoming debate for members of the Health and Community Care Committee to use or refer to, obliquely or directly, any material that is in the draft community care report, as that report's conclusions have been discussed but not yet published. The good standing of all committee reports is at risk if committee members are allowed to refer to such material.

I had intended only to listen today but having heard the passionate advocacy of the nuclear veterans' case by Andrew Welsh and Michael Matheson, and the considered speech by Mary Scanlon, I felt that I should make a contribution. One of the greatest dangers for politicians is that, when we are faced with cases that are of such deep concern and where lives have been seriously affected, we are moved to a compassionate judgment that may not be a considered one. The analogy that Mary Scanlon made is a good one—

I was going to go on to say that the problem is that the analysis must be based on the evidence available. The NRPB reports up to 1993 were fairly clear that the numbers of cancer cases at that point were not statistically significant. We are faced with the question of how valid that judgment is now. One thing that we must do, just as we must with the link between the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine and autism, is to say that at this point in time—1993 in the case that we are discussing and this year in the case of MMR—the evidence does not show that there is a link. However, the negative is also difficult to prove. The matter is severely difficult.

I support what Andrew Welsh is saying. We must constantly keep this under review. If there is new evidence, or if the previous evidence was inadequate and did not cover the field well enough, we should definitely review it. However, this issue is not like the case that has recently been discussed in another place—mesothelioma in relation to asbestosis. In that case, the link is absolutely clear; there is no question but that exposure to asbestosis causes that form of cancer. Many people have Hodgkin's  disease, for example, which may or may not be caused by the exposure that they have had. In every generation to come, we will be faced with risks that we will be unable to quantify. This Parliament will do its best to ensure that the health and safety elements are dealt with at the level and standard that we regard as appropriate at that time—although we may find that level inappropriate later. We must deal with the situation as we find it now. In other words, we should be compassionate and support the individuals affected. We should perhaps not even require the level of proof that is normally required. We should perhaps say to people such as those whose situation has been described by Andrew Welsh that, even if the proof is not available, we should do something to support their quality of life, remembering that they served us well and that we must do something for them.

Will the First Minister ensure that the redefining of personal nursing care that is being undertaken by the chief nursing officer, which was announced by the Minister for Health and Community Care, will ensure that full and appropriate care will be provided free of charge to those who are suffering from dementia, mental illness and learning disability?

I am grateful for the opportunity to participate in this debate and would like to speak on a specific issue on which I corresponded with Jack McConnell when he was Minister for Finance—automated teller machines. It is unacceptable that many rural and poorer areas in my constituency and throughout Scotland are disadvantaged compared with the more affluent areas of the country. How are they disadvantaged? Either because banks and building societies have closed their branches or because they have never had the luxury of having banking facilities close at hand. With modern technology, we can provide a limited range of banking services and, through the new ATMs, we can provide business to commerce e-commerce to every community. ATMs offer cash withdrawal, account checking and other limited facilities 24 hours a day, but internet ordering through ATMs, and e-points in post offices and in small shops and garages in deprived areas provide the security of a personal interaction with a shopkeeper and cash exchange for communities without banking or readily available credit facilities. ATMs in banks and building societies are rated as part of the building, but ATMs in other locations—of the sort that I have described—are rated separately, as separate lands and heritage. The locations are then banded into categories of net annual value, based on the number of transactions each year. That is not a socially inclusive policy. A site with 25,000 transactions is categorised as a poor location and is rated with a net annual value of £2,500; a site with fewer transactions is categorised as a very poor location, but is still rated with a value of £1,500. Small supermarkets that are located in what are termed secondary and tertiary sites—such as those operated by Sands, a business in my  community—are faced with bills that, in some communities, make the use of ATMs uneconomic, even when they can be used for e-commerce. The scale of the challenge grows as the number of transactions increases—such sites may be rated with net annual values of up to £25,000.

Those small businesses have a rateable value that is already high. An additional burden in small and rural communities creates a major problem. Not only is that not socially inclusive, the rating system will affect the extension into e-commerce, which is vital. In the development of socially inclusive policies in rural areas and deprived communities, it is important that the rating policy be reviewed. I hope that the Executive will consider that. In my constituency, iATM of San Francisco has just announced that its world headquarters for the design of software for ATMs and their extension into e-commerce will be in Alloa. Those jobs will be put in jeopardy by the present system. I hope that the Minister for Finance and Local Government and the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning will consider that.

Does Mr Gorrie agree that we should consider the Paralympians being sponsored to be involved in schools, so that they can demonstrate that people with disabilities are just as able to participate in sport? That would, as he suggests, encourage everybody to participate in sport.

Give him seven minutes, Sir David.

Will the member give way?

No.

I congratulate Tricia Marwick on securing this debate. Multiple sclerosis is an important issue. I welcome the SNAP report and I congratulate the group on the careful manner in which it has drawn it up. The report suggests that the prevalence of multiple sclerosis in Scotland is around 203 per 100,000 and that the incidence—the number of new cases annually—is around 10 to 12 per 100,000. Data that I have obtained today from the primary care clinical informatics unit at Aberdeen University confirm the SNAP figures but suggest that, as the SNAP report indicates, the prevalence is probably somewhat higher. Based on the number of patients presenting with MS to general practitioners in the four years to April 1999, the informatics unit suggests that there are probably 11,300 MS sufferers rather than 10,300, as is suggested in the report. It is suggested that even that might be an underestimate. Whatever the figure, the condition, with its unpredictable course, causes substantial suffering and stress to individuals and their families. The extended disability status score is one of a number of useful tools that allow us to determine the level of need in MS sufferers. It is estimated that 27 per cent have a minimal impairment, 45 per cent have a moderate impairment and 28 per cent have a severe impairment. I believe that this is another area in which it is not practical to expect every practitioner to have an expertise. The Multiple Sclerosis Society surveys show that there is a lack of knowledge among the health professionals. The numbers involved might be a reason for that. The basic philosophy of management in relation to MS, as with other chronic diseases, must be the one to which both health ministers have committed themselves—partnership with patients and their families. Patients and their families must be fully informed and able to participate, with the health professionals, in the management of their condition. There is no doubt that the current service is inadequate. A 70-day waiting time to see a neurologist is unacceptable and is two and a half times longer than the society recommends. I would join SNAP in identifying the shortfalls, but my time is limited. We have a new structure in the local health care co-operatives. A medical officer should be designated in each LHCC to deal with MS sufferers; we should begin by having one for each primary care trust. We should also have a specialist liaison MS nurse in every primary care trust. That would double the current numbers and be a move towards having one for every LHCC—50 nurses in all. If we engaged the voluntary  societies, they could nominate a person to work with that doctor and that nurse as a community MS team. That would further build on the informal model that exists in one of the practices in Kinross in my constituency, where a volunteer works with the primary care team and provides them with updated information. That concept of partnership, which the Executive is striving to develop, lends itself well to this area. A vertically integrated network is an imperative to improved care for MS sufferers.

I counted eight elements in the package—clearly, the Executive has had to make some hard choices. As the funds are not available to implement the Sutherland report recommendations on free personal care and the minister announced today that the chief nursing officer will undertake work on a definition of free nursing care, will the minister publish the remit for that work? Will she also ensure that the resulting free care element does not discriminate against mentally ill patients, wherever that care is delivered? I am thinking about people who have a severe and enduring mental illness, dementia of all types including Alzheimer's, learning disabilities, and the terminally ill. If the minister could give us that reassurance, it would move us significantly towards the equity and fairness to which the Executive stated last week it is committed.

I congratulate Sylvia Jackson on securing a debate on this topic. My major concerns are about the infections that can occur in association with the process of piercing. Hepatitis C is not a particularly well understood disease, and HIV and hepatitis C were not talked about at all 20 to 25 years ago. If they existed, we do not know where they came from—that is still a matter for debate. In view of that experience, it is appropriate to ask what other diseases we do not yet know about. Appropriate sterilisation of needles is fundamental. Simple, old-fashioned disinfection with a wipe is not enough. It is vital that either new equipment or a fresh needle is used on each occasion, or that there is an effective system of sterilisation, which can be applied appropriately to equipment—I will not repeat the point that Elaine Smith made on that. That applies to tattooing and acupuncture as much as it applies to body piercing. The other question is that of informed consent. Young people are quite entitled to make a fashion statement, such as body piercing. Equally, those who inflict—or assist to achieve—body piercing have a responsibility to ensure that the consent that they receive is informed. It is therefore appropriate for there to be indications of the possible consequences of body piercing.  No general practitioner would undertake minor surgery without telling a patient that, for example, a skin operation to remove a blemish carries the risk of infection and of scarring, particularly keloid scarring, which has a red, heaped-up effect, and which tends to occur more frequently among one or two ethnic groups. People need to be informed of such things before they undergo the procedure. A combination of proper regulation, ensuring informed consent and ensuring, through the licensing process, that the establishments that carry out body piercing have effective sterilisation measures, is important.

Will the member give way?

I join my colleagues in congratulating Michael McMahon on the formation of the cross-party group on palliative care and on securing the debate. At this point, I should declare an interest, as I am a member of Strathcarron Hospice and former chair of its management committee. Members might be interested in some background, as palliative care is a success story in Scotland. In the 1970s, the Scottish Health Education Council, which was the predecessor of the current Health Education Board for Scotland, put together a team to hold seminars across Scotland on palliative care. As a GP and psychiatrist, I had the privilege of participating—along with the late Dr Dick Parry—in that early attempt to improve palliative care in Scotland. At about the same time, the first hospice in Scotland—St Columba's Hospice—was founded. As Michael McMahon said, there are now 15 hospices in Scotland, which shows how far we have come with the help of the hospice movement. Although it is extremely rare for me to praise a Conservative minister, members might not be aware that Michael Forsyth was persuaded by Tom Scott, the first director of the Scottish Partnership Agency for Palliative and Cancer Care, to guarantee that the Government in Scotland would match, pound for pound, money donated by the public. That was much to the dismay of the civil servants who were present at the time. The legacy of that decision has been a strong underpinning of the most effective voluntary health movement of the 20 th century in Scotland. Although, as Michael McMahon said, the figure for average contributions is now down to 40 per cent, the Scottish hospices have been largely protected from some of the difficulties faced by English hospices. However, there is still much to do to build on that success story, and I will illustrate one way forward with examples from my constituency. The Forth Valley Health Board, with initial support from the Macmillan Cancer Relief Fund, has developed the post of a co-ordinating general practitioner, currently Dr Cath Dyer. She has already done much to assess the needs of primary care teams and to develop, through training, their capacity to provide high-quality care. The care provided by primary care teams is absolutely vital if we are to meet the aspirations of most of our citizens that they should die at home, not in a hospital. As Michael McMahon said, 70  per cent of people die in hospital. Simple measures can make a difference. My practice had two syringe drivers for delivering pain-relieving drugs. The local hospice also supplied syringe drivers to any practice that needed them. I urge the minister to consider using some of this year's inevitable underspend on one-off capital equipment of that sort. That would make a disproportionate difference in improving the end of many of our citizens' lives. Some measures are more complex. The provision of effective, 24-hour-a-day-care in the final days or weeks of life, when dignity is a vital part of the patient's life and the lives of their families, is a vital part of coping with terminal illness. That 24-hour-a-day-care is only starting to develop and requires complex team arrangements. Those teams need training and support of the sort that can be provided only centrally or through an agency such as the Scottish Partnership Agency for Palliative and Cancer Care. I have referred to that agency on a number of occasions; it should be assisted to develop benchmarks for practice in our health board areas and to promote good practice through a database. Another example of good practice is the exchange of staff between Strathcarron hospice and Falkirk royal infirmary. That exchange spreads good practice in the hospice but, importantly, promotes mutual respect and understanding between the traditional NHS hospital and the hospice. The children's hospice is in my constituency and I am aware of the good work that it does. I welcome the fact that it is working with others to develop a second children's hospice in the west of Scotland. In conclusion, I will pursue the theme to which I keep returning in all health debates. The primary care team could have the capacity to provide excellent palliative care over and above the already good palliative care provided by many teams, but it will need more staff, good training and equipment. That is possible, practical, achievable and desired by all our communities and I commend it to the minister along with Michael McMahon's motion.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take a further point of information?

It is impossible to do justice to this subject in four minutes, but I will start by considering Arbuthnott and this morning's statement. I welcome that statement and the revised formula in the final report. I believe that that formula is much more robust and transparent than it was and that it will sustain us. SNP colleagues should remember that this is an additional redistribution and not a primary redistribution—that was done in 1977 by Professor Robin Smith with the SHARE formula.

I would like to have a think about that and come back to the member. I welcome the new money that has been announced, especially the funds for GP premises and information technology in the health boards where the need is greatest. The minister's clear commitment today to revise the performance management of health boards is also welcome. It is vital that we ensure that the money that is being redistributed is spent on inequalities. All my colleagues on the Health and Community Care Committee have been making that point this morning. The previous attempt to improve the quality of care in deprived areas was through the deprivation payments to GPs. However, research  demonstrated that there was precious little improvement in primary care in deprived areas as a result. We must not waste the opportunity that we have now, so I welcome the minister's commitment to revise radically the performance management of the NHS—God knows it is long overdue. If the new funds are used up in secondary care, we will be in trouble. Increased provision in primary care teams, working closely with social care workers in deprived areas, is an imperative. Many more services need to be provided closer to people, as Maureen Macmillan mentioned. The public need to see the services coming closer to them at the same time as the acute services review produces centres of excellence. If the funding is not used to improve services in rural communities, close to people, we will have failed again. Dealing with inequality is a national priority—it was a priority of the Labour Government and is now a priority of this Administration. That is a recognition of the fact that, for 20 years, inequality was a word that could not be used. However, we must be realistic. It is now clearly recognised that the health of a nation is best measured by the gap between the wealthiest 20 per cent and the poorest 20 per cent, not by gross domestic product. We are not yet significantly improving in that area—except for the fact that Scotland, as a region, has moved up the table. Our policies on employment—we are heading towards fuller employment—on child benefit and on the minimum income guarantee for pensioners, and the measures announced yesterday on fuel poverty, will make as much difference to health in our communities as any direct health measures. The Barnett formula is always mentioned when we debate funding. We have had 20 years of advantage from the Barnett formula—a formula that recognises our health needs and the geographic nature of the country in which we provide health services. What improvement has occurred in those 20 years, however? Scotland is still at the bottom of the table for public health. I suggest that we have only a limited time to make the changes that are necessary to make a difference. The unparalleled increase in spending that will occur in the health service has to make a radical difference. As I said, four minutes is not long enough to do justice to the subject. We are improving many aspects of our health—boys are increasing the amount of time they spend on physical activity, as are girls. Our dietary measures are also beginning to improve. If the minister can pursue the root-and-branch review of performance management with her customary vigour and determination, I believe that we might see an improvement in tackling  health inequalities and in promoting health.

Does Duncan Hamilton recognise the frustration of Labour and Liberal Democrat members? We are not saying that his song is not important, but it is a single song and it keeps coming. Instead of delivering the same song all the time, will he give us some other indication of how his party would spend the money that is available?

I thank the minister for her comments on the NHS modernisation board. I understand that the people mentioned are on it not as representatives but as individuals, and that they are all potential patients. Is the NHS modernisation forum now working well and is she satisfied with it? Is the voluntary sector adequately represented on it? Will she publish the full structure, remits and membership of the sub-committees of the board?

What is the member's proof?

Let us have something new.

First, will Mr McLetchie acknowledge that the promise was given in 1997 on the basis of what we would achieve by the time of the next general election? Despite his best wishes, or perhaps his worst fears, we are not yet at the next general election. Secondly, will he acknowledge that Scotland, of all the regions of the United Kingdom, has the most patients treated in the quickest time, and that it exceeds other areas by a substantial margin? Improvements to waiting times are what his party has been demanding ever since the election, and that is being achieved.

As always, it is very interesting to listen to Mr Salmond. Will he tell us what legislative programme he would  come up with if he were to remain as leader of the Opposition? What legislation would he propose? All this stuff about budgets and funding is more suitable for the debate on the comprehensive spending review to be held next week. He seems to have confused his speeches.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Yes.

I apologise to members for arriving late. I had another meeting. I congratulate the minister on her exposition of a very difficult subject. Will the minister indicate her support for a research project into prostate cancer screening? The window of opportunity to carry out such research is small—it has almost gone. Such research cannot be done in America, as they are too far advanced. There is just the possibility that it could be done in the UK. PSA is not appropriate as a screening test at present. I should have declared an interest—I have a grant from the Scottish Executive for research into prostate disease.

I welcome the minister's statement. Will the minister give considerations to the rights of the child in respect of access to medical information where the child is being passed on for fostering or adoption? They currently have no rights of access to parental medical history and that creates enormous problems later on. I would like the minister to consider that point. Secondly, I am slightly disappointed that there is nothing in the proposals about access by grandparents to children. That is an issue that Roseanna Cunningham alluded to and it should be addressed in the bill.

rose  —

rose—

I will address three areas in my speech: the effects of the fuel blockade and the go-slow, fuel prices and the environment. Having made their point, the protesters must allow the democratic process to take over. If they fail to take a democratic approach, they will endanger life. The problems are not just with ambulances or hospitals, as the staff in hospitals and primary care services also face problems. Deaths are inevitable if doctors and nurses cannot get into work or out to visit patients. Cancer patients from my constituency need to get from Clackmannanshire to the Beatson oncology clinic in Glasgow for radiotherapy. For them, the failure of private transportation to get them there puts them at risk. There are elderly patients in my constituency who require injections for diabetes not some time today, but now—they require those injections when they require them. Go-slows and blockades put those patients seriously at risk. The country cannot permit this protest to hold the Government to ransom, for to do so and to give in to the protest, or to give in to any groups, means that we would have to give in to such groups in future. On fuel prices, the fuel escalator was switched off this year, despite our continuing commitment to Kyoto, in recognition of the imbalance in prices across Europe. Mr McLetchie acknowledged that the rapid rise in oil price from $10 to $34 has been a major cause of the recent rise in the cost of fuel. Surely members accept that fact. The Government should have three objectives in relation to fuel prices. First, it requires to raise revenue to ensure the development of services such as the NHS and education. Secondly, the Government must continue to ensure that our industry is competitive. Thirdly, there is the  question of the environment. In the longer term, I have concerns over transport costs, which need to be addressed. Combined, the new taxes that are being discussed—climate tax and aggregate tax—will also seriously affect the glass, paper, aggregates and fibreboard industries in my constituency. We must therefore consider taxation in the round.

The Road Haulage Association says that this is a spontaneous action. If it is that, whom should we speak to? That association is not saying that it is striking. Both drivers and road hauliers are out: it is different groups. This is not an official action, with notice given, as the First Minister said. If it had been that, there would have been someone to negotiate with; however, there is no one to negotiate with. If the volatility of oil prices continues—and we do not know whether it will—the Government is not going to be able to control fuel prices. To do so against the market has proven, in the past, to be impossible. Perhaps the Government could consider a tax-varying power that would allow it to provide stability for industry, for Government income and for citizens. Modelling the oil volatility is necessary: it has gone from $19 to $10 to $34 a barrel. Who knows how much it will be next? It is difficult for industry to manage transport costs, and it is the sudden rise in fuel prices that has caused this massive protest to erupt. My final point concerns the environment. The protest has been over fuel prices, but it has forced us to recognise the absolute dependency of our society on fossil fuels. Therefore, the Executive is right to pursue resolutely its integrated transport policy. I have listened carefully to the speeches that have been made by the leaders today, and the one thing that has disappointed me is the fact that Mr Salmond, as the outgoing leader of the Scottish National Party, has failed to say that the protesters should now go home, having made their point.

He did not say that—he certainly did not make that clear. He was asked to make it clear and he did not. I hope that the SNP will join Labour, the Liberals and Mr McLetchie in saying, "You have made your  protest. Do not endanger life. Go home and allow the democratic process to proceed."

Does Mr McLetchie agree that there are two other facts that ought to be pointed out in his litany on this subject? The first is that increases in fuel duties this year were the lowest for 11 years, for seven of which his party was in power. The second is that the 18 per cent increase per litre over the past 16 months is due to the rise in the price of oil, which could go up or down in future. Does he acknowledge that there are other factors to be taken into account, including seven years of Conservative rule when duties were high?

I begin by declaring that I am the joint holder of a research grant from the Alzheimer Society, to test the education of general practitioners in dementia. In the early 1980s, I sat on the mental health programme planning group in the Scottish Office, one outcome of which was the Timbury report. Professor Timbury was absolutely committed to the support of dementia patients and their carers, and it is regrettable that, 20 years on, the care and support provided has not developed as fully as he would have liked.  We should acknowledge that dementia has been recognised as a separate condition only for about 40 years, which is quite a short time in medical terms. We should begin with early diagnosis and proceed to effective management regimes, which can significantly slow the progress of the illness, and manage its most debilitating features. Early diagnosis must be followed by comprehensive support, which exists in some areas. If the mental health framework is developed—we have had a firm commitment to its development from Iain Gray in previous debates—we will be able to be proud of the support that we give dementia patients and their families in Scotland. Last week, I met carers from Central region at a question-and-answer session in Falkirk, which followed a previous session at a carers forum attended by 120 carers from the region. They expressed a number of concerns, particularly about respite care. Those families and carers desperately need a guarantee of adequate respite. Day care provision is another aspect of respite care. A carer's ability to lead his or her own life and remain in good health is crucial. The second thing that has been brought to our attention by carers, but which is not a matter for this Parliament to deal with directly, is the complexity of the benefits system as it relates to dementia sufferers and their families. There are some serious problems that need to be addressed. The UK Government's one-stop benefits shop should help, and the proposed stakeholder pensions should provide recognition of the debt society owes to carers. The compact that the Scottish Executive has developed with carers, and the further £5 million that has been provided in addition to the previous £5 million, should be helpful. Dementia groups are watching expenditure in this area carefully. The Executive's support for the dementia centre at the University of Stirling is welcome, as is the other unit in that university, funded by the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council. In responding to the Sutherland report "With Respect to Old Age", we have the opportunity to ensure that nursing care for dementia sufferers is recognised as an intensive form of personal care that is absolutely essential to those patients. We are faced with difficult choices about boundaries in personal care if we are not going to fund it fully, so I hope that the matter will be addressed very clearly in any Executive response to the report. In the Health and Community Care Committee this morning, I highlighted the opportunity that I believe is presented to the Executive in responding to Sutherland to seek a much more radical solution embracing all long-stay care. I shall elaborate on that solution in the chamber and in other forums in the next week. We can be proud  of the fact that this Parliament's first social legislation was the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, which has been welcomed by Alzheimer groups. Health is a mirage. As our predecessors dealt with infectious diseases, we have been faced with cardiovascular and cancer problems as our main priorities. As we tackle those—we are tackling them and treatment is improving—we will be faced with increasing numbers of patients with dementia. If this debate has helped to raise awareness, a start has been made. The start that the Executive has made in this area with the mental health framework is excellent; we must build on it.

Will the minister elaborate on the agreement with COSHEP? Will students get into the precise course of their choice if they now find that they have achieved the necessary grades? It is important that the students get into the correct courses. If those courses are full, will the Executive fund additional places in those courses? On the issue raised by Johann Lamont, John McAllion, Margo MacDonald and others, will the minister recommend that the Scottish Executive undertake a more extensive review of all non-departmental public bodies? Whether we like it or not, the Scottish public hold the Executive responsible for the actions of such bodies. Will he recommend a full review of all NDPBs?

I am delighted that the amendment to increase child care rates to a more appropriate level—above the minimum wage—will be accepted. I move amendment S1M-1086.1, in the line beginning "childcare costs, specially incurred", in column (2), leave out "£2.50 per hour" and insert: "up to £5 per hour".

Will the member give way?

The difference is—

My response must be slightly longer than yes or no.

Mr Wallace asked me a question; I will answer it. The answer is that the BMA will be consulted as part of the modernisation forum. It is represented there. John Garner is expressing sour grapes—and I say that even though I am a member of the BMA—because he is not on the modernisation board. There are doctors on that  board, however, and the BMA is being consulted. Dr Garner is wrong.

Will the member give way?

I have intervened only once.

Is the member aware that, as part of the modernisation strategy, there is a specific group dealing with information management and technology? I should have thought that he would have welcomed that.

Will the member give way?

There has been no decision on that yet.

I will start with a declaration of interests, as I believe that one must do so. I am a member of the British Medical Association, the Royal College of General Practitioners and the Scottish Association for Mental Health and I am a fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists. I perform occasional consultancy work for pharmaceutical companies. I have directorships of Nursing Home Management, which has nursing home beds in England and of the Forth valley primary care research group. Today's debate has been a good example of Dr Jekyll and Miss or Mrs Hyde. In the Health and Community Care Committee, Kay Ullrich and Mary Scanlon are co-operative and acknowledge the changes that the Executive is attempting to make. When we come into the chamber, everything they say is negative and regressive. They do not  mention the eight new hospitals that have been commenced or the health centres that have been built. Four of the 10 health centres in my constituency are being renewed and another two are planned. They do not mention the advances in cancer treatment or the new intensive treatment unit beds that we will open and the staff who will support them. They do not mention the investment that was made last September in a linear accelerator, which cannot be created in a few months. They want all that to have been done yesterday. They acknowledge none of what has been done—all they do is attack. The unprecedented boost in funding for the NHS over the next three years provides a unique opportunity to modernise the service for the benefit of patients. That was not taken up by Mary Scanlon or Kay Ullrich. A partnership between patients, carers, health professionals and management is being forged through the forum that was announced by the minister, the board of which met the other day. That forum has a heavy responsibility to challenge and improve accepted practice. If it fails to meet that challenge, there is unlikely to be another chance to improve practice in the foreseeable future. The easy route would be to throw money at acute trusts, such as the Tayside primary care NHS trust, which has shown ineptitude and an inability to live within its budget that is almost unique. Such an approach would be perverse and must be avoided.

The Minister for Health and Community Care announced the establishment of a task force within a few months of taking office. Again, that was not acknowledged by the Opposition. The task force has taken a few months to establish what is going on, which shows how poor the reporting systems in that trust were. That is made absolutely clear in the report. As Nora Radcliffe said, the process of modernisation must begin with the journey that a patient is required to make. Patients should not have to struggle to find the appropriate route to services. The Scottish version of NHS Direct—which we have not introduced rapidly, but have taken time to examine in a considered way—will provide a single point of access to the primary and emergency services. Too many professionals find themselves overwhelmed by demands. The Scottish NHS Direct will provide expert advice and could ensure that only those who need to see a  health professional will do so.

There has not been a cut in funding. If a cut in resources has been reported by that surgeon, that health board must be called to account. The patient should be able to obtain the highest standard of care from the right professional, as close to home as is practical. Across Scotland and the UK, there are many examples of good practice. Those examples need to be spread across the whole of the service. In Lothian, some patients have almost immediate access to minor surgery of the highest quality, provided by GPs in their local health centre. Elsewhere in Scotland, patients have to travel many miles to hospital for the same service, unnecessarily taking up the time of people such as the surgeon whom Christine Grahame mentioned. Many problems can be dealt with easily if we get the case mix and the skill mix right. That has to be managed locally.

No—I have taken quite a few interventions. I might give way if I get more time, but I doubt whether that will happen. In Liverpool and Bradford, a variety of endoscopic procedures are carried out on patients safely and to the highest standards in a local health centre, while other patients must wait for months for a hospital appointment in the same cities, because the hospital will not consider developing the skills that are required. This country has a unique primary care system, yet its potential to provide a high-quality service has been completely, or largely, unfulfilled. If we do not grasp the opportunity now, we will be in real trouble.

Every survey of public opinion shows a high level of regard for doctors and nurses, but patients who need medical advice need more than seven minutes for a consultation. We must release our professionals to deal with the real and serious problems—that is as true for  hospital staff as it is for primary care staff. It is absolutely imperative that we tackle again the amount of bureaucracy and paperwork, which was being reduced but which is beginning to grow again and which plagues the system. The Labour party's vision for the renewal of the NHS in Scotland places the user at the centre of services. We will encourage a partnership between health professionals and the patient that provides as quickly as possible the highest quality of service close to the patient's home. Yes, there are problems, and yes, the service is not perfect. However, at least we have a vision of the future. Our vision is achievable if we grasp the opportunity now.

Lies. Absolute nonsense.

Nonsense. That is not true.

I feel constrained to speak, because the facts are being completely distorted. There has been an underspend in the NHS every year, certainly since I started in the health service. Every year, health boards used to rush to spend the money in March on all sorts of crazy things that were totally unnecessary to the service. The Finance Committee of the Parliament, in negotiations with the Minister for Finance, agreed that all spending departments—[MEMBERS: "Speech."] All spending departments—

The facts need to be corrected.

The member allowed the intervention. Unless the Presiding Officer stops me, I have the right to conclude.

Twenty-five per cent of all spending departments—

I am just asking whether the member believes—

rose—

It will not be another speech.

The problem—certainly in the services that I have worked in—is that inclusion of figures such as the 25 per cent that is mentioned in amendment 2 means that those figures become the limit for which people will strive. That would happen despite the fact that the words "at least" are included in the amendment. It is inappropriate to include the figure of 25 per cent in the bill, however worthwhile the spirit of the amendment might be.

Will the minister give way?

In rejecting amendment 2, despite its excellent sentiments, will the minister agree to discuss with the appropriate committee the details of the monitoring of the scheme? LECs may be able to demonstrate strong evidence that groups such as adults who were previously looked-after children and those emerging from prison, who are also often previously looked-after children, are being encouraged to take up individual learning accounts. If so, many of us would feel much more comfortable in rejecting this quite restrictive amendment.

Will the minister indicate how much of that budget will be allocated to the training of nursing and medical staff in dealing with drug problems in prison? If he cannot give the figure, will he undertake to ensure that there is adequate provision in this respect?

I have two questions. First, how does a lack of comment imply a change in policy? Secondly, will Fiona McLeod state how much the SNP would allocate to implementing the McCrone recommendations? We are keeping a running total of what the SNP plans to spend.

I welcome the statement, the commitment to keeping water in the public sector, the licensing regimes and the access charges. At the moment, the capital requirements are being met mainly though public-private partnerships, capital from the Government or from an income stream. Will the consultation document open up the water boards, not just in the joint venture system, but generally, so that they can obtain capital in different or innovative ways?

Before Phil Gallie moves on to his next point, will he explain what his party did during their 18 years in government to inform victims of exactly the same situation on remand? There has been no change. What did the Conservatives do?

Eighteen years.

I wonder whether Mr Wilson will remind us whether it was 24 or 26 times that the Conservatives changed the basis of the unemployment statistics? There was no protest about that from the information department or the statistics department, which at that time was regarded simply as a wing of government.

One of the problems is that women's careers are often more interrupted than men's are. When they return to work, they are often asked to go to the lowest grade and start again. Does Brian Adam agree that the public sector should set an example by guaranteeing re-employment at the same level as when the woman left on maternity leave?

I welcome Tricia Marwick's speech, which was excellent. The Health and Community Care Committee took evidence from the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, who referred to the specific housing issue that she raised. The SFHA said that good practice was to have full tenancies and not occupancies. That is something that will be  addressed.

I accept that. I had the honour of serving on the programme planning group sub-committee that produced the Peters report, 20 years ago—that dates me. Although people talk about moving out of a dark time, it should be recognised that there has been accelerating change over the past 20 years. The closure of Gogarburn hospital, Lennox Castle and Lynbank hospital and the proposed closure of the Royal Scottish National Hospital are all testament to the fact that there has been some development, although not enough. The Executive report is welcome because it has involved users, which is a significant change. It is particularly important that the bridging funding is available when hospitals are being closed. That was the problem with the Peters report. The bridging funding was not available to allow the services in the community to develop before units were closed. The funding that has just been given to RSNH for that purpose is particularly welcome. The second issue that I want to address is that of resource transfer. Information from the Accounts Commission and evidence given to the Health and Community Care Committee on community care have shown that there is massive variation in the extent to which resources, beyond the initial bridging funds, are transferred on closure. Until now, the health boards have been required to track the resources that they transferred. The Accounts Commission has indicated that that is extremely difficult, if not impossible. The Sutherland report has also suggested that, at least in England and Wales, there has been a substantial diversion of funds into other priorities. I will be making a submission in response to "The same as you?" on that subject. I hope that the minister will consider ensuring that 100 per cent of the resources to be transferred are identified and agreed by all the parties to the partnership in progress. This should be not simply be a matter of the local authority deciding on the spend or the health board deciding on the moneys available; those organisations, with voluntary organisations, user groups, users themselves and housing associations should collectively decide on the best use to which the money should be put. In that respect, I refer members to the Scottish Society for Autism, which is based in my constituency. It is regarded as a  centre of excellence and should be involved in that process. The final area that I wish to address is advocacy, a subject in which, as Duncan Hamilton kindly mentioned in his speech, I have been interested. Advocacy is mentioned time and again in the report. I welcome the fact that planning guidance on advocacy is already in place. I particularly welcome the fact that the new centre for learning disability will help in the further development of advocacy. I recommend to the minister the model of the centre for social research on dementia at the University of Stirling in my constituency, which has had, and is having, a substantial effect on another neglected area—dementia. In conclusion, I refer to a subject that Irene Oldfather would have mentioned had she been able to contribute—elderly parents or carers, who have concerns about what will happen to the people whom they have been supporting. I hope that the flexible support that the report refers to will be put in place and that those carers and relatives can be confident about their care. There is no doubt that early planned support is worth its weight in gold, not just in preventing a crisis, but in reducing the anxieties of carers. I commend the report to the chamber.

I congratulate Duncan Hamilton not only on securing this debate but on the strong support that members have shown for it. This aspect of disability, like many others, is undergoing a transformation in respect of recognition and management. We are beginning to understand some of the neurological bases of dysfunctions, although in the case of dyspraxia they are still extremely obscure. Duncan Hamilton  was right to say that the answer lies in management rather than curative treatment. The first issue is early diagnosis. I am not convinced that at present the primary care teams are able to ensure that. However, the development of local health care co-operatives provides the opportunity for a degree of specialisation, which can be built on in individual primary care teams through health visitors, rather than general practitioners. I do not think that we will get general practitioners to recognise this condition easily. As Duncan Hamilton has illustrated, the problem is that children suffering from dyspraxia are often excluded. Indeed, parents and teachers may punish them inadvertently for what is perceived as willing clumsiness but is in fact something they are unable to manage. Early recognition is important, as is appropriate management, to deal with the problem of subsequent exclusion and the consequences that that has for self-esteem. I hope that health visitors will be given specific training in this area. That training should be carried out in a joined-up way. At present there is a major problem with the provision of cross-cutting, multidisciplinary training. We have paid lip service to that for many years, but here we have a condition that makes it possible for us to consider training teachers, nursery school teachers and health visitors in such a way as to give us a cross-cutting ability. I hope that the Executive will consider making that the subject of a pathfinder or pilot project.

rose—

I would be grateful if Duncan Hamilton would agree to correct one comment that he made in his speech, because it was seriously wrong. He suggested that Scottish patients would be disadvantaged by the events that have occurred. I cannot believe that he is trying to say that. For the sake of the patients who are in the balcony, I hope that he will correct that comment now. They are not disadvantaged; they are on a common list and they will receive excellent treatment at the unit in the Freeman hospital in Newcastle.

Is Ben Wallace aware that for a number of years Norway was sending most of its patients who needed heart operations to Glasgow? He is correct to say that a country of 5 million people cannot sustain facilities for many types of transplant, although I hope that we can sustain a heart transplant unit.

Will the member give way?

Does Pauline McNeill agree that Sandra White's suggestion in her intervention that this unit should be opened by December, no matter what the public safety issues are, is nothing short of abominable?

I am grateful to the member for giving way on that important point. Is he aware that lung transplant patients already go south? Is he also aware that a pancreas-bowel transplant—a new operation, which is one of the first in the United Kingdom and in which a colleague of mine was involved—was recently carried out in England and that Scottish patients travel for that? Robert Brown's point about the necessity of a weight of clinical material is extremely well made—it is only since the early 1990s that that has been available. The number of cases in Scotland has justified a unit; it is only barely justified at present.

rose—

Cathie made the point eloquently. The problem since January has been donor availability. That is why there have been no heart transplants. It is not a question of the service being suspended, as was suggested by Kay Ullrich.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The light on my console was flashing during decision time; I am told that my vote was not recorded and that I was marked as "not present". I ask that my vote therefore be recorded manually.

Before I start, I give notice that I will raise a point of order at the end of the debate. Having visited every prison in Scotland, except Penninghame, in the early and mid-1990s—most of them twice, some more than twice—it strikes me that there are a number of issues about human dignity that need to be addressed. I was particularly struck in the early 1990s by the conditions of reception in the Bar-L. They were absolutely appalling—something like the black hole of Calcutta. I am glad that those facilities have been done away with and that the new facilities are excellent. There are many issues of human dignity in prisons—overcrowding is one that has been relieved by the new prison in Kilmarnock. Dorothy-Grace Elder, whose introductory speech I applaud, has today highlighted the degrading practice of slopping out. It is good that, in 1976, the new women's prison was built at Cornton Vale, on the edge of my  constituency. It does not have any slopping out. However, in the past few years, a policy has been adopted of dispersing women back to local prisons. I ask the minister to ascertain whether the practice of slopping out applies to any women, following the dispersal. I hope that it does not. With regard to the male jails, I believe that the minister should ask the Scottish Prison Service to present him and the Parliament with detailed plans for meeting the target of 2005. Like Euan Robson, I find that target loose and too distant. I further believe that we should have, as part of those plans, the option to use any underspend in prisons on an annual basis to abolish this practice, which is the most degrading practice in prison. Apart from that practice being degrading to the humans who have to suffer it in this new century, what concerns me is the issue of cross-infection and hygiene. We spent some time yesterday talking—quite rightly—about significant new regulations on meat products and butchers' shops, as the public would not stand for unhygienic practices. Nevertheless, we accept practices in our prisons that are equally unhygienic and unpleasant. Finally, I wonder about this issue in the context of the European convention on human rights. I cannot believe that those rights are not being transgressed by this practice. If that is the case, it is highly likely that a prisoner will test that in our courts in the near future. We must, therefore, be prepared to end the practice as soon as possible.

I welcome the minister's statement. For several years, I have been involved in medical approval of childminders and I wonder whether the extension of the regulations that we have been discussing will include childminders. Could the minister say a little more about how any charges that might be made in respect of fit person and criminal checks might be levied? Who would be responsible for those costs?

Well, I will try to make it so. Will the minister seriously consider whether all the statistics need to be collected every year? The confusion of Mr Gibson et al—as well as the amount of bureaucracy involved—might be reduced if fewer statistics were collected less often.

Will the member give way?

On resource transfer, does Margaret Smith agree that, rather like a joint investment fund, the health board and social work department should agree on the total amount of funding that is involved and on its application? That would ensure transparency about what is happening with the funds. Whether the funding for mental health is spent by the health board or the social work department, there should be a joint agreement.

I should declare an interest, as it was my son who did the research— [Laughter.] He carried out the research around the time of the election in 1997. The number of blocked beds at that time was—guess what—2,400. It was as bad as that under the Conservatives.

We are going down another critical path. Will Kay Ullrich tell members how much the SNP proposes to spend on care and from where it proposes to get the money? If the SNP is going to be critical of policy, Kay Ullrich must say what the SNP would do instead.

I congratulate Mike Watson on securing the debate and on the detailed and professional manner in which he presented the facts about epilepsy. I would like to add that no one cannot have a seizure. Seizures are a matter of thresholds and all of us could, in the right circumstances, have one. I was a general practitioner for many years and epilepsy was an area on which my practice audited itself on a number of occasions, but the outcomes were not good. When we asked patients, we found that their knowledge of their condition was poor. Their knowledge of their rights and the limitations of their rights was also poor. Management of epilepsy in Scotland makes it evident that it is a condition that requires a holistic approach. Sufferers must be treated as individuals, but that is not happening. As Margaret Ewing said, we need a strategy to manage the condition. The issue is not entirely about finding massive extra resources—it is about a co-ordinated response. The Scottish Executive's policy of restructuring health care and the introduction of local health care co-operatives provide—as Nora Radcliffe suggested—a massive opportunity to get co-ordinated care in place in primary care for the first time. The role of nurses in that could be enormous. Through appropriate training, working to the right protocols and following guidelines, it is possible for nurses to improve enormously the condition of epileptic patients. We must, however, recognise that there is a substantial shortage of neurologists and that neurological supervision of the condition is lacking because of lack of time. The situation has become worse in the past few years because of the success of certain treatments that have become available, such as new drugs and operative treatments. Those treatments require proper assessment in specialist centres, which would require resources.  I am concerned about the way in which some of our specialist neurological units operate. I will write to the minister regarding a couple of cases that have come to my attention recently. It is possible for Parliament to develop a strategy that will bring epilepsy out of the shadows, which is what those who are promoting the campaign for awareness want. We owe that to sufferers of epilepsy in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

I appreciate what the member is going through. Perhaps I can offer some help. A mast was erected in my constituency. Fortunately, it was close to a B-listed building as well as on the edge of the motorway. Placement of the mast close to the B-listed building allowed us to insist on its being removed and it was replaced by two false trees at the Keir roundabout. I recommend that Ian Jenkins look at those trees—they are very pleasant looking. The Carlops villagers might feel happier about two Scots pines than about what they had previously.

I wonder if Des McNulty would agree that particular attention should be paid to masts near schools. Bruce Crawford shares my concern about the situation in Kinross. Some of the considerable amount of money raised from the new licensing fees could be used to encourage companies to re-site masts. I am not suggesting that the Government should pay for that, but that we should ask Westminster to consider using some of that money to support the re-siting of masts that are near schools.

I join my colleagues in welcoming the minister's statement as yet another step along the way to developing an effective strategy to deal with a problem that is not getting better but is getting worse. I particularly welcome the analysis of the £250 million—we look forward to receiving the detail of that—and the mapping of all existing services, which is an exercise that is fundamental to our understanding of the drugs problem. I thank Fiona Hyslop for referring to my motion. The Parliament should have a committee on drugs as it is such an important issue. We must play our part collectively so that we can monitor and sometimes challenge the work of the ministerial committee on tackling drug misuse. A parliamentary committee on drugs would also provide a focus for people who might wish to comment on the strategy in other ways. My motion, which was signed by 32 members, lapsed during the recess. I have now resubmitted it and I hope that members will sign it, so that we can move towards establishing that committee, although I appreciate that we are having difficulties with the amount of time that members are able to spend in committees. I want to raise a specific issue, which illustrates the problem of using AIDS funding for drug-related work in many areas. In the Forth valley area, there is a risk that the health board's drug action team will run out of funding in September. While the board has agreed to continue funding the team until April next year, the rejigging of AIDS funding has caused difficulties. I know that the minister has been involved in discussions about those difficulties, and it would be interesting to learn  whether that is a general problem or whether it is specific to my constituency. I welcome the developments on social inclusion partnerships. While those developments have been slower than some members would like, it is important that we get them right. I hope that the minister will support groups such as Locals Against Drugs in Alloa, in my constituency, which has now received funding. I hope that he will ensure that bureaucracy of the support systems that we are putting in place is minimised for such groups and that he will address the question of funding beyond three years—this is not a short-term issue—so that they do not have to start considering exit strategies before they have begun their work. I worked in the Scottish Prison Service for 26 years, and have seen the huge changes in prisons brought about by the fact that the overwhelming majority of prisoners have committed drug-related offences or are involved in drugs. Drugs are a crucial problem in prisons, and one of the most difficult aspects of that problem is the fact that remand and custodial sentences might interrupt a prisoner's through-care. As part of the Prison Service's new drugs strategy, which is about to be published, I hope that the minister will address the problems caused to the management and support of drug addicts when they are interrupted by remand and short-term sentences.

rose—

On a point of order. I am sorry to interrupt but, for the second time, my name appeared on the annunciator screen while Alex Fergusson was speaking; not temporarily, but throughout the speech. It was one thing at the beginning of the Parliament when our pictures were transposed on the web, but I wonder whether you could ensure that it does not happen again. I do not particularly wish to be associated with the previous speaker's views.

Does Fiona Hyslop recognise that expenditure is increasing throughout the health service and that—unless her party has a different policy—it is up to local trusts and boards to decide  on the best way to spend the money? Is she saying that her party—were it in government—would determine provision of every piece of equipment at a national level?

Will the member give way?

Was that a yes?

rose—

I congratulate Kenny Gibson on lodging this motion for a members' business debate. I should declare that I am still registered as a psychiatrist. I am pursuing research, and have completed some research in this subject.  As a general practitioner, I came across a common belief that, because many suicide victims consulted shortly before they committed suicide, general practitioners should in some way be able to identify potential suicides. However, when the matter is studied in depth, one finds that it is extremely difficult to pick out those who will commit suicide. We recently undertook some research with Professor Kevin Power of Stirling University, which took a retrospective look at some 40 suicides in the Forth Valley area. We found that the suicides fell into two different groups. One group consisted of infrequent consulters, who saw their GPs far less often than the average of 3.8 times a year. Members of the other group had much more frequent consultations. A research-based approach would therefore provide opportunities for us to begin to turn back the tide of suicides among young men in particular. The group to which Kenny Gibson referred—those who have mental health problems—is important. People who have suffered schizophrenia or manic depressive psychosis are much more likely to commit suicide, and it would be helpful to identify people with mental health problems more clearly. We must be realistic about the incredible increase in drug and alcohol abuse that we face. The co-morbidity that is associated with the abuse of drugs and alcohol by people who have mental health problems leads to situations in which suicide is more likely to occur. Suicide has been researched since Dirkheim produced his seminal study, back in the 1880s. He referred to a condition that he called anomie, which still exists today—a condition of isolation and poor self-esteem. Those issues are compounded by drug and alcohol abuse and by unemployment. In its work with the social inclusion partnerships, the Executive is right to tackle some of those root causes in order to improve the situation, as that would help. The question "Why we are we facing a rising tide of suicide?" was asked at recent conference. Richard Holloway gave an extremely worthwhile talk on that occasion and described the situation as being at least partly due to the increasing pace of change in a complex society, to the fact that, particularly for men, the values and certainties of life are much less concrete than they were, and to the fact that people are excluded from education and from employment. He also talked about drug and alcohol abuse. Why should suicide be more common among young men than among young women? The answer may involve gender perceptions, as  perhaps, for men, changes in gender perception appear greater. The mental health framework gives us an opportunity to move forward. I am concerned that, although mental health has been a priority under both the previous Government and the present Government, as yet there is no great evidence that the health service is shifting adequate funds into mental health issues. We must constantly ensure that that shift in prioritisation is driven forward.

I do not wish to undermine the seriousness of the GM debate, but I have considerable concerns about the environmental impact of the overuse of pesticides in Scotland. Can the minister outline the measures that are in place to ensure that the use of pesticides does not contaminate the wider environment?

rose—

The SNP's plans could be written on a credit card.

Could Mr Davidson elaborate on the word "remain"?

Mr Davidson said that members of the teaching profession remain disillusioned. Does that mean that, when his party left power, they were totally disillusioned?

The Glasgow cost of £100 million was based on a 20,000 sq m project, but the requirement is now for 31,000 sq m. I ask Mr Sheridan the same question that I asked earlier and which I will continue to ask of those who oppose Gordon Jackson's amendment: what reduction in the size of the Parliament does he propose that will allow the Parliament to function and fulfil the needs of the Scottish people?

rose—

May I intervene?

Will Mr Russell make it clear that he does not believe that the increase in size, since the debate last June, is appropriate? Is he saying that we should reduce the size back to 24,000 sq m? Will he acknowledge that the Parliament's changing function has had to be recognised in the increased design?

This bill is the first measure that clearly and directly affects the citizens of Scotland. Some people may be disappointed that the passionately held views that were expressed to the committees did not meet with agreement in the chamber, but the advance in the protection for adults with incapacity is undoubtedly substantial. The role of carers, family and proxies in treatment decisions has been clarified and the bill promotes good practice, which is what all our laws must do. We have worked out a procedure involving a wide range of individuals and organisations. It would not have been possible to do that a year ago under the Westminster legislative process. The interaction between members in the committee and the chamber and civic Scotland will ensure that our laws stand the test of time. Whether the bill will last as long as the act that we repealed in schedule 6—the Curators Act 1585—remains to be seen. Nevertheless, we have created a new procedure, we have tested it and it has worked well. The only cautionary note that I would sound is that if it had not been for the ability of the Health and Community Care Committee to take further evidence following the major change at stage 1, there might have been some feeling that carers had not had the opportunity to express their views fully. The way in which the Health and Community Care Committee and the Justice and Home Affairs Committee have worked together is another parliamentary innovation. I am sure that that will continue. The bill represents a major advance in the protection of adults with incapacity.

I hear some slight laughter rippling around the chamber on the point about the definition of death. If people had agonised, as many doctors have done, over what constitutes brain death, they would understand that it requires a precise definition. To some extent, the definition of vegetative state, which is not an easy matter, lies at the heart of the bill. The fact that the terms in the amendment are not found elsewhere in the  bill is a serious point—it is why the amendment is flawed.

Because it is not necessary to do so in this bill.

On a point of information, Presiding Officer, that is not correct. Our initial position was to have a second tier of opinion, which would be lay and medical opinion. When both positions were proposed to the MWC—making clear that both positions would have true independence to provide the balance that the sections are seeking—the commission said that it was not keen to promote a cadre of lay people to provide that second opinion. As a result, we moved to the present position in which the carer is now empowered to appoint that second opinion, which is a very important and positive move.

Throughout stage 2, there have been attempts to ensure that the bill takes account of and promotes best practice. As many members have said, we do not expect the carer and the doctor to disagree in the majority of cases; it is likely to be the minority of cases. The problem all along with section 47 has been that it has tried to cover all situations in which treatment is proposed, from the acute to the long term, and from the severest incapacity to the  mildest or most circumscribed. The original proposal, to which Malcolm Chisholm would have us return, is that the proxy should have primacy. In the event of the carer refusing treatment, the doctor would have to go to court. As was discussed at length in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, primacy without a duty of care was not thought to be reasonable, yet the imposition of a duty of care on the proxy was also thought not to be appropriate or reasonable. The duty of care, therefore, lies with the doctor and not with the carer. However, the amendments propose that a simple statement of the reason for refusal should suffice. As the minister said, there is no judgment about that statement. In my opinion, the most powerful evidence that was received by the Justice and Home Affairs Committee was that of Professor McLean, who cogently referred to research in the United States on the opinions of carers in respect of those for whom they were acting as proxy. It was a theoretical piece of research but, nevertheless, it is highly credible. Interestingly, it found that the carer was able to judge what the adult's view would have been only by chance—in other words, on 50 per cent of occasions. The same applied to the doctor. We are dealing with a very human situation, in which two people are trying to reach a decision that is in the best interests of—and, in section 1(2), must benefit—the adult. It is a situation in which the doctor and the carer are in disagreement over the proposed treatment. The amendments that have so far been accepted indicate that an independent medical opinion will be sought. The Health and Community Care Committee felt that, even with independent medical opinion, two medical opinions were not enough. It felt that it might be perceived that there was a degree of collusion or that it might be perceived that a scientific medical approach was being taken, which did not take into account the human, caring situation that was described to us with great passion by Parent Pressure. Amendments 140 and 141 allow an additional lay opinion to be obtained. It is possible that a doctor might dismiss the opinion of one carer. A doctor who dismisses two lay opinions may now be in considerable trouble in court if either of those lay people decides to go to court. What the Executive is proposing, in amendments 140 and 141, is to empower the carer to appoint that second lay opinion. They will be able to choose from a wide array of individuals: perhaps another relative, someone from a voluntary organisation—Dorothy-Grace Elder made a point about involving voluntary  organisations—a health visitor or a general practitioner. It does not specify who should be chosen in those circumstances. Amendments 140 and 141 continue to promote good practice because they broaden the decision out from one in which—as Phil Gallie mentioned—there is the possibility of collusion. In practice, looking after incapable adults at the severe end of the problem is no longer done by a single person; it is done by a team. Amendments 140 and 141 promote good practice and promote the involvement of a second tier of individuals, so that a collective decision can be reached. I believe that those amendments meet the concerns that were expressed by witnesses to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and the Health and Community Care Committee. I commend amendments 140 and 141 to Parliament, and suggest that amendments 138 and 139 be rejected.

Apart from its inconsistency with part 3, to which the minister has already drawn attention, the amendment is impractical. Psychiatrists are already under considerable pressure; if they were required to be in attendance  every time incapacity had to be certified, that would make life extremely difficult. Under the terms of clinical governance, which cover all general practitioners, GPs will need to feel comfortable issuing a certificate. If they felt that their knowledge was insufficient, which is what Mr Gallie is in part suggesting, they would pass the matter to a colleague with greater experience. The amendment would make the situation impractical, so I hope that Mr Gallie will withdraw it.

I will speak  against Phil Gallie's amendment and in support of the Executive in two respects. I firmly believe that two changes in the definition of mental disorder in a short space of time would lead to severe difficulties. In addition, the Millan committee will give us an opportunity to revisit this section and to make appropriate amendments if practice bears out what Phil Gallie is suggesting. The other important point is that Justice and Home Affairs Committee members and Health and Community Care Committee members will know that I tried hard to insert an amendment in the bill in respect of advocacy, which I regard as important. In fact, advocacy is not prevented by the bill and is still contained in section 1(4)(a) and section 1(6), but Phil Gallie's amendment would remove the part of section 1(6) that deals with making good the deficiency  "by human or mechanical aid". That would add confusion to the situation, and the one thing that we do not want is any confusion. I support the Executive's position.

At which prices? Today's? Tomorrow's?

Will the minister comment on how Clackmannanshire Council's Scottish National party administration set its budget? In particular, will he comment on its initial proposals to increase corporate services by 21 per cent—more than £1 million of new expenditure—to be funded by a nursery school closure, other school closures or mergers, community hall closures and by reneging on the previous Labour commitment to fund the excellent Barnardos Freagarrach project for young offenders, which is to be adopted by three other local authorities?

Presiding Officer, I hope that you will consider setting a precedent, whereby those who have acted as reporters to committees have a little latitude when speaking. I will not stretch your patience too far. I welcome this first ever opportunity to debate the work of the Health and Community Care Committee. It has been said that if this Parliament is to be different from Westminster, that difference will lie in its committee structure and in the relationship among committees, the Parliament and the Scottish Executive. The central issue in the two reports that are under discussion is accountability. The bedrock of this Parliament's attempt to improve the public's  view of the body politic will begin here today. It will be determined by the response of the Executive, part of which we have heard and which is welcome, and of the Scottish establishment to the clear calls for the involvement of civic Scotland in shaping the future of all aspects of our society. The common theme of the Stracathro and Stobhill petitions was a cry for consultation. In both cases, attempts by trusts and health boards to restrict the flow of information in order to reach difficult decisions failed, with disastrous consequences. In preparing the Stobhill report, I divided the process of formal consultation into three elements: informing, engagement and consultation. Those will not always occur in sequence, nor will they involve all interested parties at the same time or in the same way, but the whole process must be driven by a commitment to openness and accountability, which is a central aspiration of this Parliament and all of its members. In deciding its strategy for mentally ill offenders in the west of Scotland, Greater Glasgow Health Board built on a national report and on Scottish guidelines. While drafting its strategy, it involved, engaged and consulted widely with professional staff and their representative organisations, users and patient representatives, and with a large number of partner organisations and individuals. As far as the strategy was concerned, as the report indicated, it was in many ways an example of good practice, but the board and the trusts recognised at that time that the siting of the medium secure unit would be contentious. What followed was a studied and secretive determination to manage and restrict the flow of information relating to the siting of the medium secure unit, instead of the provision of clear and published plans to inform, engage and consult. The boards thereby forfeited the opportunity to engage with community leaders and with the acute hospital staff leaders to convince them that the best options had been considered and that the conclusions were the right ones, however difficult it would have been to sell the decisions subsequently to the immediate community. The attempt to manage and prevent the premature leaking of information was ill advised in the Stracathro and Stobhill cases. The results predictably poisoned relationships with the staff and communities. Many more difficult decisions lie ahead for those boards and trusts but, sadly, those decisions will now have to be taken in an atmosphere of mistrust. Both reports point strongly to a democratic deficit in the composition of trusts and health boards. That deficit impedes the valuable efforts of board members who are appointed to serve our  communities. The evident commitment of both ministers to broadening representation is a welcome first step, but we may need to go further. The imminent announcement of the findings of the acute services reviews across Scotland will test the accountability of our current structures to the limit. If the boards publish only decisions, and are seen as being dragged unwillingly into a process of consultation, the damage to the body politic will be immense. If we are to emerge from those important reviews with radically modernised health services, as is necessary, which meet the expectations of our communities, boards must publish options rather than decisions. They must put forward detailed plans on the process of informing, engaging and consulting the communities they serve. Make no mistake: those two petitions and the committee reports that arise from them are no dry academic exercises. They are nothing less than an alarm call to all quangos and to the Scottish Executive. Modernise the process through which our institutions interact with civic Scotland and both society and the institutions will be enriched; fall short of the standards of openness and accountability that we set for ourselves in this Parliament and we will risk the increasing isolation of these institutions and public disenchantment with the political process. I commend the motion and these reports to Parliament.

No, I have not.

I had not intended to intervene in the debate. I welcome the work of the Standards Committee; having been a temporary recruit of that committee, I know how hard its members work. Apart from the concern over the definition of a member of staff—which is crucial—there are other issues that I would like to raise. Before doing so, I would like to refer to paragraph 2.2 of the report, which repeatedly uses the phrase: "as a member of staff". The definition of a member of staff will be central to the way in which the document is treated. I echo the point that Mike Russell made about temporary employment. What constitutes temporary employment? Does it, for example, involve working full time for 10 days, or part time, or an hour a day? We need to have clear definitions, so that we know what we are talking about. I accept that the spirit of the report is to be open and transparent; perhaps we therefore need to be over-inclusive rather than under-inclusive. However, that has consequences for individuals who volunteer to fill in on a short-term basis. I would like to ask about the third-party provision. There are circumstances in which many of us have discussions with organisations such as voluntary organisations, unions and others, when offers are made to investigate a particular area, to provide specialist information, to provide us with papers, or to search the web for literature reviews—as I had done the other day for me by an organisation. Such organisations employ staff to undertake that work, so I am asking a third party to do that work for me. However, I do not know who is doing it or the way in which it is being done. I do not know whether it is being done by an individual or by a team. Perhaps Mr Rumbles could address  that point.

The report also refers to provision of services "whether paid or unpaid." Those two elements taken together—

That is another issue which I was going to raise. I was not referring to paid advocacy. If we include family members who are staff in the register, what do we define as family? I do not want to get into that today—it would be wonderful to have one day on which we do not try to define what constitutes a family. Do we include family members who are unpaid members of staff? My family has been supportive and helpful and has made many suggestions—not always favourable—about what I should do or say. How wide do we make the definition when work is being done on an unpaid or voluntary basis? Do we include wives, parents and children? Who do we include? We must have a clearer definition. Those of us who are fortunate enough to have significant extended families might overwhelm the register. I welcome the report and the fact that the Standards Committee is—as it has proved in the past—a listening committee, but we must examine definitions more closely.

I have read the document with some interest, but nowhere in it can I find a definition of members' staff. Mr Rumbles has mentioned them throughout his speech. Without a definition of members' staff, anyone associated with an MSP in their office—any volunteer—is included in this draft. More than 50 activists work in my community for me, in various guises—I am very lucky. Will I have to register all those people and classify them as members of staff? They certainly would not want to be classified as members of my staff; nevertheless they are associated with me. That point is not clear in the document.

Mr Rumbles referred to "paid" and "unpaid". That does not only mean employed. I have no problem with the register in relation to people I employ; the Standards Committee is right on that, but unpaid members of staff—

Fergus Ewing would tax people again.

Someone commented that there was a doctor in the house and that I should make a diagnosis about Murray Tosh. Although Murray spoke with considerable passion, I would diagnose exasperation with the SNP, which consistently fails to come up with policies that have any credibility. No MSP would disagree that the water industry needs investment. The disagreement is about how such investment should be financed. We think that the cost should be spread among, first, the private finance initiative, which the nationalists would completely abandon; secondly, the external financing limit, which we have increased; and, thirdly, water charges. If PFI is abandoned and the EFL is not increased, how will that investment be financed? It will be financed by another of the SNP's magical bonds that do not work within the public sector borrowing requirement. That is just not on.

There was a failure to recognise that any bond issue would still count within the financing limits, which is the problem. I am not saying that we do not need to examine the matter carefully; I am saying that we must address it in a careful and considered way that does not try to score political points. We should accept certain basic premises on which most MSPs agree. We agree that the Scottish people are absolutely clear that they do not want the Scottish water industry privatised. We also agree that we must position our water industry to make it modern, highly competitive and able to attract the appropriate investment. I am concerned that the English water companies have had six more years of significant investment than our companies have had, which has allowed them to modernise in a way that makes them more competitive than our water  industry. Although some measures that have been introduced in the past two or three years represent a significant advance, we must address that issue. In England, the French have taken over a substantial proportion of the water industry, and other significant external investors are involved. We need to examine how to position our water industry so that it remains competitive and its base is not narrowed. Perhaps we should investigate new ways of funding that ensure that charges do not increase any more. Scottish charges are still less than English charges. If we examine how much less our charges have been than English charges since the water industry was privatised, we will find that we have been protected in Scotland from increased charges for many years. The necessity for investment means that our charges are catching up with those in England, which is an uncomfortable process. The minister has appropriately undertaken to examine the most vulnerable group in our society. In his thoughtful speech, Tavish Scott suggested how to make savings in an area that will be retained in the public sector. Many of us will begin to listen to the SNP when it comes up with some credible alternatives that do not rely on a rapid rise in the oil price from $10 to $30 or make demands on Westminster when the party wants to separate itself completely from the UK Government. Its motion is totally unacceptable and should be rejected in favour of the Executive's amendment.

Answer the question.

rose—

I would still like to hear an answer to Mr Tosh's question. How, from within the block grant, does Mr Lochhead propose to finance the debt that he would write off? I estimate the debt to be around £1 billion, which would mean that one sixteenth of our entire block grant would be used to write off that debt next year. Is that really what Mr Lochhead proposes, on top of the £2.5 million that he has spent already?

Will the minister make public the progress that has been made in developing the mental health framework for Scotland, and will he indicate the Executive's targets?

rose—

Will Mr Wilson give way?

rose—

Absolute rubbish.

From the Tories that is wonderful.

Is Andrew Welsh aware that the total amount of new burdens is £23 million? Last year, there was millennium funding of £10 million, which leaves £13 million, which is included in the settlement total. He might argue about hypothecation and ring-fencing, but he must say what he would change or remove in local government. Is he saying that there should be no changes at all?

I understand what Mr Gorrie says about the divisions in his party, but does he appreciate that a vote against the motion will result in problems for councils, which must set their council tax levels next week? If the motion falls, they will not be able to do that. They will either have to leave it—which would be illegal—or set the tax before knowing what their allowances will be. If they must do the latter, they will have to borrow money—which will be extremely expensive—because no funds will be directed at them if Parliament does not agree to the motion. That will, in turn, result in jobs being lost. If I am able to speak later, I will address the concerns of the three councils in my constituency. Does Mr Gorrie accept that the concerns of individual councils must be set against the whole situation?

Will Mr Gibson give way?

It is about water charges.

I welcome the statement, as what is now proposed embodies two principles: the absence of discrimination, which was present in section 2A—although the Conservatives will not recognise that—and child-centredness. The latter must be at the heart of the Government's policies, to ensure that children are not exposed to material that may be appropriate to adults, but not to them. That was the fear that many people expressed to me. Does the First Minister agree that the new section will not only emphasise good care of children and good practice within the education sector, but support that practice in social work, youth work and every other area of a local authority's involvement with children? That means that the new section goes beyond the old section 2A. Does he also agree that the material circulated to MSPs by the Souter campaign—it was health promotion material designed to prevent the spread of HIV in adult homosexuals—would, if shown to children, constitute as much of an abuse of the child as showing that young child explicit heterosexual material?

I, too, congratulate Bristow Muldoon on raising this issue, not just because of what is happening at St John's, but because of the wider national implications. There is much ill feeling in many parts of England about the substantial charges that are made on a completely indiscriminate basis. It seems that we are now faced with a major problem that will only get worse. As the acute services review progresses and there are major changes to modernise the service—changes that are entirely appropriate and  must be driven through—there will be substantial increases in ambulatory care, which will lead in turn to greater congestion in hospitals such as St John's. The effect on staff of that congestion is extremely deleterious, as they are often unable to find car park spaces. Mary Mulligan mentioned community staff. Having been a member of a community staff group, I want to emphasise that aspect of the problem. At our hospital, we managed to oppose the introduction of charges. I visited the hospital on a regular basis, but not as regularly as the midwives did, and I know that it is a major problem. I ask the minister to consider establishing a committee to examine the transport strategy for Scottish hospitals. As I said, it will become a wider problem. Are there opportunities for staff to car-share and is it encouraged? Is any management effort put into supporting staff who are coming in for difficult shifts at night, when their safety and security are important? Any piecemeal solution, as often occurs, would be inappropriate. Mary Mulligan mentioned volunteer drivers. The British Red Cross Society provides an excellent transportation service, demand for which can only increase. Since we have centralised paediatric cardiac surgery at Yorkhill in Glasgow, people have to travel there regularly. It seems unfair, and goes against my basic principles as a socialist, that we should be charging the people whose need is greatest, who go to the hospital most frequently with children or other relatives who are seriously ill. Those people suffer the most because of their illness. We must find a sensitive system that discriminates appropriately in relation to staff and to those who are using the service, so that we can manage things more effectively. I do not deny that we have a problem or that we have no effective solutions, but I do not believe that a simple policy of introducing charging without adequate consultation is an appropriate way to progress.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether, in the light of the £90 million new funding announced by the Secretary of State for Health for the primary care  group in England to meet increased generic drug costs, it will urgently reconsider funding the additional generic costs being borne by Scottish local health care co-operatives. (S1O-1137)

Does the minister realise that growing anger is felt by the GPs who responded to advice from the NHS in Scotland Management Executive, NHS trusts and the Accounts Commission to increase their generic prescribing? Is she aware that LHCCs in Tayside have had their budgets hammered by more than £2 million and in Forth valley by more than £1 million? Is she also aware that GPs who dragged their heels by not increasing their generic prescribing are being perversely rewarded twice over by avoiding much of the increased cost and benefiting from the reduction in brand drug costs that the UK Government has negotiated? Will Susan Deacon undertake to review all the economic effects, including the impact on LHCC development, of the changes in drugs budgets and to report back to this Parliament?

Will Alex Neil give way?

Does Mr Chisholm agree that as we make the process more transparent and change the way in which the budget is written, we will also engage the public in relation to the committees, which will be equally important?

rose  —

On Mr Wilson's calculation of a 0.5 per cent squeeze, which I do not fully accept because it assumes things will stay the same every year, does he agree that it would then take 36 years for us to reach the average expenditure of the United Kingdom? Does he accept that the amount of increase in the total sum of money we receive will put our health spending above the average for Europe within five or six years?

Are the organisations and the minister satisfied with the progress that is being made on the mental health framework that was published by her predecessor in the Scottish Office, Sam Galbraith?

Will the minister give way?

Can the minister take on board the question about the European convention on human rights? Having signed up to it separately in Scotland, we may be faced with court action if we do something inappropriate, irrespective of the fact that this is a reserved matter. It is an issue that has yet to be addressed.

On a point of order.

I am having trouble with the voting button.

No.

Out of the 4,000 quango appointees, how many are disabled persons? What targets were set for disabled appointees? Will the minister consider sponsoring further pre-application training, particularly for under-represented groups? There is a wealth of talent out there, but people do not have the same self-confidence to come forward as middle-aged, white males—as Johann Lamont has just reminded me. [Laughter.]  Will the question of the accountability of quangos, which arises in many committees and which may not be part of the consultation exercise, be considered separately? If so, when?

I welcome, in general, the package that has been put together and recognise that some transition arrangements—the fine detail—still have to be made. Frankly, if the opposition parties are reduced to attacking that fine detail, they should at least acknowledge as valid and important the changes that the Executive has made. I have raised already the issue of poorer students who study in England. I welcome the fact that the minister will consider that issue. David Mundell raised important elements, which must be  considered. If we can find a way to help those students, we should do so.

I will not give way yet—I want to get into my stride. Margo MacDonald said that independence would help. Independence would add further to the SNP's problems of finance. It would have to fund all the English students who study in Scotland, as fees would also be abolished for those students. I cannot see how independence would help our budget to any great extent. I wish to pick up on the myth of free education, which has been peddled during the debate. What about the further education students who have had to pay fees for years? It is nonsense to talk about free education.

I wish to address serious issues that lie beyond the present agreement. In my submission to Cubie, I raised concerns about students on longer courses. While I welcome the £2,000 for poorer families, I remain concerned about the fact that very few people from poorer backgrounds get on the longer courses, such as medicine, dentistry and veterinary science. I hope that, as we develop our economy and generate more money, we are able to consider increasing access for those people. I will take an intervention from Andrew Wilson now.

I cannot give Andrew Wilson an honest answer to that question, as I am not a lawyer. This is a complicated situation and, undoubtedly, his question raises just the sort of issue that must be addressed. Ian Jenkins and, I am sure, other members, would welcome a positive input from the opposition parties on how we can manage the situation in the best possible way. I welcome in this package the exemption of disabled students from the graduate endowment, which is very much in line with new Labour's philosophy of focusing resources to the best advantage of those who are disadvantaged. I also welcome in the framework document that has  been produced, Sam Galbraith's commitment to examine child care. In my evidence to Cubie, I pointed out that only eight establishments currently provide free child care and that at 23 there is no provision. In the interests of greater access, we need uniformity in that area. A number of the Cubie committee's recommendations relate to reserved matters. In my evidence to the committee, I indicated my concern about prescription charges for students. The problem is that student loans are treated as income when assessing benefits, irrespective of whether students take out loans. We need to address that, as some students are unable to afford prescription charges. The £2,000 access charges will help the poorest students in that regard. In this speech, I have chosen to look forward and to raise issues that are of continuing concern, and I call on the Opposition to join me in that. I am concerned about the fact that the SNP is talking about £100 million plus—throwing the money around willy-nilly, rather than focusing it on groups that need it. The SNP needs to tell us precisely which problems it would address, or whether it simply intends to continue spraying money around. Mr McLetchie responded to my intervention by saying that university funding had been increased. I do not doubt that, but the per capita expenditure was so reduced and the universities' position so disabled that the Dearing committee had to be set up, which led to the introduction of tuition fees. We must remember that tuition fees were introduced in a way that was designed to protect the poorest families and the poorest students. The intention was to provide universities and colleges with an income stream. I welcome, therefore, the Executive's absolute commitment to maintain the £42 million that is being invested in the higher and further education sector, because we must preserve its competitiveness. I hope that, as the economy grows, we will address some of the discrepancies in funding certain groups of teachers in the higher and further education sector. I welcome this package. We need to address some of the issues that are left outstanding, in both reserved and general matters. However, I call on the Opposition to work positively with us, instead of carping or calling for us to spend vast amounts in a totally profligate manner.

Is David McLetchie equally proud of the fact that the efficiency savings that the Conservative Government imposed on higher education reduced it to a parlous state? This Government has begun to restore it.

Tell us what the figures are.

On a point of order. Is it in order for someone who is a member of the bureau on whose behalf Mr McCabe is moving this motion to speak against something that he has already agreed to? Another member of his party might speak on the matter but he should not.

Will the member give way?

No one in the chamber would deny the right of the member to scrutinise the  budget. However, the SNP has failed to explain how, in an independent Scotland, it would deal with the Barnett formula difference, which, I estimate, would need an 8p or 10p rise in income tax. Which of its promises—which the BBC calculated would cost £2.5 billion—would the SNP choose not to keep? Keith Raffan might not have been totally right, but we are talking about a 20p increase in income tax being needed to pay for SNP promises. In scrutinising the budget, the SNP has a responsibility to say where it would raise money.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

rose—

David Davidson and Andrew Wilson have come out with long litanies of additional spending. Will either of them give any indication, in a carefully costed budget, of how they propose to raise the money to pay for their profligate plans?

Will the minister tell us whether Scottish students studying  in England whose family incomes would make them eligible for the new access bursaries, were they to study in Scotland, will still be eligible for such support?

I certainly will keep my comments brief, particularly because, coming from close to the central belt, I feel a bit of an interloper. I support the concept of dispersal which lies behind Jamie Stone's motion. Although my constituency might be 31 st in the overall list of unemployment, the heart of the area, Clackmannanshire, has suffered massive deterioration of its industrial base, with huge numbers of job losses. Recently, 70 jobs have been lost at Weir Pumps foundry, and 21 more at R G Abercrombie and Co. The announcement of another 50 job losses today at United Glass in Alloa, in part, has motivated me to speak tonight. The concept of dispersal of jobs should be applied across Scotland and should be underpinned by the possibilities presented by IT, which Nora Radcliffe mentioned, with the ability to work at home and away from Edinburgh. As part of our modern society and structure of government, we should be creating an absolutely in-built concept that something should not be in Edinburgh unless it is absolutely necessary for it to be there. We should be using IT, audio-conferencing and videoconferencing to ensure such dispersal. I have suffered in this respect myself. I used to have a five-minute walk to work; now I have to commute for three and a bit hours a day, which I hate. That is terribly destructive to family life and I do not know how some MSPs with young children cope with the situation. Many people are forced to work in Edinburgh, which is about to have a massive jobs bonanza. I appeal to the Executive to follow through on its commitments to ensure that we reduce substantially and soon the 6,000 or so civil servants, to whom Fergus Ewing referred, who work in Edinburgh.

What measures are being taken to encourage health boards to advertise the fact that voluntary breast screening is available to women over the age of 65? Does the minister agree that the uptake of such screening is growing in some areas, which has put some pressure on the service?

The first thing that we should acknowledge is that we are not winning the battle against drugs. There is no doubt about that. The minister has acknowledged that this is a major problem facing our society. It is not limited to the major cities—that notion needs to be put aside right away. Communities such as mine in Clackmannanshire are blighted by drugs. I was speaking to Professor Hannay, who used to be a professor of general practice down in Wigtown; he said that he despairs of the youth in that area, where the number involved in drugs increases daily. Between 1998 and 1999 the number of charges for possession rose by 63 per cent, and the number of charges for supply rose by 13 per cent. Partly, that reflects the efficacy of the excellent police force in my area, but it also reflects the growth of the problem. The minister's acceptance of the size of the problem and the establishment of the cross-cutting ministerial committee are welcome and important. The need for research and the constant evaluation of outcomes is vital. For example, £600,000 will be spent on new schemes on diversion, and there is money from the new futures funds for similar things. If the proposal in the SNP's amendment  had been in addition to Executive's motion, I would have voted for it. Lyndsay McIntosh referred to the number of deaths caused by the methadone programme. However, the savings in terms of the costs of crime are enormous. The movement of people who are addicts to programmes that begin to address their chaotic lifestyles and reduce the harm that they do is very important. We must not damage those programmes.

I agree that the methadone programme should be a reduction programme. However, I had patients who had been on methadone—admittedly, on small doses of 5 ml or 10 ml—since the previous major heroin outbreak in the late 1960s, but who functioned normally. Total withdrawal is not necessarily the answer. We do not support community pharmacists nearly enough. Would members, for 40p a day, supervise methadone addicts in their shop, in the presence of other customers? Addicts are very difficult and irritable people. The provision of adequate support must be made a priority. We need to expand the role of pharmacists and give them financial and other support.

I entirely agree. Again, such schemes need to be properly funded. I will give some figures on crime, which I mentioned in response to a question that David McLetchie asked Jim Wallace in a previous debate. In my area, 12 young men, aged between 17 and 25, who are addicts committed a total of 166 crimes—a significant proportion of crime in my area. The property that they stole was worth £78,000, but the recovery value was £18,000. They created additional property damage of £14,000. The police and support cost of dealing with those crimes was £348,000 and the cost of imprisonment of those young men was £100,000. Have we got the balance right? Should we be doing this? I believe that the Executive's  programmes on diversion, which it is carefully evaluating, are important. If Kate MacLean catches your eye, Presiding Officer, she will address the difficulty that courts have in securing adequate diversion schemes. We must promote such schemes. We must break down the cycle of recidivism. The problem, to which Lyndsay McIntosh referred, is that if young men or women go to prison for only a week or 10 days, prisons cannot begin to treat them, so they return, half treated, into the community. The Scottish Prison Service is producing a new strategy on drugs. I hope that that strategy will recognise the priority that must be given to the issue of drugs. I have concerns about the Prison Service's adequacy in dealing with this problem. It must consult outside agencies and its draft strategy should be available for wide consultation. Today, I lodged a motion—in case the SNP's amendment was not accepted—that follows my proposal earlier in the session for a standing cross-cutting committee consisting of members from the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, the Health and Community Care Committee, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee. This Parliament must send a message that this issue is a major priority; the establishment of a cross-cutting committee would do that.

rose—

rose—

Will Mr Raffan give way?

I thank Mr Raffan. The English scheme to which he referred is very important. The English prison system developed from being behind our system to the point where it is ahead of our system. Does he agree that it is important not only that the English Prison Service has focused on that issue as a priority, but that there has been an insistence on schemes being developed with agencies in the prisons' local communities? The schemes must involve a comprehensive through-care system, which the English are developing, whereas we are not.

rose—

rose—

rose—

I welcome the statement, but I would like Mr Wallace to consider a number of things before legislation is introduced. Financial support for couple counselling is extremely varied throughout Scotland and the prevention of breakdown of marriages is of considerable importance. Will he talk to the Minister for Health and Community Care  about focusing primary care counselling on relationship support and about ensuring that primary care counsellors are adequately trained to provide that support? Will he also examine family mediation services, some of which—particularly in central Scotland—are having considerable financial difficulties?

Will the minister agree to examine the uptake of residential rehabilitation schemes? It is a matter of considerable concern that expensive schemes funded in Scotland are not being utilised.

I have had personal experience of the situation in Cornton Vale prison, as I was a deputy medical officer there from the time when it opened in 1976 until quite recently. Indeed, my practice resigned from providing general medical services on a regular basis one week before the first suicide. That suicide followed a period of seven or eight years in which the whole character of the prison changed. In 1987, 10 women with drug problems were admitted to the prison. By 1994, the number had risen to 600, although the number of annual admissions, at around 2,000, had not substantially changed. The degree of recidivism—repeated minor offences—among that population is very substantial. Prisoners are admitted for very short sentences, often for failing to pay fines, which may have remained unpaid for a long time. It is possible for the professionals and officers in the prison to establish a reasonable treatment programme for those who are serving longer sentences. However, there is a problem even with those longer-term prisoners in that their discharge is not always well supported. It would be helpful to have some way of releasing prisoners on licence into a more caring environment. Sylvia Jackson has made a strong point about people going into custody. It is totally abhorrent that we still admit so many women and that we split up so many families, which causes so much devastation to the next generation. This chamber should do something about the situation. I state my intention to make it my business, along with Keith Raffan and the others on the all-party group, to ensure that measures are introduced to divert people from prison. During the visit the other day of the all-party group to Brenda House, which is the unit run by the Aberlour Child Care Trust in Edinburgh, I was appalled to find that only two of the six places there were occupied because funds were not being made available. Members of all parties were shocked to find that the very limited resources that we have in the community are not being fully utilised. There are 112 agencies dealing with drug problems in the community. I believe that it will take all of the minister's energy to co-ordinate those agencies with the Scottish Prison Service to ensure that we bring about a substantial change early in the new millennium.

Will the member give way?

One mistaken belief about Arbuthnott needs to be clarified. It means changes in increase in expenditure; no area will lose money. To hear Lothian officials talking about slashing their learning disabilities expenditure and moving people back into hospital is utterly disgraceful and is an unbelievable misperception of what will happen. Those officials should be severely reprimanded.

I was disappointed by the speeches of Kay Ullrich and Mary Scanlon. They are much more positive in the Health and Community Care Committee than they are in the chamber. Perhaps the chamber brings out the worst in people. Certainly, the amendments—

Not at the moment. I would rather get into my stride and then Mr Monteith can trip me up, or attempt to.

The amendments that have been lodged—Kay did not fully speak to hers—are nonsense. Instead of raising health issues, or proposing changes, Kay's amendment talks about the relationship to spending in England. The Conservatives' amendment talks about bureaucracy. As Robert Brown said, that is not worth responding to, after what the Conservatives did to the health service.

Not at the moment. The SNP amendment seeks to delete the parts of the motion on public accountability, involvement and partnership. Does that mean that the SNP does not believe in them? If it does, why delete those parts of the motion? What is the SNP replacing those elements with? A better vision for health? No. A radical new policy? No. A hint of new thinking? No. It replaces that part of the motion with a long whinge about the difficult issues that are being tackled by the Executive. If members think that we have got problems, think for a minute about the problems in the rest of the United Kingdom, because we get £250 per head more for every man, woman and child in Scotland than the average in the United Kingdom.

Not at the moment, I will take an intervention later.  Not only that, but we are continuing to spend more. We spend considerably more than the SNP or the Tories indicated in their plans. Yesterday, Andrew Wilson raised the question of what would happen to the Barnett formula. I will try to answer that point. If we can improve the health of the people of Scotland, the justified excess and advantage in funding that we now have should be redistributed in terms of health inequalities elsewhere in the United Kingdom. We are a partnership within the United Kingdom.

Absolutely not. At the present time, we need that spending, because we have some of the worst health records and as long as that pertains we will be able to justify that from the UK exchequer in the block grant.

I do not accept Mr Hamilton's figures.

I do not accept those figures. The increase in expenditure is considerably more than that. Over the next three years, the planned increase is in the region of 12 per cent cumulatively. I do not accept Mr Hamilton's figures. Let us look at the issues that the SNP are deleting from our motion, for example "public accountability". I accept that public accountability is nothing like as good as it should be but at least this Administration is attempting to make some changes. When I was practising medicine, the public were not genuinely involved in the proceedings on a pre-consultative basis. They were told of the decisions that were to be issued and asked, "What do you think of that?" The situation now is that, with difficulty, trusts and boards are making genuine attempts to involve the public. Like Roseanna Cunningham, I attended the meeting in Perth when 1,200 people attended a consultation on the acute services review when Tayside Health Board had not reached decisions. If that is not involving the public, I do not know what is. I have to say that her inflammatory intervention at that meeting was self-serving,  irresponsible and made improvements in the service for her constituents less likely rather than more likely.

They also agreed with my intervention, which was far more measured and talked about the need for redesign. Is the SNP really telling us that it wants to stick to the current health service, with no changes, even if that means poor clinical services? The SNP is encouraging the public to be enthralled to bricks and mortar rather than considering the redesign of services.

As I have taken some interventions, can I make some final points?

I have a vision of patients in partnership with professionals, in a service delivered for the most part as close to their home or community as possible. We should consider models of care such as that developed in Nairn. We should develop care that makes rare the need to go to the acute centre; care with first-class transport, where it is needed, to link patients speedily to those centres when it is needed. Patients should spend in those centres the minimum of time that is required for good, safe care. Patients should receive care before and after in the local community hospital or local resource centre or, as has been published in the British Medical Journal this week, their hospital at home.

Patients should be empowered by good quality information and advocacy. Accountability, public involvement and partnership in a modern service are what we should all be promoting in this Parliament—not the whingeing nonsense from the Opposition.

To ask the Scottish Executive what external consultation has taken place or will take place before the conclusion and publication of "Partnership and Co-ordination—the Scottish Prison Service Action on Drugs", the revised guidance on the management of drug misuse by Scotland's prisoners. (S1O-838)

Does the minister accept the view that while there has been an overall reduction in positive drug test results in the Prison Service associated with the mandatory drug testing programme, this has been due for the most part to a switch in use from cannabis to heroin? Will he undertake to conduct an independent review of the mandatory drug testing programme in Scottish prisons and examine the restrictive effect that the use of funds on this mandatory expenditure has had on the development of testing in relation to voluntary drug-free zones in prisons?

At the risk of incurring your wrath, Presiding Officer, I want to inform you that that was not the point of order. The point of order was connected to the fact that Mr Russell referred to items in the report in laying the motion without notice before the Parliament. That is a relevant point of order.

Will Mr Swinney agree with me that the real increase over the four-year period is 12 per cent, and that the big increase—from £4.6 billion to £4.9 billion—came in the current year? Will he also agree that the increase in the first three years of the Labour Administration, nationally and in Scotland, was £700 million, which is a substantial increase that fulfils, at least in part, our commitment?

When did the Conservative Government ever publish level 2 funding for Scotland with any explanation at any point in its 18 years in power? How does that match up to transparency?

rose—

rose—

rose—

Will the member give way?

I was hoping to comment on efficiency savings. In fact, the health service is required to make such savings every year. That requirement has been there since the Conservatives introduced it in 1986, as part of a process of re-engineering. I am not sure why Nick Johnston made that comment, and I am also appalled by his awful comment on food and drink.

rose—

Andrew Wilson has been very eloquent in saying how much extra spending the SNP would provide, but he has said absolutely nothing about how he would raise that money. Would the level of VAT go up, or would the level of income tax go up? How would the SNP raise the millions and billions of pounds that it promises every week?

Will the Minister for Finance give a rough estimate of the additional expenditure that would be involved in implementing the promises already made by the SNP, over and above the fact that the Scottish block budget is 18 per cent higher than the average budget for English regions?

The bill is to be welcomed—that is clear—but there are some problems with it. I am not sure whether the bill will last as long as the Curators Act 1585, which is the first act to be repealed by the new bill. The change in the bill's title to "adults with incapacity"—from the original proposal of "incapable adults"—recognises that incapacity is not an absolute, for the individual with a learning disability, or for the individual with Alzheimer's. Incapacity may be temporary or permanent, it may be worsening, or it may vary according to the area in which the decisions are to be made. Much attention has been paid to the most severe situations, but the thresholds of incapacity are important and I am not convinced that the bill covers them adequately. The rules on consent for treatment in relation to children, which have always been rather person-oriented in Scotland, have recently changed to allow consent to be given based on the ability to understand, without a specific age limit. It seems that the bill attempts to treat incapacity in a similar way, but that is not absolutely clear because of the  medical certification that has to be issued. Such certification has to deal in absolutes, rather than in thresholds. Evidence from various organisations has indicated that people with learning disabilities at the most severe end of the scale will undoubtedly require the full capacity of the bill, but those at the lesser end will not. We are slightly hide-bound by the timing of the Millan commission; if it had reported first, we might have had new definitions, which would have made things much easier. Will the minister, in summing up, advise what consideration was given to the inclusion in the bill of a concept of partial incapacity, assisted decision making, or advocacy? None of those terms appears in the bill, yet they are the new clinical issues at present. On the matters that have caused the greatest difficulty—certainly, the Health and Community Care Committee has had problems with them—I will limit my remarks to three areas. First, the decisions are currently made by a team rather than by individuals, and it would be helpful to find a way of recognising that in the bill. The second difficulty concerns the balance between the decision of the medical team and that of the proxy. I understand from the minister's speech that an amendment will be proposed on that, but—as the minister said—it is a matter of balance between the two decisions. It seems to me that the courts should be involved only in instances where disagreement is recognised between the two. There should be no primacy over who should go to court. I am not a lawyer. I do not know how that could be done. However, when it is recognised that decisions should be made jointly, if they are not and if there is a dispute, there should be an automatic reference to the courts, rather than one or other party having to go to court. There has been much discussion about duty of care. I accept the evidence of Professor Sheila McLean to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee that we cannot impose a duty of care on proxies. That would be inappropriate. Nevertheless, there is inadequate reference in section 73 to the limit of liability of proxies, and it would be helpful to extend that limit in some way without going as far as a duty of care. The issue of omissions as opposed to commissions of intervention has been dealt with. I understand that legally, interventions include intervening as well as not intervening. However, the issue of cessation of treatment has not been covered adequately. On the matter of research, if I understand the minister's statement, the bill will be amended to take into account the European Convention on  Human Rights and Biomedicine. I welcome that, because the original text of the bill seemed to rule out the use of randomised controlled trials with placebos, and also defined the benefit to the individual as having to be "real and direct", which was a strict definition that would rule out genetic research that might produce a distant benefit. The bill is to be welcomed. It will benefit a significant number of adults. However, the definitions in section 1, particularly those in relation to the wishes of the individual, are not sufficiently clear. I am not a lawyer, but if primacy is given to section 1(4)(a), which refers to "the present and past wishes and feelings of the adult so far as they can be ascertained", the written statements that I was presented with as a general practitioner, and which many of my GP colleagues increasingly are being presented with, will be of considerable importance. It might be possible to address that issue in notes of guidance, but further clarification is required at stage 2.

Does the minister agree that the process that we are setting up, whereby the Finance Committee will be able to scrutinise the general budget intentions and consult the subject committees, which will be expected to consult the public, means that we will have one of the most open systems in the western world?

I welcome the proposed amendments, which are skilfully drafted. Despite the concerns of Andrew Welsh and Nick Johnston, the threshold that has been adjudged is reasonable because, if the figures are too small, we run the risk of totally overwhelming our administration. Both the Audit Committee and the Finance Committee will have to keep that under review.

I wonder whether the minister will agree with me on two points. First, because of the inflexibility of this amendment, it may not include some items that we may want to include later. For example, subsection (1)(b) mentions changes only to expenditure allocations. If we wanted to change income allocations during the year, that would not be allowed. There is already that inflexibility. Secondly, it is always open to the Finance Committee to introduce this in legislation through the Finance Committee at a later date, if we feel that the terms that have been promised today are not being appropriately met.

Along with everyone else, I welcome the lifting of the ban. I congratulate the Executive on the way in which it has handled the issue, which has been entirely appropriate, following medical advice. What will the Scottish Executive, in partnership with the UK Government, do now to promote beef in the United Kingdom, as well as abroad?

I must begin by declaring that I still act as a medical adviser to foster carers in the former Central Region, now Falkirk, Stirling and Clackmannanshire. There is little doubt that much caring in families and among neighbours goes unacknowledged. The way families, neighbours and friends step in quietly and without any fuss when a crisis occurs never ceases to amaze me. We should all acknowledge that help. I remember one of my patients, a stroke victim, whose friend came in every morning before going to work to shave him and to have a chat with him. That was almost worth more than many of the therapeutic efforts that the team was undertaking. I also remember the families in my practice who, in the 1970s, volunteered to provide respite care at short notice for families with profoundly disabled children. That scheme is now incorporated within statutory provision, moving from a voluntary capacity to a statutory capacity, which is excellent. I welcome the Scottish Executive's strategy for  carers and wish to address three points that are raised in the document. First, the inclusion in the 2001 census of a question on carers will undoubtedly help us to understand the wealth of caring in society—and make us proud of it. I welcome the minister's statement that the new G-Pass GP data system can be employed in that respect—I think that it is flexible enough to do that. Secondly, I emphasise the need for patient consent to the provision of information to carers by the primary care team. Only after careful consideration should information be divulged without that consent. The one exception to that rule is when the medical information about the family of a looked-after child would be crucial to the care of that child. While current General Medical Council regulations prevent doctors from releasing that information to carers, I am discussing with interested parties the possibility of a bill to ensure that the rights of the child are paramount in this area. The need for information about the help that is available from the NHS is also important. I welcome the patients project, which is developing a strategy for effective communication. The extension of the NHS Helpline, to which the minister referred, should be linked closely to the development of the NHS Direct service and the proposals for NHS Direct must be linked to the continuing development of out-of-hours services. The services must be linked up to provide a comprehensive service to carers. Thirdly, the provision of aids and adaptations remains a vexed problem at the interface of health and social services, which must be streamlined with the rapid implementation of best practice, both for joint assessment and for joint provision. The care and repair provision also has problems: the different pots of money for different categories of housing must be combined to ensure one-stop provision. It is, quite frankly, obscene that money can remain in one agency's budget while an unmet demand remains with another agency in the same area. I can give the minister detailed examples from my constituency, if that would be helpful. We must also address the vital issues that face foster carers. The UK standards have been published. We must value and support our foster carers if we are to create the best parenting for looked-after children—previously known as children in care. Research from John Trisiliotis shows that too many foster carers are leaving the system. I believe that we must move rapidly to a salaried service. In the meantime, in keeping with the new proposals for pensions for carers in general, we  should apply immediately pension rights to the fees and expenses of foster carers. Ten per cent of foster carers who left the service did so because of a lack of respite—one returns repeatedly to this issue—and the minister has recognised that by providing new money, which is fundamental to the provision of respite care. Finally, we must recognise that family structures are changing. The homophobic regulation that prevents households with two adults of the same gender from offering foster care is, frankly, no longer appropriate and should be removed. We know that good outcomes for children's mental health depends on the quality of the relationship between the adults who care for them—irrespective of gender—and not on the structure of the household. I welcome the Executive's caring strategy as an excellent first step.

In opposing the Conservative motion on law and order, I should say that I spent about 29 years in part-time medical work, mainly in Cornton Vale prison. On the suicide risk management executive steering group, I had the privilege of visiting every prison in Scotland, so I have at least seen the service working, albeit not from the inside. In order to make some points, I would like to describe two of our institutions. Polmont young offenders institution admits some 4,000 young men every year. Of those, 46 per cent have previously been in local authority care—they have been what are now called looked-after children; 83 per cent have been through the children's hearing system; 93 per cent have used illicit drugs at some time and 52 per cent are still users; many have been abused; and many have been bullied or been bulliers. The chances of their benefiting from our current programme of incarceration is minimal. We are spending money unwisely; the diversion and prevention policies of the Executive are the ones that we must follow. Cornton Vale is an even sadder situation. Despite attempts to reduce the number of women on remand, the number has again risen. Repeated appeals from successive governors to divert non-violent offenders and—especially—remand prisoners away from prison appear to have fallen on deaf ears. As Cathy Jamieson said, we are sending young women to jail for non-payment of fines, which is an extremely expensive undertaking for little return. One of the worst cases I came across in my time at Cornton Vale was of a woman with eight children. She was sent there for non-payment of a £200 fine. The children had to be taken into care; the cost, in emotional terms, to those children was immeasurably damaging; the cost to society was thousands of pounds; and the benefit to any of us was absolutely minimal. At least 60 per cent of the resident population in Cornton Vale are drug users. Like Keith Raffan, I have the gravest concerns about our current drugs policy. The mandatory drug testing system introduced by Michael Forsyth has not been subjected to independent evaluation, is an expensive waste of money and is diverting funds from the voluntary drug-free zones, which are a much more important development in the Prison Service. I appeal to the minister to ensure that young women are diverted from custodial remand, as the Executive motion suggests. We should build on  the pilot in Plymouth to divert drug addicts from prison into rehabilitation and treatment. The Government has given £100,000 to the three authorities in the old Central region for such a pilot. That approach has been tested and is worth while, as long as the selection is appropriate. We need to build on such schemes, which reduce the prison population and underpin the reduction in prison officers. If we do not do that and pressure inside prisons is maintained, the suicide rate will increase and we will have real problems. As a result, I have real concerns about the reduction in the number of prison officers, not about the closure of prisons. We should have an independent review of mandatory drug testing and ensure that non-violent prisoners are not incarcerated, except as a last resort. Furthermore, we should develop through-care to support drug offenders before prison, through prison and after prison. That scheme is far too disjointed at the moment.

To assist Mr Wallace in dealing with Mr McLetchie, in Clackmannanshire, 17 youngsters committed 60 per cent of the drug-related crime—17 individuals who cannot be jailed repeatedly. Those 17 youngsters are in jail because they are repeat offenders. The crime levels have risen, but the number of people committing crimes has not. It is simple, Mr McLetchie.

Does Hugh Henry agree that the solutions that Irene Oldfather has proposed apply equally to mobile shops? We have to ensure that the withdrawal of a licence from a van also applies to the operating company.

Will Fergus Ewing acknowledge that 800,000 tickets for the millennium dome have been sold? The festival of Britain, in 1951, was one of the most profitable enterprises ever undertaken. He should wait to see whether the millennium dome also turns out to be highly profitable as a showcase of Britain.

I welcome the appointment of consultants on the Kincardine-Clackmannanshire bridge. Will the minister publish a timetable to indicate when the consultation process will be completed?

Like everybody else, I welcome the signing of the Scottish compact. I have some sympathy with the SNP's amendment, as I think that we need to address the problem of organisations that are not signed up. I would like to suggest that it is possible to sign them up in another way. Within the compact are opportunities for review and discussion. Towards the end, it talks about  establishing "a framework to monitor and evaluate its operations jointly with the sector". That should be taken to mean the whole sector, not just those represented in the initial compact. It is perfectly possible to involve those organisations; it does not require the setting up of another quango. Indeed, I was under the impression that the Scottish National party was against the establishment of quangos.

It would have to be funded somehow, so it would be a sort of quango, unless the member has specific proposals to the contrary.

Yes.

Funded by?

That was a rhetorical question. I believe that there is a significant role here for this Parliament, which is not specifically mentioned in the compact. The parliamentary system, through its committees and the chamber, is the protection that those other voluntary organisations will have. At this stage, there is no need for us to set up an independent body. However, it will be necessary for us to keep this compact under scrutiny by the committees and this chamber. I am sure that we will do that. There are one or two issues relating to the sector that I would like to mention. I was going to talk about primary care, but that has been dealt with very ably by my colleague Elaine Smith. I have some concerns about the short-term funding that still goes on, particularly in local authority-funded funding. The move towards three-year funding, which will benefit the sector, and which both the Executive and the UK Government have embarked on, is of great importance but must be reflected at all levels because the consequence of short-term funding is that paid administrators in voluntary organisations spend a lot of time trying to get new funding every year, which is not an effective use of their time. Short-term funding also means that many people in the sector are employed on short contracts. That has deleterious effects. The  principle of avoiding short-term contracts has been recognised. Sam Galbraith, when examining the health service last year, before this Parliament started, indicated that the NHS should largely abolish short-term contracts because of their deleterious effect not only on the people on such contracts, but on the organisations they work for. The new system of funding will, I hope, help in that respect. The Parliament and the Government have a role in scrutinising, benchmarking and encouraging local authorities in their compacts with voluntary organisations. I understand that they are being encouraged to set up similar compacts, which is excellent. There should be a much longer-term approach. I want to stress that, because it is more efficient. Parliament has a role that is not spelt out in this document, but it is implied. It is the role that the SNP amendment refers to. We should return to consider that amendment only if that role does not succeed and we have real difficulties.

Will the member give way?

A piece of joint research that follows on from that pilot has been presented recently by VDS and the Forth Valley GP research group. That is another good indication of how things can develop; it also shows the relatively low level of direct volunteering in primary care. Such  volunteering must be encouraged.

On a point of order. Is it in order for a member to give misinformation to the Parliament in reply to a question and deliberately to—

Oh. If it was really that, I withdraw.

Will the minister look into the current shortages in laboratory staff? The recruitment programme for laboratory assistants is now entirely restricted to graduates and the average starting salary is £7,000, which is extremely low and is leading to considerable problems in the laboratory system—problems that are likely to get worse. Will the minister also encourage our UK Government colleagues to examine the inclusion of laboratory technicians and workers in the second-level pay review body, which currently covers nurses and PAMs?

I want to address a couple of issues. First, I want to give some examples from my and Dr Jackson's constituencies. We had a telecommunication mast, a base mast, erected by the M9 motorway, near Lecropt church. Anyone who has driven up that motorway, towards the Keir roundabout, will remember this excrescence being placed in front of what was a listed building. Fortunately, the rules that were created said that if the mast caused problems with a listed building, it was possible to do something about it. The campaign resulted in the mast being removed. It is not always impossible, with local support, to run a successful campaign. More important than the removal of the mast was the consequence. In conjunction with Scottish Natural Heritage, the masts were replaced with synthetic pine trees at the Keir roundabout. I would invite members to look at that. They are a nice addition to the  arboreal scenery in the area. I cannot understand why, if it is possible to do that in rural areas, it has not been possible elsewhere. Driving down the motorway from the Keir roundabout towards where the Edinburgh and Glasgow motorways divide at Pirnhall, motorists will see a positive plethora of masts. Even at the time, the original guidance, formulated under the Conservative Administration, when the development of this technology was, quite rightly, encouraged, said that the masts should not be clustered in such a way and that companies should co-operate to make the masts joint or whatever. There is no evidence that that has happened. It seems to me that there should be an opportunity for local authorities to say, "We will have a mast, but the masts should be together in an area." That is the second example. The third example, which has been mentioned already, has been raised with me by a number of constituents. That is the Kinross issue. Nick Johnston, whom I congratulate on this motion, is one of my constituents. He may well complain to me about this mast which, I am glad to say, Bruce Crawford said is a disgrace. It represents the real problem, as the local authority had to interpret the planning consents in a particular way. That mast was a replacement mast and the way that the legislation is written means that an existing mast can apparently be replaced without any great planning consent or restrictions. This is not a 15 m mast. It is much taller than that and it looks appalling. All those aspects of the legislation must be addressed, and I hope that they will be. The other public concern is about health. We must divide the issue of mobile phones from that of base masts. The thermal radiation from mobile phones, which are held close to the head, is close to the skull and the brain. For children, I strongly advocate to parents that the precautionary principle should apply. We should not encourage children to use mobile phones. However much it is the cool thing to do, it may not be cool, it may be rather hot and may cause significant problems. On the base masts, we do not know exactly what the situation is because low-intensity radiation may have significant effects of which we are not aware. The NRPB, in defining the current regulations, has considered only one part of the safety regulations. It has dealt with that appropriately, but there are other areas that this new expert committee will address. I welcome the fact that, to my knowledge, 12—Sylvia says 16—authorities have adopted a principle whereby, for the moment, no more masts should be erected within 200 m of schools. That is a reasonable precaution until the results are produced. We must be cautious around schools, play areas and other areas where there are large numbers of children.  I welcome this debate and hope that the minister will respond to some of the points that have been raised.

I am sure that health professionals in Scotland are ready to play their part in this important and ambitious campaign, but what does the minister propose to do to promote caution in relation to meningitis B? Does she intend to work with the National Meningitis Trust, whose campaign has been so helpful in continuing to promote caution?

I will be very brief. Most of the points have already been made. I wanted to end on a good-news story. The west of Scotland breast screening service had come to my practice area, and one of the last  patients I treated in my practice was one of the people who was recalled. Dorothy is quite right: it is difficult for women to be recalled, not knowing what is then going to happen. However, the support that she received, and that other patients have received, from the west of Scotland team has been first-class medicine: better than anything offered in the private sector. That medicine allowed that woman to feel supported, through a process which indeed ended up with her having a mastectomy. However, that process gave her the opportunity to have counselling by the same nurse, who was in the counselling system on the screening side, and to go through with her to the hospital side, with Professor George's unit, and have her operation done. She had the time between the diagnosis and the procedure being undertaken to make a number of decisions about the type of treatment that she wanted and about the possibility of reconstructive medicine. She was able to consult that same nurse on a continuing basis. Nurses have an enormous role to play in the support of the management, diagnosis and treatment of cancer. I agree with Maureen Macmillan that doctors need to understand this: that patient was able to come back to me, consult me, get a second opinion and tease out the issues. That is the sort of support that every woman in Scotland should have. The commitment of the Scottish Executive to 48-hour screening—I do not want to steal all Susan Deacon's thunder—will perhaps be the most important thing that this Parliament will have done, if we achieve it before the end of this period.

I would like to offer a word of caution on the screening issue, which is not straightforward. Mass screening is not necessarily the answer for people over 65—that is why the parameters are set between 50 and 65. We all have a terrific desire to make improvements, but we should be a little cautious about extending screening in either direction  without the evidence that doing so would be worth while.

I particularly welcome the additional expenditure on the national health service. However, I do not recognise much of what the Opposition said about forward planning. It is true that we have had two years of prudent budgeting. We have inherited one of the strongest economies in Europe and one of the lowest unemployment rates in the western world. That is a sound basis on which to develop public services. It is crucial that we develop those services. Mr Jack McConnell's commitment not only to the introduction of the previously planned expenditure but to definite new expenditure is not—as Kay Ullrich claimed—smoke and mirrors. It is reality. Let us look at some of those realities. Getting the £50 million in the NHS trust capital spend back from the Treasury is of considerable importance; putting it into housing is a demonstration of the Executive's joined-up thinking. As the Opposition says, health is not just about health; it is about other issues. We are as committed to that as the Opposition is, but in a realistic, not fanciful, way. The Scottish Executive is already spending more than £200 more for every woman, man and child than is spent in England. It is almost obscene for us to ask for even more, when there are people in Birmingham, Manchester and other areas of England who are suffering deprivation that is just as great. The Barnett formula favours us enormously and the percentage increases that people play games with mean that we will receive—and will continue to receive—substantial increases.

What I dispute is Scotland being measured against the UK average. There are areas in England and Wales that are suffering just as much from poor morbidity as areas of Scotland. It is crucial that those areas—

In health terms, we are spending less, but it is because we have a health service that, because of its primary care system, is considerably more efficient than health services anywhere else. That efficiency is the next item to which I turn. I say to the Conservatives—whose number is depleted by greater events—that although the Conservative Government spent considerably more money on the health service over 18 years, it did not spend it wisely. The money was spent on administration; under the Conservatives, the percentage spent on administrative costs more than doubled. The Executive is trying to spend its money prudently; we have begun that process with reorganisation. I have two more points. First, the chamber has to get to grips with the issue of drugs. I recommended in the Health and Community Care Committee that there should be a separate subject committee on drugs. Drugs are one of the most destructive things in our communities; the Parliament must state that it regards the issue as a priority. I welcome particularly Jack McConnell's commitment to the drugs enforcement agency. He also indicated that there would be a review of expenditure on rehabilitation and education. We must examine how we spend that money and ensure that it is spent wisely. The drugs issue is fundamental to social inclusion, to health and to the criminal justice aspects of the Parliament's work. Secondly, I welcome the money that is being spent on the meningitis C vaccine. That is an indication that this Executive is prepared to take up important new developments and spend money appropriately. I welcome the minister's statement; it is just a start, but it is an excellent start. I am pleased that he has accepted the need for level 2 funding analysis, on which the Finance Committee is particularly keen. I am sure that members from all parties will welcome that, and that John Swinney will mention it when he sums up.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister elaborate on his position on the national health service trusts and the funds retained by the Treasury?

I will try to be brief.

I will cut out all the major welcoming bits that everybody else mentioned. One thing that I want to welcome is the new arrangements for health boards and trusts. That change, which will allow greater democratic scrutiny, is of considerable importance and I am pleased that it is occurring. I share Mr Raffan's concerns about access to the figures at one level below the global figures that were presented in the initial considerations. I hope that we will address that in the stage 2 consideration. That is vital if we are to appreciate the detail of what is going on and hold the Executive to account in the way that the new arrangements will allow. The combination of that and the early input of the subject committees to the budget process is vital. Beyond that, we must get the process correct, to allow input into the subject committees by experts and the public. I take the overall strategy one stage beyond what Mr Raffan was suggesting. The process provides what our colleagues in the Scottish National party seem to be calling for—that caught the attention of SNP members. It is now the most democratically accountable and scrutinised expenditure system—a model of democracy. We should deal with that and ensure that it works well, before we move on to other forms of examining income—or variations on income—that might emerge at some point. The process is not static. Within a Scotland that is not independent, it is perfectly possible for that process to move forward gradually. I hope that the general terms of the process that we are setting up today will be ones that we are proud of in a year's time. I will refer again to Robert Black's excellent essay, "Holding to Account". The cross-cutting nature of budgeting will be important, but I am not certain that we will get the scrutiny of it correct. I hope that we can consider that at stage 2, as Government departments will have pooled budgets and there will be joint budgets for public bodies. Robert Black has quite rightly drawn attention to the fact that we need to be careful about how such budgets are held to account. I am  giving notice of a matter that I intend to raise at stage 2.

Will the member join me in welcoming the three-year expenditure plans that the Government has developed, which allow the sort of forward planning that he talks about?

Does Mr Swinney agree that one of the problems is that companies do not discuss matters with the enterprise groups, which limits their ability to act in an anticipatory way? In my constituency, Coats Viyella closed three plants over five months and did not warn me, the local council or Forth Valley Enterprise about those closures at all. They were simply announced. That behaviour, in this day and age, is unacceptable. No matter what planning there is, proactive response from the enterprise groups is very difficult.

Will Fiona Hyslop agree that the problem is not just the financial burden—which the Guide Association reckons at £40,000—but the administrative burden?

It is a  secure unit.

It is secure.

Will the minister confirm that the number of cases of new-variant CJD and the number of deaths are still rising? Does she agree that were the Oxford study report in November on transmission from cow to calf to show that such transmission is far more common than has been believed to date, a premature total lifting of the ban could lead to further increases in the number of deaths among young people? Does she further agree that we need to review the situation carefully once the report that has been commissioned is out, rather than to prejudge it?

rose  —

Is Mr Adam aware that the Government has gone further than simply making the agency independent? It has also said that it will audit the quality of the advice that it is given by committees. The interlocking mechanisms at every level will ensure independence; they will also ensure that the quality of advice is good.

I begin by declaring that I continue to undertake some consultancy work, purely on medical issues, to companies that I believe have food interests that may relate to novel foods. I am not going to talk about location today. If the minister had seen fit to announce a shortlist of one, the debate would have been truncated. The important thing about the food standards agency is that the Labour party has kept its promise and instituted an important change. The Government is answering the questions of public concern about food safety, and in setting up a non-ministerial Government department it has created a substantially independent authority. It is also addressing the question of devolution by effectively setting up a separate executive body for Scotland with its own director and advisory committee on food safety. There are currently 12 advisory committees working on food safety and related topics. Hitherto, they have mostly been related to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, although some are related to the Department of Health. The fact that many of them will soon relate to the FSA is extremely important. If we had set up our own food standards agency, as the Scottish National party originally wanted, the costs would have been enormous. The estimated cost was about £29 million. We would not have saved anything by having our own  separate agency. It was a spurious argument which, I am glad to say, the SNP is moving away from—at least I hope it is. The advisory committees are of great importance and it is fundamental to the credibility of the agency that it interlocks with them. The fact that the agency will be involved in the appointment of chairmen to the various committees is very important.

I do not think that there is a need for any committees to be specifically established in Scotland, apart from the food safety advisory committee, which is currently being established. I want to refer to two specific committees that are important: the Advisory Committee on Pesticides and the Veterinary Products Committee, which deals with issues relating to veterinary medicine and residues. Those committees—which have not yet been mentioned—are of importance in addressing fundamental issues such as the use of antibiotics and growth hormones in farming. We must establish how they will work and how they will interlock with the food standards agency. The initial challenge for the agency will be the establishment of a risk assessment protocol. The protocol will be important and I hope that we will have an opportunity to debate it. I will put a question to the Executive on that at the end of my speech. As a doctor, food poisoning is the central issue for me. Between 1982 and 1999, the number of reported incidents of food poisoning doubled to a total of 9,000 cases. In England, during the same period, the number increased fivefold, which initially may make it seem as if England's record is much worse. However, what it means is that the number of cases in England has now reached 180 per 100,000, which is the same as in Scotland. That tells us that, in Scotland, our reporting and notification system and our ability to identify cases is already well established. We have been effective and England is catching up. We need to take care of special groups, such as children, pregnant women, the seriously ill, the elderly—particularly those in institutions—and people with allergies. The agency will address that need. I also welcome the minister's announcement on the licensing of butchers and the consideration that is to be given to other catering establishments. The beef-on-the-bone ban has come up a number of times in the debate. I want to reiterate the fact that all 56 Labour members will—I am  sure—agree to the lifting of the ban when such medical advice is given. Recently, members from the Scottish National party have been trying to create further fear around the issue of the beef-on-the-bone ban by raising the issue of the disposal of rendered beef and bones, which are stored at two sites in Scotland. If beef on the bone is totally safe and the SNP has no worries about it, why is it raising issues about rendered beef to create fear? Mary Scanlon asked whether anyone has been affected by the beef-on-the-bone ban. I cannot say, but I can say that the parameters for the development of new variant CJD are still extremely wide. We do not know how many cases there will be, but the number is still increasing year on year. Meat on the bone was abandoned because prions are centred in the neural tissue, close to the bone. Cooking is not sufficient to deal with them—they must be dealt with in other ways. The ban on beef on the bone was a reasonable precaution at the time. As soon as the information from the medical officer is that we can lift the ban, it will be lifted. BSE has practically been eliminated by culling cattle that are over 30 months old. It is interesting to note that, in Europe, the number of cases is still rising, whereas in the United Kingdom the number is dropping. The question of the food standards agency being UK-based is important. Why do we not have such an agency in Europe? The answer is that Europe has not had the same food scares, such as the one caused by BSE, which the Conservatives—with all the advice that they received—allowed to develop. That is why we are getting a food standards agency ahead of the rest of Europe. I agree, however, with the Conservatives that there should be a level playing field and that we should persuade the rest of Europe that this is an important issue. I have some final questions. Will there be a separate research fund for Scotland, administered by the Scottish Executive body? Will the Meat Hygiene Service be looked at separately in Scotland, or will it continue to relate to the FSA at a Scottish level? Also, if the Scottish Executive has any proposed modifications to the statement of general objectives and practices, will the Health and Community Care Committee be able to debate them, particularly in relation to the risk assessment protocol?

I welcome the opportunity to address the chamber on this matter. As Nick said, Clackmannanshire has suffered from the decline of traditional industries, although in the case of the mining industry the suffering was significantly exacerbated by his party's Government. The most recent decline has been in the wool and textiles industry. That problem is not only local; all the developed world is suffering as the industry moves to developing countries. In the past 20 years, the Government has funded few—if any—manufacturing jobs in Clackmannanshire. Clackmannanshire has received only a small share of the funds that have been made available for job creation through bodies such as Locate in Scotland. The recent announcement by the Coats Viyella group of the closure of its operations in Alloa is a particularly sad event. It severs a 200-year-old association between that employer—in the form of Patons—and the community. The people in the wee county have contributed much over many years to the profits of the company. The company owes a debt to those people. This week, the company was valued on the stock exchange at £350 million, so not only does it have a moral obligation, it has the funds to assist the county by  making available the sites that it occupies to other industries that might want to take up the opportunity for inward investment. I call on the company, as the council has, to transfer the ownership of the factory sites to a mutually acceptable body—whether that be the council or a local enterprise company. The decision-making process of the Coats Viyella group and similar companies is extremely worrying and members should address it soon. The company closed three plants in one town during a five-month period without a word of warning to the employees, the unions, the council, the local enterprise companies or members of the Parliament. I find that not just old-fashioned and out of date, but totally unacceptable and thoughtless. A previous Conservative Prime Minister said that the Rowlands companies were the unacceptable face of capitalism. To me, that is the unacceptable face of business today. It is not good practice and it is not acceptable. I discovered the company shortly after I was elected and asked it about the effects of the minimum wage and the working time directive. Prior to the directive coming out, it was still paying its cleaning staff £2.60 per hour. We would not expect that, but I am proud of the fact that this Government has introduced a minimum wage to ensure that such things do not happen. An issue for the future that I regard as important is the climate energy tax. The six plants in my constituency are all high energy users, but they are efficient high energy users, benchmarked against the rest of their own industry and theoretical minimum energy uses. The energy tax that is proposed, but which has not yet been introduced, by the UK Government will disadvantage those companies against European and world competition. I urge the Scottish Executive—in discussions with our Westminster colleagues—to take great care with the jobs in my constituency and in the rest of Scotland. The tax should be about efficient energy use, not simple energy use. I support the tax in respect of its encouraging efficient energy use, but I am dismayed at the prospect of further job losses in my constituency resulting from a bludgeon tax, applied inappropriately. I therefore call for the tax to be reconsidered. I welcome the Executive's efforts over the past few weeks. Although Nick feels that everything was produced from up our sleeves only in the past few days, some of us have been working on this with the Executive—and I know that members have been calling for it—for the past few months as the unemployment situation in the area began to deteriorate compared with the rest of Scotland.  Unemployment is still lower than it was when we came to power, but there is no doubt that it is deteriorating substantially against the rest of Scotland. That is extremely worrying. The most important thing about the announcement is not the funds and how much money is involved initially, but the Scottish Executive's commitment to a partnership with the council, Forth Valley Enterprise and Clackmannanshire Enterprise, to ensure that there is progress over a sustained period. We can now get the direct ear of the minister without having to write or badger him daily. We can progress. However, I appeal to the minister that we need to have adequate representation from Locate in Scotland on the committee. It must be at a level and of a nature that ensures that we obtain our share of the Locate in Scotland money. We need to have major industry, preferably in IT and biotechnology, to which the First Minister referred, and in which many jobs have been created over the past few weeks. We need them now in Clackmannanshire. The Executive is doing its bit, with the creation of a number of jobs ranging from community police officers to child care providers. There are 194 18 to 24-year-olds on the new deal programme and 111 youngsters are involved in the modern apprenticeship programme. There is a commitment from the public sector in that area. I have two final points. First, I welcome the initiative of the local Churches. Their support provides the moral leadership that is needed by the people of Clackmannanshire at this difficult time. Members would be welcome to come and see Clackmannanshire; it is a beautiful place to live and work. We have a backdrop of one of Scotland's most beautiful sites, the Ochil hills. Secondly, we need good access, to which Nick referred. The A907 should be a trunk road and taken over by the Scottish Executive. We also need a date for the Clackmannanshire bridge and a rail link. Improved transport infrastructure would open up this beautiful part of the country to the job prospects that my constituents deserve.

At the outset of this debate, the First Minister asked a question of Mr Salmond that I hope will be addressed. What other Government in the past has produced 150 timetabled promises collected in one document? That is innovative. Please answer the question.

Will Mr Mundell give way?

I, too, have some sympathy with amendment 28 moved by Mr Matheson, but our problem is that we are trying to do something specific and limited. The members who support the SNP amendment and others are trying to move everything forward to 1999 from 1984 instead of considering the parts that we need to amend to achieve our focused objective.  I have a dilemma. When the Millan committee considers the issue, it will need to investigate this aspect in detail and with extreme care, but it is not necessary for us to amend the bill in the way suggested by the amendment. I am unhappy with the terms that are used in the amendment. It is unnecessary and goes beyond the scope of the change that is needed. As I understand it, section 17 still applies-I hope that the minister will confirm that, because I am not a lawyer-and that is the test that must be passed before one comes to the tests that we are now talking about. If that is  the case, the situation is already covered adequately and there is no need for the amendment.

As I understand it, a doctor is allowed to make a report on a patient who is detained. That would not change. I hope that that has answered Mr Gallie's point.  I will conclude my recommendation that the committee reject the amendments. It is imperative-it has been given to us by the minister and the Parliament will continue to review it-that where treatment for a condition exists in the state hospital system, it should be made available to patients. Roseanna Cunningham's amendment 7 makes a valid point, but it does not need to be incorporated in the act. It should be a general  matter, not specific to section 64. It should apply to all detained prisoners, no matter their situation.

The amendment does not need to go into the act. I will tell the member why.

I am sorry. I know that Ms Cunningham is not happy with that. This is a matter for clinical judgment. I am not happy that under the act the sheriff should make observations about what is or what is not good treatment. The question of treatment and what constitutes it is changing. The question of treatability and what is treatable is changing. I think that we should, rightly, hold the clinicians and the Executive to account for providing adequate treatment, but the law does not need an amendment to do that.

I fully understand where Ms Cunningham is coming from, but it is not the appropriate way to deal with the issue. Section 1 deals with public safety, not treatment, and it should be left at that. If the amendment is agreed to, it will confuse the issue. Circumstances change. There will continue to be arguments among psychiatrists as to what constitutes appropriate treatment. Therefore, the amendment should be disagreed to.

I realise that what I am about to say goes to the heart of the SNP's amendment, but Mr Ruddle was deemed to be untreatable by the sheriff. Mr Ruddle had two different conditions, one of which was a personality disorder that was deemed to be untreatable. It is not true to say that the patient was capable of being treated but was released nevertheless. That would not have been possible under the act, because the sheriff would still have acted wrongly. He did not do so.

I do not propose to deal with amendment 1 because I think that it has already been dealt with. The Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 is a civil law and, although I am a psychiatrist, not a lawyer, I believe that the "beyond reasonable doubt" issue does not apply as the matter concerns a balance of probability. Therefore, I hope that the amendment will fall.  The question of harm versus serious harm is  difficult. Those in psychiatry are debating the issue at considerable length, for example in reference to confidentiality. One of the problems currently facing psychiatrists is the duty of the psychiatrist when a patient reveals information during a clinical discussion about harm or possible harm that they intend towards the public. It is emerging from the discussions-and it is relevant to the debate-that psychiatrists are suggesting, as are some of the judgments in other countries, that the harm intended by the patient should be quite specific. It should not be a generality of harm, but should be specific to one individual. In other words, it should be focused and serious in its nature. To leave out the word "serious" could lead to the detention of many people in the state hospital who would, as a result of a personality disorder, cause some harm to the public. I think that that would be wrong and is against the general tenor of Mr Canavan's speech. The balance that Mr Wallace referred to is crucial and we must not affect it by removing the word "serious".  I shall deal with the question of detention in a hospital as opposed to detention in prison. I worked in Cornton Vale prison for 23 years. We saw inmates who were transferred to the state hospital at Carstairs and back during that time. In my view, those who suffered from a serious personality disorder were much better managed- not treated, but managed-in the state system. The difference between treatment and management lies at the heart of the problem that the Parliament faces. As I said last week, we would not have had to deal with the Ruddle loophole if the treatability test had been met. In the past 15 years since the 1984 act was introduced, there has been movement in psychiatrists' views about what is and is not treatable, which has caused the loophole in the act.  Our colleagues in England and Wales have been lucky because so far there has not been a successful appeal under a similar act in England and Wales. I understand that, like us, they are considering the act under similar reviews to that of MacLean and Millan. I hope that they are not faced with a similar difficulty to this one. I suggest that treatment in the state hospital is to the advantage of the patient, because their welfare and well-being can be better managed there than in the prison service.  In the Ruddle case, there is confusion over the management of his alcohol problem and the management of his personality. That has become confused in amendment 7, proposed by Roseanna Cunningham. Alcohol problems are not grounds on which people can detain a patient. That is illegal and cannot be done. In addition, there is considerable debate as to whether alcohol problems are treatable. The consequences of alcohol addiction are treatable, but alcohol  addiction is probably not treatable. It can be managed-people can be given help with its management-but it is not treatable. The gap between management and treatment lies at the heart of our problem.  The act as it stands-and I suggest that all the amendments be rejected-provides for the main thing that must be done, which is to protect the public from the small group of prisoners who predated the introduction of the hospital direction order in 1998. That is the group that we are dealing with.

What I was trying to say in that regard was that when they decide what should remain confidential, psychiatrists must make a judgment of the risk to the public of not disclosing information about a particular patient. The debate at the moment-it is not resolved and is on-going-seems to revolve round the harm being fairly specific.  If, for example, the patient says that they propose to go out and kill a specific individual, that is clearly a serious matter. If, on the other hand, they express a general threat that the public at large will be harmed, that might not be serious. That is a medical definition. I accept that it might be somewhat different from a court's definition of serious harm, but it is appropriate to keep the word "serious"-it should not be removed.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will publish an audit of the parliamentary questions it has been asked, broken down by MSP and topic. (S1O-206)

Given that more than 1,300 questions have been asked, amounting to an expenditure of over £130,000 by this Parliament on questions-according to information obtained in response to a previous question-will the Scottish Executive consider, when responding to Parliamentary questions, indicating whether the information requested is already in the public domain, in order to ensure that we are making appropriate use of public funds and not wasting them?

This is a sensitive and difficult issue of great complexity. This Parliament has a number of duties, which it has to meet. We have the clear duty to have in place legislation that protects the public from those whose mental disorder-whether it is mental illness, personality disorder or mental handicap-is manifest in seriously violent and aggressive behaviour. We also have a duty to ensure that those who have such a mental disorder should be treated humanely-I will come back to Mr Matheson's point about treatment, which was well made. We have a duty to ensure that the civil liberties and human rights of our citizens are protected.  The law has been amended since 1984 with the introduction of hospital directions, which should deal with the substantial majority of the problematic cases. As I understand it, the bill is intended to deal with a small and dangerous minority of mentally disordered patients who are currently detained in the state hospital and whose release would pose a danger to public safety.  Those patients have hitherto been regarded as being treated within the state hospital. Their right to appeal under the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 has existed since the act was passed-the act gives them a right to an annual appeal. Appeals up to and including the Reid appeal were turned down on the grounds that the patients were receiving treatment and that their conditions were regarded as treatable.  Since 1984, psychiatry's view of personality disorder has shifted, but the law has not. Psychiatrists take the view that personality disorder should generally be regarded as untreatable but still as a mental disorder. The question of treatability lies at the heart of the  problem. The existence of a regime within the state hospital is no longer a sufficient ground to constitute treatment, unless that regime can be shown to be beneficial to the patient and not simply to the protection of public safety.  I have no difficulty with the definition of personality disorder as a mental disorder, but psychiatrists have great difficulty with it being placed in the category of mental illness, as is proposed in the bill. However, there is no alternative at this time. Any other course of action would pre-empt the outcome of the MacLean and Millan committees, which would be inappropriate. Although I welcome the bill, I am reassured by the Minister for Justice's assurance that it is an interim measure and will not preclude the full review by MacLean and Millan.  The definition of what constitutes a mental disorder is changing, and will continue to change as society's culture changes. We are dealing not with absolutes, but with things that are culturally based. I will give members an example. When I was a medical student, the laws on homosexuality were changing, but the medical profession-and psychiatry-still regarded it as a treatable medical condition, to which it applied various pretty horrific therapies. Society has moved on, thank God, and recognised that homosexuality is not an illness.  Let us hypothesise that somebody discovers that personality disorders that are manifested in a dangerous, violent and aggressive form have a genetic basis, and that at some point in the future gene therapy is able to treat them. At that point, society will need to amend its laws again to take into account the fact that personality disorder has become a treatable condition. I am trying to say that we must make laws for now, and recognise that those laws may need to change.  I welcome the bill. It is the appropriate measure to ensure the protection of the public, which is what this chamber is trying to achieve. However, the Millan and MacLean committees may choose to take a somewhat different view. As Mr Gallie suggested, they will have to examine this matter closely and to recommend that we incorporate into law adequate public safety measures, while giving absolute assurances that people with personality disorders, or those who are regarded merely as odd or difficult, will not be locked up by the state.

The establishment of a Scottish Parliament with broad and accountable responsibilities for health service provision in Scotland offers us a unique opportunity. The white paper demonstrates that the Government's approach is to consider the multi-factorial nature of Scotland's ill health and the fact that we require multi-agency solutions. Many of us who have practised medicine over the past 20 or 30 years have been engaged in the process of trying to promote health in Scotland, of almost preaching to people about health, and we have not made any substantial changes at all.  The Government has begun to promote health in an effective way by publishing a number of papers. Sir David Carter drew attention to these important initiatives in his report, which was published last month. The white paper, "Tackling Drugs in Scotland: Action in Partnership", to which Alex Fergusson alluded, is very important in terms of what we are going to do in the drugs field. A further initiative is "Smoking Kills", which was published in December 1998.  Sir David repeatedly drew attention to inequalities as the first challenge that has to be faced in every aspect of this area of work. The Government has placed inequality and children at the centre of the renewal strategy. At a national level, the long-term aim of eliminating child poverty has been established as a goal. The increase in  child benefits, the establishment of the working families tax credit, the £100 allowance to the elderly to deal with dreadful death rates in winter and the warm deal initiative are important issues. In my constituency, the care and repair efforts that are being made through voluntary groups in partnership with local authorities will begin to deal with some of the housing problems that we are faced with.  I want to tell members briefly about the initiatives that the Government has taken in the heart of my constituency in Clackmannanshire, which is an area of some deprivation. For example, £2.7 million was made available for a social inclusion partnership and will support some of the efforts in the drugs field to which Mr Fergusson referred. The establishment of community schools, and the widening of that initiative, is very important in terms of health. The promotion of a healthy alliance, and the opportunity to establish a healthy living centre-for which we have submitted a bid-will help as well. Henry McLeish's visit to the constituency yesterday concentrated on the central problem of unemployment. Unless we tackle unemployment, we will not give people the self-esteem that is vital to good health. These initiatives contribute to a comprehensive strategy to renew my constituency and to deal with Scottish health problems.  Phil Gallie seemed to be feeling under some attack when he spoke earlier. I say to him, yes, the Conservatives did spend a lot more money on health, but what was that money spent on? The number of administrators was increased from 1,000 to over 12,000 under the Conservative Government, so the money was spent on administration, not on the appropriate issues that we need to address. We have already tried to start rolling that process back.  Turning to a point made by Robert Brown, there is one area into which I believe that we need to go further than-from what the white paper says-the Executive is prepared to go and on which we must provide clear leadership for the rest of the United Kingdom. The white paper contains a strategy on tobacco, and that strategy is also spelled out in "Smoking Kills". However, I do not believe that that strategy deals adequately with the problem of passive smoking. Sir David Carter's report states that, in North Lanarkshire, 43 per cent of people interviewed within a week of a survey being done mentioned passive smoking. Such figures are unacceptable, and we cannot tolerate passive smoking.  Tricia Marwick referred to asthma, which 5 per cent of adults and 10 per cent, or more, of children suffer from. Those figures are increasing, as has been demonstrated in studies in Grampian. Tobacco smoke is one of the most powerful  triggers for acute asthma. There are 2,000 deaths from asthma annually. The Royal College of Physicians reported that 50 children a day are admitted to hospitals in the United Kingdom because of asthma triggered by cigarette smoke specifically.

This will be the briefest answer-no.  Smoking is undoubtedly the most proven health problem. If Hugh Henry's private member's bill does not get through, I will propose to the Health and Community Care Committee that it should use its powers to introduce legislation-and the committees in this Parliament have powers to do that, unlike Westminster-to bring about a ban on smoking in public places. That would set the tone for this Parliament, and would show that we are prepared to lead from the front, as well as being supported by the white paper's partnership from below. I recommend that approach to members.

rose-

rose-

I am not so sure about the relationship, but I am trying to be helpful.  I am going to shock the chamber, because the party that introduced the first privatisation of the health service in the United Kingdom was the Labour party. The health services in general practice are owned privately by banks, by building societies, by doctors-they are not owned by the national health service. In 1966, the Labour health minister Robinson introduced that; the Conservatives cannot claim to have done so.  I hope that Mary Scanlon will agree that there has never been a complaint about that aspect of privatisation of the health service, because it is pragmatic and it has worked for the people. That is what PFI and PPP are about, as Mr Raffan has said.

Will the  member give way?

I want to say how much I welcome this bill and the fact that, in this instance, legislation is covering the whole of the United Kingdom. It is interesting that members of the SNP, in opposition, want to delay the protection of the Scottish community by seeking separate legislation. We already have a full legislative programme and a full consultation programme on other bills. To delay this bill would be very foolish.  Susan made the point, very strongly, that bacteria do not respect boundaries. People also move around and it is important that we have legislation that covers the whole of these islands rather than separate legislation.  Mrs Scanlon's point was good: in the long term, we require European legislation. However, until we can get our European partners to consider the problems as seriously as we do, that will be difficult. We should not wait for European legislation, but go ahead with the present legislation, which is good not only because it fulfils one of the UK Labour Government's pledges but because it sets out clearly the devolved role and powers of this Parliament.  Mr Chisholm has already referred to the fact that the bill does not preclude this Parliament from enacting its own legislation in future if we feel it necessary. However, we should not enact separate legislation simply out of the beliefs that are held by the SNP. Where legislation should cover the whole of the UK, it is appropriate that it  does so. The unity of one act, in this case, seems beneficial.  I will refer to one example in the bill. Clause 8(2)(b) deals with the powers of the agency to commission specific research. If that is done on a UK-wide basis, costs will be kept down and the Scottish institutions-which punch well above their weight in terms of research-will be able to compete to undertake the research, which would be beneficial. Roughly 12 per cent of total research takes place in Scotland, whereas one would suppose it to be 9 per cent on a per capita basis. If research were separated out, there would be no real benefit.  The bill gives us specific powers. For example, we will have our own Scottish director. Indeed, I hope that our ministers will lobby for the agency to be based in Scotland; nothing in the bill precludes that. We also have a number of other powers to scrutinise the agency's work. We have to have agreement on the published objectives of the agency; again, this Parliament will be consulted. Clause 22 of the bill specifically requires the agency to promote links with the Scottish Administration. Beyond that, there are even some powers that must be retained by the Scottish Ministers and that the UK secretary of state is expressly forbidden from exercising. Again, that is entirely appropriate.  If we had different legislation now, and later sought more stringent rules, we could affect our food industry, which-as the SNP spokesman said-is very important to us. I see no need for different legislation. Is Mr Morgan suggesting that we should have less stringent rules? If we did, we would not adequately be protecting the Scottish public.  I submit that the motion is the right one for this Parliament at this time.

On a point of order. I simply cannot hear the lady. I do not know if she is speaking in front of the microphone, but she is almost inaudible. I apologise for interrupting.

Yes, thank you.

The last speech did not sound like a maiden speech. It was a polished performance, but did it address the proposed legislation that was put before us by the Executive today? Apart from the freedom of information question, which will have to be discussed at some point, it did not. It did raise significant and important issues, and there is no doubt that members will wish to discuss them-opportunities to do so will arise.  I am beginning to get a strong feeling that many of the Opposition speakers are confusing action that can be taken, using current laws, with areas where new law is clearly needed. Rushing in haste to make laws on individual issues is not the best solution.  One example from this morning is Mary Scanlon who, among others, wanted a new law on health. The new NHS structures in Scotland have been put in place only within the past two months. The health professionals and the public in Scotland would not thank the Parliament for embarking on yet further legislation before we see how the new legislation changes our structures for the better. The Health and Community Care Committee will have the opportunity to look at how the legislation is working to achieve the goal on which most of us agree-a health service that truly meets the needs of the Scottish people.

That makes my point extremely well. I thought that this debate was about the alternate legislation that was required, not about actions that might-appropriately, I agree with Mary Scanlon-be taken.  Although Mrs Ewing said that she, and the public, had not been impressed, I have been impressed that a number of speakers from different parties have already shown a passion and a determination to tackle the scourge of drugs, which affects so many communities in Scotland. However, does the issue of drugs require new laws? No; it needs a joined-up, multi-faceted approach-to which Keith Raffan referred-which deals with education, treatment and effective policing. Above all else, it needs the involvement of the people: unless our citizens are genuinely on our side-on that, we can provide leadership without new laws-we will not achieve our objectives. Mary Scanlon referred to Mothers Against Drugs; a group in my community-Locals Against Drugs in Alloa, or LADA-represents another sign that individual groups are beginning to get together to tackle the issue of drugs. We must provide the leadership, without legislation, to enable them to do so.  I am sorry that Alex Salmond is not here, because I have asked the SNP twice whether it is prepared to go against the advice of the chief medical officer on the beef-on-the-bone ban. It is important that we should know and, at some point, I should like a clear answer. I know the SNP's policy on the ban and I have already said that we all wish it to be lifted at an appropriate time, but to go against the chief medical officer's advice is an extremely dangerous course of action.  Opposition members have said that the legislation that was outlined today is inadequate and does not meet the needs of the Scottish people. The 100,000 Scots who are affected by the incapable adults bill would not agree with them. That bill sets a stamp on what this chamber is about; it deals with a group of people who are the subject of archaic and unfair laws, which are higgledy-piggledy, fragmented and all over the place. If the Parliament can address such issues in its first session, we will deal with them effectively.  I was in my surgery on Monday, as I have the misfortune of still having to work out my notice in my previous job. A patient said to me, "I know your views on living wills, which I very much support, but will the Parliament make them statutory?" I answered that I was not sure that we needed a statute. We need health professionals who are  prepared to listen to patients, accept what they say, put living wills into their case notes-as I have done throughout my professional life-and respect the wishes and dignity of the individual patient. Health professionals should take people's clearly expressed prior wishes into account, and I think that they are beginning to do so. Through this chamber, we can encourage them to do so, but I question whether we need specific legislation on living wills.  We need legislation on the general issue, because it is an important area in which difficult questions need to be answered. For example, in accident and emergency departments today-at this very moment-a junior doctor is probably technically assaulting a patient. Junior doctors do not have the authority or permission, in law, to undertake the necessary tests to produce a diagnosis and to go on to manage that patient. Indeed, if a junior doctor goes on to administer treatment to a still-unconscious patient, for example to reduce brain swelling, the doctor is technically assaulting the patient. Our hard-pressed junior doctors, to whom Opposition members referred this morning, have enough problems on their hands without worrying about the legal position. The chamber has a duty to ensure that the health professionals have clear laws that support them and allow them to proceed appropriately.

I cannot speak on behalf of the Labour party, but I can speak as a doctor and as someone whose son is an accident and emergency doctor. We have reduced junior doctors' hours already and have agreements in place with junior doctors. I, along with everybody else, will certainly question the Executive to ensure that those agreements are met, and that the health authorities and trusts in Scotland fulfil their obligations to junior doctors, who are still treated extremely badly. The treatment of junior doctors is not just a question of hours. Most junior doctors are dedicated and will work the hours that are necessary to complete the job rather than fixed hours. We should also consider their accommodation and support, and the dignity with which they are treated as employees. The situation is not good at the moment and we need to address it. I am sorry that I cannot give Mrs Ewing a straight answer.  Many groups, such as the National Schizophrenia Fellowship and the Alzheimer action group, have described the legislation in that area as fragmented, archaic or unfair, both on  financial matters and on welfare. I have significant experience in that area. As Karen Whitefield pointed out in her excellent speech this morning, it is tragic and extremely upsetting that a couple's joint bank account should be frozen when the husband falls ill and is incapable; we cannot manage such situations. I very much welcome the statement that the proposed bill makes to our country: we care about people and will do something about it.

Mr Neil regards an unemployment rate of 5 per cent or so as grinding, but does Mr Raffan agree that the rate that the SNP would have wreaked on us by going into the euro now would have been very much worse?

To make it clear, is Mr Salmond suggesting that this chamber should lift the ban on beef on the bone immediately against the clear statement from the chief medical officer for Scotland? I want it to go on the record that that is Mr Salmond's position.

Against medical advice.

No.

Will the member give way?

I had a fixed speech with which to address this chamber. However, as a new member of this parliament-as we all are-I find it difficult that we are repeating a debate on all the issues with which we dealt this morning, on which there was a vote and on which the SNP and the Conservatives were roundly defeated. What we are going through is a complete waste of time. I do not deny the right of members to speak on the matter, but if this chamber is going to constantly reiterate the same arguments, we will be faced with a situation similar to that of the Houses of Parliament, where the seats are empty. I for one am not going to sit here and listen to repeated arguments the whole time.

No, I will not give way. I welcome this morning's appointment of Susan Deacon as the first ever woman health minister in Scotland, and now speak to the nomination of Iain Gray, who has specific responsibility for community care. Health is an important issue, and the appointment of this team should be welcomed by the whole chamber.  As a doctor, I welcome the commitment to a patient-centred health service contained within "Partnership for Scotland". There has been a protracted period of structural change in the national health service in Scotland. Although those changes are designed specifically and uniquely to meet the needs of the Scottish community, in partnership with all health workers we must turn our attention to making those improved structures work for the people who matter most: patients.  Our patient-centred health programme will include one-stop clinics to provide same-day tests and diagnosis, and a new NHS helpline, NHS Direct, which will ensure that health advice is immediately available around the clock, every day of the year, to everyone in Scotland.  The programme will also include the use of the best technology to link every doctor's surgery in Scotland to the NHS, thus providing an immediate connection among surgeries, pharmacies and hospitals. Under the previous leadership of Sam  Galbraith, who introduced the programme, Scotland already leads Britain in this area. We have just begun to tap into the improvements in the care process that the new information technology will create. Unlike the sterile debating process in which we are engaged today, these are real issues that real people are facing.  We will establish walk-in walk-out centres that will offer same-day treatment by specialist staff.

No. Perhaps the appointment of Iain Gray as a junior minister, with a specific remit for care in the community, will begin to break down the Berlin walls that have grown up between health and social work since 1969. That is another real issue facing real patients in hospitals today.

No. Our patients need a seamless care service and everything that the new department does will be focused on patients. The partnership's renewed and binding commitment to patient-centred care will allow the Government to commit to the biggest ever hospital building programme in Scotland's history. It is a commitment not only to shorten waiting lists but to speed up treatment and shorten waiting times, to increase the number of doctors and to increase NHS spending in real terms over the coming years.  I am particularly pleased that "Partnership for Scotland" commits the Government to seek the guidance of the parliamentary health committee. The real debates, as opposed to today's sterile debate, will take place in the committees. We need to debate the complex issue of tuition fees, but the soundbite approach that has been adopted by certain members today is utterly appalling.  It gives me great pleasure to speak to the nomination of Iain Gray. The Parliament should support his nomination.

What astonishes me about the points being made by Michael Matheson and the parties who wish to lift the beef-on-the-bone ban is that they are determined to go against the medical advice that is being offered. Does he think that any member does not want the ban on beef on the bone lifted as quickly as possible? The ban cannot be lifted until the appropriate medical advice has been received.

Will the member give way?

Mary Scanlon cannot have been listening to the First Minister's speech. He mentioned a most interesting statistic that may help to raise the debate from its juvenile level, at which I am appalled. Given that 53 per cent of the population had no tuition fees to pay, can Mary Scanlon mention a single parent or any unemployed person who has had to pay tuition fees?